

      TB (Student application - variation of course - effect) Jamaica [2006]
                                                                 UKAIT 00034


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 February 2006                             |On 06 April 2006           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                    Mr C M G OCKELTON (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
                   Mr J BARNES (SENIOR Immigration Judge)
                   Mr a jordan (Senior Immigration Judge)


                                   Between


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene, counsel, instructed by Total Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Miss J Brown, Home Office Presenting Officer

Prior to the Secretary of State's decision and without notification to  him,
the Appellant changed her course of studies from that in  respect  of  which
the application had been made (paragraph 57(ii)(b) of HC 395 as amended)  to
one referable to paragraph 57(ii)(a )thereof. Held: (1) the  nature  of  the
change was such that the Appellant could not comply  with  the  requirements
of the Immgration Rules  in  relation  to  the  course  for  which  she  had
initially applied; the Immigration Judge erred in law  in  considering  that
the provisions of s. 85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002 (as explained in LS (Post decision evidence; direction;  applicability)
Gambia [2005] UKIAT 00085) permitted him to consider post-decision  evidence
in relation to an application entirely different in  nature  from  that  for
which the Appellant had applied. (2) An Immigration  Judge  is  entitled  to
consider whether an Appellant can meet  the  requirements  of  all  relevant
provisions of the Immigration Rules, whether or not raised as  an  issue  by
the Respondent, provided that the Appellant  is  given  the  opportunity  to
address such additional requirements (R v  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  ex
parte Kwok On Tong [1981] Imm AR 214 applied). (3) It was arguable  that  by
changing the fundamental nature of  her  application  the  Appellant  should
have known that all requirements of the Immigration Rules were brought  into
play notwithstanding the terms of the refusal decision. But,  in  any  event
event, even if the Immigration Judge had erred in law  in  not  putting  her
more clearly on notice as to the matters he intended to take  into  account,
such error was not material to the outcome of the  appeal  for  the  reasons
set out at (1) above.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the hearing for the reconsideration  of  the  determination  of
      the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent taken on
      19 September 2005 to refuse to grant her  an  extension  of  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom as a student.

2.   The appellant is citizen of Jamaica, born on 6 July 1983,  who  entered
      the United Kingdom  on 21 October 2002 as  a  visitor  and  was  given
      leave  to  remain   in  that  capacity  until  4  March  2003.  Before
      expiration of that leave she made  an  application  for  variation  of
      leave to remain as a student which was granted on 21 February 2003  to
      expire 1 February 2004. This was in relation to studies with Foresight
      Business Training in basic bookkeeping in respect  of  which  she  was
      given diplomas in Basic Bookkeeping on 30 July 2003 and in relation to
      Maintaining a Sales Ledger and Purchase  Ledger  on  8  October  2003.
      Prior to the expiration of that leave,  the appellant again made an in-
      time application for further leave to remain as a  student  which  was
      granted for the period 20 February 2004 to 30 June 2005.  During  this
      period she successfully  attained  certificates  of  proficiency  from
      Pitman Training in computer applications, namely Word 2000 on 1  April
      2005, Excel 2000 on 6 June 2005 and PowerPoint 2000 on 24  June  2005.
       Additionally, she had part time weekend work during that period.

3.   On 20 June 2005 the appellant made a further  in-time  application  for
      further leave to remain as a student.  Her studies which had  resulted
      in the Pitman Training  Certificate  had  also  been  carried  out  at
      Foresight Business Training where she had been studying 'Business ICT'
      at intermediate level. The purpose of the latest  application  was  to
      follow a course in legal secretarial studies from  4 July 2005  to  30
      June 2006, again at Foresight Business Training. This was described on
      the application forms as  a  weekday  day  time  course  at  a  single
      institution involving a minimum of fifteen hours per week.  Section  9
      of the application form which  the  appellant  completed  contained  a
      declaration which included the following specific statements:

             'The information I have given in this form is complete and  is
             true to the best of my knowledge ...


             I confirm that if, before this application is  decided,  there
             is a material change in my circumstances, or  new  information
             relevant to this application becomes available, I will  inform
             the Home Office. ...


             I understand that the Home Office may make  enquiries  of  the
             institution(s) named in sections 5.2 and/or 6.2 of  this  form
             in order to establish whether I meet the requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules with regard to satisfactory  attendance  and
             progress ...'

4.   The institutions referred to in the two sections above  were  Foresight
      Business Training, being those with whom she  had  previously  studied
      (section 5), and those with whom the proposed further studies were  to
      be carried out (section 6).

5.   On 19 September 2005 the respondent issued notice of  his  decision  to
      refuse to vary leave under paragraph 62 with reference to 60(vi) of HC
      395 (as amended) in the following terms:

             'You have applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
             a student but your application has been refused.


             Since you commenced your studies  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
             17.02.03 you have only undertaken short courses  below  degree
             level and the Secretary of State is  not  satisfied  that  you
             would not, as  a result of an extension of  stay,  spend  more
             than two years on short courses below degree level (courses of
             less than one year's duration), or longer courses  broken  off
             before completion.'

6.   It is common ground that,  unknown  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
      appellant had on 12 September 2005 commenced what is described  as  an
      ABE: Business Information Systems Course at  Giovanni  Timarco  Centre
      of Education  (GTCE)  in  Lewisham.   The  only  written  evidence  in
      relation to this new course was  a  student  progress  and  attendance
      sheet dated 20 October 2005 which said that the course  would  end  in
      June 2008 and that attendance, for the limited  period  involved,  had
      been 'very good' and the total fees due of ï¿½1530 paid  in  full.  GTCE
      stated that it was registered with the DfES and was unable to  provide
      additional evidence of progress as the student commenced  'his' course
      recently. Beyond this there is only the student enrolment form  of  12
      September 2005 which provides no additional information.

7.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
      and the grounds of appeal  are  not  particularly  enlightening.  They
      simply assert that the respondent erred in his decision which was made
      without consideration of all the facts before him, and, curiously,  go
      on to say that the refusal was based on an erroneous  assumption  that
      the appellant did not intend to leave the UK at the conclusion of  her
      studies, a matter in respect of there was no  evidence  on  which  the
      respondent could have reached  this  conclusion.   That  was  not,  of
      course,  the  basis  of  the  refusal   of   the   application.   More
      significantly, perhaps, the appellant did not then say  that  she  had
      switched courses and no longer intended to pursue that in  respect  of
      which her application had been made.  Further, there is no  suggestion
      on the part of Mr Rene that the appellant ever informed the respondent
      of this change in her circumstances as she had undertaken to do in her
      application form.

8.   Her appeal was heard on 27 October  20-05  by  Mr  M.J.  Gillespie,  an
      Immigration Judge.  For the first time, there  was  reference  in  the
      appellant's bundle, stamped as received by the hearing centre two days
      prior to the date of hearing, to the changed  course  of  study.  This
      bundle also included a short  statement  by  the  appellant  dated  20
      October 2005 and said this in relation to the current appeal :


             '4.   I have been subsequently extending my leave  since  then
                  until the last leave which was refused in  September  2005
                  on the basis that since I commenced  studies  in  February
                  2003, I have only undertaken short  courses  below  degree
                  level.


             5.     It is my case  that  I  have  been  progressing  in  my
                  studies and I am now studying my ABE Business  Information
                  Systems which is in line  with  my  previous  studies  and
                  qualifications.


             6.   I have now enrolled to study an ABE Business  Information
                  System. I gained  admission  into  this  course  with  the
                  qualifications previously obtained in my studies.


             7.   I therefore disagree with the Home Office that I  am  not
                  making any progress in my studies as it is always the case
                  that I  must  complete  foundation  course/studies  before
                  progressing to a degree level.

             8.     I am enjoying my studies and progressing well.


             9.   This is the basis of the full appeal hearing.'


9.   At  the  hearing  before  the  Immigration  Judge,  the  appellant  was
      represented by Mrs Oji of Counsel, and the respondent was  represented
      by Miss Gaskell, a Presenting Officer. The Immigration  Judge  records
      the issues before him in the following terms at  paragraph  7  of  his
      determination:

             'The issue, as this has been presented  in  the  main  by  the
             parties, appears to include  whether,  as  was  said  by  Miss
             Gaskell, the appellant has spent two years already doing short
             courses and will continue in the  United  Kingdom  doing  only
             short courses below degree level or other course that will not
             completed [sic];  or, as was said by Mr Oji [sic], the term of
             the rules have been satisfied by the evidence, which shows the
             appellant enrolled on a degree course.  In fact, however,  the
             entire  basis  of  the  appeal  differs  from   the   original
             application  in  that  the  appellant  no  longer  claims  the
             intention mentioned in the application  form.  It  is  perhaps
             somewhat anomalous that an appeal  should  still  subsist,  so
             divergent is the present basis for relief from   that  of  the
             original application.  One would have thought that  a  further
             application  on the new basis, and an  original  decision   at
             first instance would be required. Nevertheless, section  85(4)
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  provides
             that in relation to an appeal, other than appeal  against  the
             refusal of an entry clearance as provided for under   s.95(5),
             all evidence  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
             including evidence concerning a matter arising after the  date
             of decision, may be considered by the Tribunal. The effect  of
             this  appears  to  be  that  where  there  has  been  even   a
             fundamental change in the basis of an application, between the
             date of decision and the date of appeal, evidence  as  to  the
             new facts surrounding this change  ought  nevertheless  to  be
             considered to determine whether, as at the date of appeal, the
             requirements for the issue of the leave sought have been  made
             out.    I  must  therefore  turn  to  consider  each  of   the
             requirements for the issue of further leave  to  remain  as  a
             student.'

10.  The Immigration Judge then  went  on  at  paragraphs  8  to  9  of  the
      determination to consider the requirements of paragraph 60 of HC  395,
      as amended, the relevant  Immigration  Rule  in  relation  to  student
      applications.  Having  set  out  the  evidence  in  this  respect,  he
      concluded at paragraph 10 that the appellant had failed to prove on  a
      balance of probabilities that she met the  requirements  of  paragraph
      60.

11.  It is appropriate at this point that we should  identify  the  relevant
      rules and, where appropriate, set out their provisions  as  applicable
      to this appeal.

12.  Paragraph 32  is  the  general  provision  governing  applications  for
      extension of the time limit on, or variation  of  conditions  attached
      to, a person's stay after admission to the United Kingdom, which  must
      be made prior  to  expiration  of  the  current  leave.  With  certain
      exceptions which do not apply to this appeal, such  applications  must
      be made using the form prescribed for that purpose by the Secretary of
      State, completed in the manner required by the form and accompanied by
      the  documents  and  photographs  specified  in  it.    Paragraph   32
      specifically provides that an application for such a variation made in
      any other way is not valid.

13.  Paragraph 57 sets out the requirements for leave to enter as a  student
      and paragraph 60 deals with the requirements for an extension of  stay
      as a student.

14.  For our present purposes the relevant provisions of  paragraph  57  are
      as follows:

             '57. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave  to
                  enter the United Kingdom as a student are that he:


                    i) has been accepted for a course of study which  is  to
                       be provided by an organisation which is  included  on
                       the Department for Education and Skills' Register  of
                       Education and Training Providers, and is at either


                       (a)   a publicly funded  institution  of  further  or
                       higher education;  or


                       (b)  a bona fide private education institution  which
                       maintains  satisfactory  records  of  enrolment   and
                       attendance; or


                       (c) an independent  fee  paying  school  outside  the
                       maintained sector;  and


                 (ii)      is able and intends to follow either:


                       (a)  a  recognised  full-time  degree  course  at  a
                       publicly funded  institution  of  further  or  higher
                       educating;  or


                       (b)  a weekday full time course involving attendance
                       at a similar institution for  a  minimum  of  fifteen
                       hours organised day time study per week of  a  single
                       subject or directly related subject;  or


                       (c) a full time course of study  at  an  independent
                       fee paying school; ...'


16.  The provisions of paragraph 60 are:


             '60. The requirement for extension of stay as  a  student  are
                  that the applicant


                    i) either


                      (a)  he is a person specified in Appendix 1  to  these
                       Rules and he was last admitted to the United  Kingdom
                       in possession of a valid student entry clearance,  or
                       valid  prospective   student   entry   clearance   in
                       accordance with paragraph 82 to 87  of  these  Rules;
                       ...


                  (ii)  meets the requirements for admission as  a  student
                       set out in paragraph 57(i)-(vi);  and


                  (iii)   has produced evidence of  his  involvement  on  a
                       course which meets the requirements of paragraph  57;
                       and


                  (iv)  can  produce  satisfactory  evidence   of   regular
                       attendance during any course  which  he  has  already
                       begun; or any other course  for  which  he  has  been
                       involved in the past;  and


                 (v)    can show evidence of satisfactory  progress  in  his
                       course of study including the taking and  passing  of
                       any relevant examination; and


                 (vi)    would not as a result  of  an  extension  of  stay,
                       spend more than 2 years on short courses below degree
                       level (i.e. courses of less than on year's  duration,
                       or longer courses broken off before completion);  and
                       ...'


17.   We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 60(i)(a) as she is a visa national of Jamaica who, according
      to the passport produced to the respondent, a copy of which is in  the
      respondent's bundle, returned to Jamaica on 22 March 2004 and was then
      subsequently readmitted to the United  Kingdom  on  return  from  that
      visit to  her home country at a time when  she  had  a  valid  student
      entry clearance in the United Kingdom.

18.  As we have already noted, the Immigration  Judge  considered  the  fact
      that the nature of the appellant's course of study had changed and was
      now not the same course as that  in respect of which she had sought an
      extension of leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student -  see
      paragraph 7 of his  determination  quoted  above.     He  relies  upon
      section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as
      requiring him to consider evidence as to the situation current at  the
      time of the determination of the appeal even where there has  been  'a
      fundamental change in the basis of an application, between the date of
      decision and the date of appeal ...'.  The  reference  to  s.85(5)  is
      clearly an error on his part and we assume that he intended  to  refer
      to s.85(4) which provides as follows:

             'On an appeal under s.82(1) or 83(2) against the decision  the
             Tribunal may consider  evidence  about  any  matter  which  it
             thinks relevant to the substance of  the  decision,  including
             evidence which concerns a matter arising since the date of the
             determination.'

19.  The current appeal is under s.82(1) as it is an 'immigration  decision'
      falling within the definition in s.82(2)(b).  Section 86 of  the  2002
      Act deals with the determination of an appeal under  s.82(1)  and  the
      following subsections are relevant:


        (2)  the Tribunal must determine -
              (a) any matter raised in the grounds of  appeal  (whether  or
              not by virtue of s.85(1)), and (b)  any  matter   which  s.85
              requires it to consider ...


        (3)  the Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that
              -


              (a) a decision against which the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
              treated as being brought was not in accordance with  the  law
              (including Immigration Rules), or


              (b)  a discretion exercised  in  making  a  decision  against
              which the appeal is  brought or is treated as  being  brought
              should have been exercised differently. ...


        (5)  In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, the Tribunal shall
              dismiss the appeal.'


20.  We bear  in  mind  that  in  LS  (Post  decision  evidence;  direction;
      appealability) Gambia [2005] UKAIT 00085 the  Tribunal  had  concluded
      that, save in those cases to  which  s.85(5)  applied  in  restricting
      consideration only to circumstances  operating  at  the  time  of  the
      decision to refuse, the effect of s.85(4) was to  entitle an appellant
      to adduce evidence as to the position current at the date  of  hearing
      of his appeal to  support  a  claim  that  the  decision  'is  not  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules' even where it is clear that the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met at the date of  the
      decision itself. That evidence,  however  must  be  'relevant  to  the
      substance of the decision'. In the present case, the substance of  the
      application  was for leave to follow a  course  in  legal  secretarial
      studies commencing on 4 July 2005 and ending on 30 June 2006 - that is
      for a period of less than one year. That is an application to follow a
      course of  study  which  falls  within  the  provisions  of  paragraph
      57(ii)(b) of the Immigration Rules and, by reason of  the  appellant's
      history of study in the United Kingdom, was  bound  to  fail  for  the
      reason given by the respondent in the refusal  decision,  namely  that
      the appellant  failed to comply with the   requirements  of  paragraph
      60(vi) of  the  Rules.  The  scheme  of  the  policy  in  relation  to
      applications for leave to  enter or remains a student  are  geared  to
      consideration of a specific type of course as  provided  in  paragraph
      57(ii)  which gives three alternative categories.

21.  The appellant had chosen to  make  an  application  in  relation  to  a
      course  which  fell  within  category  (ii)(b)  and  it  was  such  an
      application with which the substance of the  decision  was  concerned.
      The appellant sought before the Immigration Judge to claim  compliance
      with the rules relating to extension of stay as a student on the basis
      of a course within category (ii)(a)  of  paragraph  57.   That  is  an
      entirely different type of application as is  evidenced  by  the  fact
      that the basis of refusal of the current application  would  not  have
      any relevance to an application in the different category. By  way  of
      analogy, it is as though the appellant had come before the Immigration
      Judge with evidence  that  she  was  now  married  subsequent  to  the
      respondent's decision and required him  to  consider  her  immigration
      status on that basis. That would clearly be absurd as it could have no
      relevance to the substance of the decision under appeal. The  position
      is no different  in student applications which  by  their  nature  are
      tied to the specific course sought to be followed as set  out  in  the
      application for extension of  leave.  Whilst  it  may  be  that  later
      evidence of a change of institution for the purpose of continuing in a
      course in the same category as that applied for might be  relevant  to
      the decision on the student application as at the date of the hearing,
      the same cannot be said to apply  to an  entirely  different  form  of
      student application as is the case here.

22.   There is no question but that the Immigration Judge  materially  erred
      in law in considering that the effect of s.85(4) above was that he was
      required  to  determine  whether,  as  at  the  date  of  appeal,  the
      requirements for the leave  sought  had  been  made  out  an  entirely
      different basis from that in respect  of  which  the  application  for
      extension of leave had been made.

23.  In any event, we  note  that  there  was  in  truth  no  post  decision
      evidence relevant to the substance of the decision. The appellant  had
      chosen, prior to the date of decision, to take a course falling into a
      different student leave category without informing the  respondent  in
      accordance with her undertaking to do so contained in her  application
      form.  At the date of decision it is  clear  that  the  appellant  had
      abandoned any intention of following a course of  study  falling  into
      the category for which she had applied for an extension of  stay.  The
      position is that the Immigration Judge simply had no  jurisdiction  to
      consider whether the appellant met the requirements of  the  rules  in
      respect of this entirely different category of course  in  respect  of
      which it would  be  necessary  for  the  appellant  to  make  a  fresh
      application for leave to the respondent.

24.  Nevertheless, the judge went on to consider the appeal  before  him  on
      the basis that it should be considered having regard to the  evidence,
      which he accepted,  that  the  appellant  had  commenced  on  the  ABE
      Business Information systems course with  GTCE  with  effect  from  12
      September 2005.  As he had said in paragraph 7 of  his  determination,
      he then turned to a consideration of the requirements of paragraph  60
      of HC 395 which he deals with point-by-point at paragraphs 8 and 9  of
      his determination, summarising the findings on the basis of  which  he
      dismissed the appeal at paragraph  10  of  his  determination  in  the
      following terms:

             'For these reasons, I find that the appellant  has  failed  to
             prove to  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  she  meets  the
             following requirement of  rule 60:

             (a)  paragraph 60(ii) as read with paragraphs 57(ii),  57(iv),
                  57(v) and 57(vi); more particularly  I  am  not  satisfied
                  that the appellant intends to pursue a course of  studies,
                  intends to leave the United  Kingdom   at  the  conclusion
                  thereof, does not intend to take work  save  for  approved
                  part  time  or  vacation  work,  and  has  the  means  for
                  accommodation and maintenance without   taking  employment
                  or public benefits;  and


             (b)  paragraph 60(iv);  more  particularly  that  satisfactory
                  evidence of regular attendance on  any  other  course  for
                  which she has been enrolled  in  the  past  has  not  been
                  produced; and


             (c)  paragraph 60(v); more particularly in  that  satisfactory
                  evidence of progress in her course of study has  not  been
                  produced; and


             (d)  paragraph 60(vi); more particularly in  that  I   am  not
                  satisfied to a balance or probabilities that the appellant
                  will complete the present course, rather than break it off
                  before completion; and


             (e)  paragraph 60(vii); more particularly in that  I   am  not
                  satisfied to a balance of probabilities that  satisfactory
                  evidence of sufficient sponsorship funding is available.'


25.  The appellant was seeking and was granted an order for  reconsideration
      of that decision on grounds which, although set  out  at  considerable
      length, may be  summarised  as  asserting  that  the  only  aspect  of
      paragraph 60 upon which the  respondent  relied  for  refusal  of  the
      application was paragraph 60(vi) and that it was only at  the  hearing
      that the Immigration Judge then sought to examine the other aspects of
      paragraph 60.  It was submitted that the appellant was not only  taken
      by surprise but was also prejudiced by this  and  therefore  denied  a
      fair hearing. It was further asserted that it was incumbent  upon  the
      Immigration Judge to adjourn the hearing  to  give  the  appellant  an
      opportunity fully to address the concerns  of  the  other  aspects  of
      paragraph 60, given that he was minded to deal with it. The grounds of
      appeal then go on to take issue with specific  findings  made  by  the
      judge leading to his dismissal of the appeal on the basis recorded  in
      paragraph 10 of his determination.

26.  The order for reconsideration was in the following terms:

             'I give permission to argue each  of the points raised in  the
             grounds but I am particularly concerned that  the  Immigration
             Judge appears to have put initial points that were not put  in
             issue by the Secretary of State without giving  the  appellant
             notice that he was putting other points in issue.


             It is arguable that this approach was wrong and arguable  that
             any such error was material. Nevertheless  the  Tribunal  will
             expect the appellant to show how she would have met any of the
             additional points put in  issue  by  the  learned  Immigration
             Judge if she had had notice of his concerns.'

27.  Despite the specific  terms  of  the  order  for  reconsideration,  the
      appellant has not sought to put in any additional  evidence  advancing
      her case from that as it appeared at the date of  the  hearing  before
      the Immigration Judge.

28.  The record of proceedings on the Tribunal file does not show  that  the
      Immigration Judge specifically drew the attention of  the  appellant's
      counsel to his intention to consider the applicable Immigration  Rules
      generally as opposed to paragraph 60(vi) upon which the respondent had
      placed specific reliance in refusing the  application.   That  it  was
      perfectly proper  for  him  to  consider  the  application  under  all
      relevant Immigration  Rules  is  established  by  the  ratio  in  R  v
      Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Kwok On Tong [1981]  Imm  AR  214
      where, in an appeal governed by  the  provisions  of  s.19(1)  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971, it was held that both  an  Adjudicator  and  the
      then Immigration Appeal Tribunal were required to look at the whole of
      any relevant rule to  see  whether  or  not  the  circumstances  of  a
      particular case appear to comply with it. It was said further that  if
      some part  of  it  had  not  been  specifically  referred  to  in  the
      Immigration Officer's notice of reasons that did not remove that  duty
      or right from the Adjudicator or the  Tribunal  subject  only  to  the
      requirement that if a matter was raised either on behalf of  the  Home
      Office or by the Adjudicator or Tribunal which was not in  the  notice
      of refusal, steps must be taken to ensure that  the  appellant  had  a
      proper opportunity of dealing with the point. In  such  circumstances,
      where the appellant would not have come ready to meet  the  point,  it
      might be necessary for there to  be an adjournment.

29.  We are satisfied that there is no difference in the requirements  under
      s.19(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 and those under s.86(3)(a) of  the
      2002 Act which we have already set out above.  Both  require  that  in
      considering whether a decision was not in accordance with the law, the
      effect of the Immigration Rules is to be taken into account.

30.  There was, therefore, no error of law on the part  of  the  Immigration
      Judge in holding that the appellant must satisfy him that she complied
      with all of the relevant Immigration Rules  and  not  simply  that  on
      which the respondent's refusal of her application expressly relied.

31.  It is certainly arguable that as the appellant had  herself  chosen  to
      make a change in her course of studies which would necessarily  result
      in the refusal of her application on the basis on which  it  had  been
      made: but, she was now seeking to  rely  on  placing  herself  into  a
      different  category  of  student  course  in  her  appeal  before  the
      Immigration  Judge.  It  must  have  been  apparent   to   her   legal
      representatives that on the basis of the ratio in Kwok On  Tong   -  a
      decision binding on the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  -she  had
      chosen to open up the range of her appeal to  demonstrating  that  she
      complied with all requirements of the appropriate Immigration Rules.

32.  The respondent cannot be criticised for confining his reasoning to  the
      one requirement which was clearly fatal to the prospects of success in
      her application as made to  him.  There  was  no  reason  for  him  to
      consider anything else in those circumstances.  But, it must have been
      apparent to any competent legal adviser that  the  way  in  which  the
      appellant now sought to put her case  would  almost  inevitably  raise
      generally her ability to comply with each  and  every  aspect  of  the
      applicable rules. The burden of proving her case  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities rested on her, and  she  should  undoubtedly  have  come
      prepared to deal with the  appeal  on  a  full  basis.    Indeed,  the
      determination records evidence which goes to issues wider  than simply
      the changed course of study. But, let us assume that  weight  must  be
      given to the primary assertion in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
      appellant was unfairly prejudiced by the Immigration Judge taking  the
      wide ranging approach which he did without forewarning so as  to  give
      her the opportunity fully to prepare her case on the  basis  that  all
      issues raised in the rules would have to  be  proved  by  her  on  the
      balance  of  probabilities.   That  would  give  rise  to   procedural
      unfairness and could arguably amount to an error of law on the part of
      the judge in his approach to the making of his findings  and  decision
      to dismiss the appeal without giving the appellant the opportunity  to
      call further evidence as to the issues which he identifies only in his
      determination.

33.  The issue is then whether that amounts to a material error  of  law  on
      his part. In our judgment it does not. We have already explained  that
      the judge materially erred in law in his approach in accepting that he
      was required to consider the application on the basis of  the  current
      course of study rather than that in respect of which  the  application
      to the respondent had been made. On the  basis  that  the  appeal  was
      bound to be considered in the light of whether or  not  the  appellant
      could satisfy the rules in relation to the course of study  for  which
      she had applied, it is, as we have said, common ground that she cannot
      succeed before us.  Even were we precluded from taking into account an
      issue which goes to the fundamental jurisdiction of  the  Tribunal  to
      entertain the appeal on the basis on which it was entertained  by  the
      Immigration Judge, because the respondent had  failed  to  raise  that
      issue by the appropriate counter-notice before us, the most  that  the
      appellant could hope for at this  hearing  is  a  direction  that  the
      reconsideration be adjourned in order to take full evidence  from  her
      by way of reconsideration afresh.  But, she would be bound to fail  on
      such reconsideration because she  is  seeking  to  argue  an  entirely
      different application from that in respect of which the appeal arises.
       Taking her arguments  at their highest, she  cannot  succeed  in  her
      appeal.

34.  It therefore follows that even if the Immigration Judge did err in  law
      in failing to make clear the way in which he proposed to consider  the
      appeal before him, such error could not be material to the outcome.

35.  For the above reasons, the Tribunal  did  not  materially  err  in  its
      dismissal of this appeal and the decision  of  the  Immigration  Judge
      shall stand.



Signed                                  Date       4th April 2006

J Barnes
Senior Immigration Judge


