
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


 JA (revocation of registration - Secretary of State's policy) India [2011]
                                UKUT 52 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 January 2011                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          The Hon. Mr Justice Irwin
                        Senior Immigration Judge Gill

                                   Between


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A Miah, Counsel, instructed by Law & Lawyers
Solicitors

In cases where an educational provider has its licence withdrawn during  the
period between a student's application for extension of leave as  a  Tier  4
(General) Student Migrant and the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  on  the
application, it is  the  Secretary  of  State's  practice  (as  set  out  in
applicable guidance) to limit a student's existing leave to 60 days, if  the
student has extant leave of six months or more and if the  student  was  not
involved  in  the  reasons  why  the  education  provider  had  its  licence
withdrawn. The guidance states that the leave of  a  student  who  has  less
than six months will not be limited. This guidance does  not  give  rise  to
any legitimate expectation that the Secretary of State will grant  a  period
of 60 days' leave to any student whose original leave  had  expired  by  the
date of the decision, so as to afford him an opportunity  to  register  with
an alternative education provider. It is not irrational or unreasonable  for
the Secretary of State to  distinguish  between  students  who  lodge  their
applications for extension of their leave many  months  in  advance  of  the
expiry of their leave and those who do not.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This case is an appeal by the Secretary of State from  a  decision  of
    Immigration  Judge  Dawson  sitting  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   a
    determination promulgated on 7 September 2010.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by SIJ McGeachy on 29 September 2010.

2.    Before proceeding to deal with the substance of the appeal we wish  to
    point out that directions were made by SIJ McGeachy on 9 December 2010,
    these included the following:


         "It is considered that, if the Upper Tribunal decides to set  aside
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal , the Upper  Tribunal  will
         be able to re-make the decision without any further hearing, if  it
         is able to  hear  submissions  from  the  representatives  of  both
         parties.


         The respondent must serve  on  the  Tribunal  a  witness  statement
         dealing with all the relevant issues in the  appeal  together  with
         the skeleton argument in  support  and  an  indexed  and  paginated
         bundle of documents on which she wishes  to  rely.   The  appellant
         must also serve a skeleton argument together with  an  indexed  and
         paginated bundle of any documents on which she [sic] wishes to rely
         at the hearing."


3.    These directions were not complied  with.   Neither  side  provided  a
    paginated bundle, the respondent to this appeal did not serve a witness
    statement dealing with the relevant issues and neither  side  served  a
    skeleton  argument  setting  out   the   issues.   This   position   is
    unsatisfactory.  Cases such as this which involve considerations of law
    of potential complexity are poorly served in the absence  of  developed
    skeleton arguments.  Both sides in this case are to blame.  It is quite
    unacceptable for directions to be ignored in this way.  We direct  that
    this portion of this judgment is drawn to the attention of  the  senior
    partner of the claimant's solicitors, Messrs Law &  Lawyers,  349  High
    Street North, London E12 6PQ and to the senior lawyer in charge of  the
    file on behalf of the Secretary of State.   We  would  like  a  written
    explanation within fourteen  days  of  this  decision  as  to  why  the
    directions were not complied with.  It  seems  clear  from  submissions
    made in the course of the  hearing  that  in  each  case  the  advocate
    present was not at fault and the difficulty lies with those responsible
    for the conduct of the file.

Background

4.     The  facts  of  the  case  are  reasonably  well  set  out   in   the
    determination and reasons given by the Immigration Judge.  Mr Antony is
    an Indian national born  on  25  March  1985.   He  was  granted  entry
    clearance to come to the United Kingdom as a student whilst  in  Madras
    on 13  April  2007  which  was  valid  until  31  July  2008.   He  was
    subsequently granted an extension of leave from 5 August 2008 until  31
    August 2009.  On 26 August 2009 Mr Antony was a student studying at the
    London Institute of Technical Education.  On 31 August 2009  his  leave
    to remain was due to expire.  On 26 August  2009  Mr.  Antony  made  an
    application for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant in order to study at the  London  Institute
    of Technical Education.

5.    In October 2009, Mr. Antony  switched  to  studying  with  the  London
    School of Business  and  Computing  because  the  London  Institute  of
    Technical Education was not successful in its  registration  under  the
    points-based scheme. There exists on the file a letter of  17  December
    2009 notifying the Secretary of State  of  this  change.   However,  in
    February  2010,  the  London  School  of  Business  and  Computing  was
    suspended as an approved  education  provider.   Although  we  have  no
    precise  detail,  the  Immigration  Judge  found,  in  an  unchallenged
    conclusion, that the licence was subsequently revoked.

6.    The Immigration Judge continues the narrative in this way:

         "[Mr. Antony] then started searching for  a  new  college  offering
         courses  that  suited  him  but  encountered  difficulties  without
         approval from the Home Office.   He has however been successful and
         on 17 May 2010 began a  course  of  studies  with  Overseas  Nurses
         Training Organisation Ltd based in Leeds.  They had provided a visa
         letter dated 22 July 2010 by way of confirmation of [Mr.  Antony's]
         enrolment on an NVQ level 4 in health  and  social  care  programme
         which is to run until 21 May 2012.  [Mr. Antony] has been  informed
         by the college that unless his appeal is successful, he will not be
         able to continue with this college."


7.    It follows from the above that at the time when Mr  Antony  originally
    applied for an extension of his leave to remain there was a  period  of
    five days only unexpired.  At the date of the decision (12 March  2010)
    the outstanding application (as varied by the letter dated 17  December
    2009) was in relation to an educational provider whose licence had been
    revoked and at that point Mr Antony was many months beyond the  expiry
    of his original leave to remain.

8.    The argument successfully mounted by Mr Antony before the  Immigration
    Judge was based on a legitimate expectation said to arise from  a  part
    of the UK Border Agency "Tier 4 of the Points  Based  system  -  Policy
    Guidance" dated 1 June 2009.  The relevant sections read as follows:

         "27.      If  your  approved  education   provider's   licence   is
             withdrawn, all visa letters become invalid.


            What will happen


            ....


             If you are already in the United  Kingdom  studying;  we  will
             limit your permission to stay to:


              . 60 days if you were not involved in the  reasons  why  your
                approved education provider had their licence withdrawn (we
                will not limit your permission to stay  if  you  have  less
                than six months left.  You may want to apply for permission
                to stay with another  approved  education  provider  during
                this time).


              . Immediately if we think you were involved  in  the  reasons
                why your sponsor's licence was withdrawn."

9.    There is no suggestion in this case that Mr  Antony  was  involved  in
    the reasons why the licence  of  the  London  School  of  Business  and
    Computing was withdrawn.

10.   The crucial conclusion of  the  Immigration  Judge  was  expressed  in
    paragraph 8:

         "[Mr. Antony] cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules because at
         the time of the [Secretary of State's] decision he did not  have  a
         valid visa letter.  Nevertheless he has a legitimate expectation in
         accordance with the [Secretary of State's] published guidance to at
         least be granted the 60 days in order to regularise his position by
         enrolling at  another  college.   In  failing  to  follow  her  own
         guidance, the [Secretary of State] cannot  be  said  to  be  acting
         lawfully."


11.   The central points made by the Secretary of State in  the  appeal  are
    succinctly put forward in the grounds as follows:

         "It is submitted the IJ arguably misunderstood the  terms  of  this
         policy.  The policy states that if the student is already in the UK
         studying, the student's existing  permission  [emphasis  added]  to
         stay will be limited, for those with permission  to  stay  of  more
         than six months, to 60 days if the student was  not  involved  with
         the reasons why the licence was revoked ...  [Mr. Antony's] current
         leave  to  remain  expired  on  31  August  2009  (with  his  leave
         continuing under s. 3C of the Immigration Act 1971), therefore,  as
         [Mr. Antony's] leave to remain did not have more than six months to
         run, this part of the policy did not apply to him.  It is submitted
         there was no leave to limit."


Interpretation of the Policy Guidance

12.   On the face of the language contained in the guidance, it  is  clearly
    and explicitly confined to a possible decision to  limit  the  existing
    "permission to stay".  The more accurate term is, of course, "leave  to
    remain", the term which we will hereafter use. The  guidance  indicates
    what decision will be taken.  As a matter of language, if there  is  no
    question  of  a  contribution  to  the  circumstances  leading  to  the
    withdrawal of the sponsor's licence,  the  policy  is  clear.   If  the
    existing leave to remain is longer than six months it could be  limited
    to 60 days.  If the existing leave to remain is less than  six  months,
    it will not be further limited.  In neither case on  the  face  of  the
    language  does  the  policy  contemplate  a  direct  extension  to  the
    student's leave to remain.

13.   We pause to remark that the guidance seems to  us  to  be  capable  of
    giving rise to arbitrary results.  Even before we address the  question
    of when the outstanding leave to remain is to be  calculated,  it  will
    immediately be obvious that those with outstanding leave to  remain  of
    less than six months will often be better off than  those  who  have  a
    longer period of outstanding leave to remain.

14.   The next question is at what point is the outstanding leave to  remain
    to be calculated?  Mr Tufan, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  began  by
    arguing that the relevant point in time for calculating the outstanding
    leave to remain, and indeed for the imposition of any limit, was at the
    time of the revocation of the relevant licence.   However,  this  would
    mean that students would be subject to what might be very  considerable
    limit to their existing leave to remain without even being aware of it.
     It also involves the proposition that such a limit on leave to  remain
    might arise automatically, without a positive decision by the Secretary
    of State.   Under  pressure  of  discussion  Mr  Tufan  abandoned  this
    proposition.  We regard him as wise  to  do  so.   Not  only  does  the
    proposition involve obvious unfairness but it rests on  the  idea  that
    the policy guidance institutes an automatic limit on existing leave  to
    remain without any positive decision by the Secretary of State.  We  do
    not regard that as either fair or legally tenable.

15.   If the policy guidance is indicating what will be the approach of  the
    Secretary of State when taking a specific decision, then when will that
    arise?  In our view it  could  arise,  as  here,  when  an  outstanding
    application for further leave to remain is considered.  It could  arise
    if the Secretary  of  State  informed  the  relevant  students  of  the
    revocation of the licence of their educational  provider,  and  at  the
    same time or subsequently took a positive decision, which would have to
    be communicated to the students, limiting the leave to remain of  those
    with more than six months left.  However,  if  the  imposition  of  the
    limit of leave to remain arises only when a positive decision is  taken
    by the Secretary of State in a given case, it follows that the delay by
    the Secretary of State before taking such  a  decision  is  capable  of
    altering the position of a student concerned.  We  are  concerned  that
    the policy therefore may give rise to arbitrary outcomes  in  different
    circumstances to those arising here.

16.   However, the straightforward position  adopted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in the application of the  policy  to  this  appellant  is  that,
    whether one looks at the situation at the time  of  withdrawal  of  the
    licence of the London School of Business and Computing or at  the  date
    of decision on 12 March, or at any subsequent date, Mr. Antony  had  no
    continuing leave save that derived from s. 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971, which of course continues only until his application for  further
    leave to remain is decided and  any  appeal  against  the  decision  is
    finally determined.  This appellant did not have  leave  to  remain  of
    more than six months to be limited to 60 days or less than  six  months
    which would not be  further  limited.   Mr.  Tufan  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State therefore says that Mr. Antony is not covered by the
    policy and can found no legitimate expectation upon it.

17.   The way the matter was put to us  on  Mr.  Antony's  behalf  was  very
    simple.  Mr Miah suggested that there should be a grace  period  of  60
    days whatever the circumstances, beginning  from  the  point  when  the
    student was aware of the revocation of the licence.   In  our  judgment
    this submission cannot be sustained in law.  It does not arise from the
    clear wording of the policy stated in the  guidance  at  paragraph  27.
    Furthermore, it is not irrational or unreasonable for the Secretary  of
    State to distinguish between applicants who  lodge  their  applications
    for extension of their leave at a time when there is still  six  months
    or more extant leave to remain and those who do not.

18.   In any event, the argument advanced on Mr. Antony's behalf  would  not
    avail him.  Mr Antony must be taken to be fully aware  that  his  first
    educational provider, the London Institute of Technical Education,  had
    had its licence removed before he switched his application by letter so
    as to found it upon his promised place at the London School of Business
    and Computing.  That switch took place by October 2009 and was notified
    to the Home Office by letter of 17 December 2009.  There was of  course
    no extant or continuing leave to remain at either of the latter  dates,
    leaving aside the statutory extension of  leave  under  s.  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  Paragraph 27 of the guidance  cannot  have  been
    intended to apply to leave extended under s. 3C.  Even  if  the  policy
    did require some form of extension or further grace period of  60  days
    from the date of knowledge of the withdrawal  of  the  licence  of  the
    institution concerned (which we do not accept, as stated above), the 60
    day period in Mr Antony's case would have expired well before the  date
    of decision on 12 March 2010.

19.   For these reasons we conclude that the Immigration  Judge  did  indeed
    fall into an  error  of  law  by  concluding  that  Mr.  Antony  had  a
    legitimate expectation that he be granted a further 60 days in order to
    regularise his position by enrolling at another college.   Accordingly,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.  We  re-make
    the decision following this hearing and we dismiss Mr  Antony's  appeal
    from the decision of the Secretary of State.







Signed                                             Date:


Mr Justice Irwin
(Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)




