


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
                                         FM (FGM) Sudan CG [2007] UKAIT00060




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |                             |
|On 12 February 2007 and                       |                             |
|Field House on 18 April 2007                  |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE LANE
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE KING TD
                             MISS R I EMBLIN JP

                                   Between


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms K Cronin, Counsel, instructed by Danielle Cohen
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Tranter, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Significant action is being taken in Sudan, both within  government  and  by
NGOs, to combat the practice of female genital mutilation in all its  forms.
Legal sanctions are, however, unlikely to be applied where a woman has  been
subjected by her family to FGM.

There is in general no real risk of a woman being subjected to  FGM  at  the
instigation of persons who are not family members. As a general matter,  the
risk of FGM being inflicted  on  an  unmarried  woman  will  depend  on  the
attitude of her family, most particularly  her  parents  but  including  her
extended family. A woman who comes from an educated family and/or  a  family
of high social status is as such less likely to experience  family  pressure
to submit to  FGM.  It  is,  however,  not  possible  to  say  that  such  a
background will automatically lead to a finding that  she  is  not  at  real
risk.

The risk of FGM from extended family members will depend  on  a  variety  of
factors, including the age and vulnerability of  the  woman  concerned,  the
attitude and whereabouts of her parents and the location and "reach" of  the
extended family.

If a woman's parents are  opposed  to  FGM,  they  will  normally  be  in  a
position to ensure that she does not marry a man who (or  whose  family)  is
in favour of it, regardless of the attitude of other relatives of the  woman
concerned.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of Sudan, born respectively  on  27  August
    1959, 27 July 1997, 3 March 1985, 18  September  1988  and  20  January
    1993.  The first appellant is the mother of the other appellants.   All
    of them arrived in the United Kingdom on 31 October 1999, with leave to
    enter until 31 January 2002 by reason of the employment in  the  United
    Kingdom of the husband of the first appellant.  On 18 January 2002, the
    first appellant applied, on behalf of herself and the other appellants,
    for leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That  application  was
    refused by  the  respondent  on  13  December  2002  and  each  of  the
    appellants appealed against it. The bases of her  claim  to  remain  in
    this country were a fear that the third and fourth appellants would  be
    subjected to FGM in Sudan,  a  fear  based  on  the  first  appellant's
    political opinion and the generally adverse effect that  removal  would
    have on the family and its constituent members.

2.   The appellants' appeals were heard at Hatton Cross on 12  October  2004
    by an Adjudicator, Mrs D J Baker, who, by a  determination  promulgated
    on 20 October 2004, dismissed them.  On 6  March  2005,  permission  to
    appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal was granted to the appellants
    on the ground that the Adjudicator had arguably erred  in  law  in  her
    consideration of the ground relating to an asserted real  risk  to  the
    third and fourth  appellants  of  being  compelled  to  undergo  female
    genital mutilation (FGM), if returned to Sudan.

3.   On 4 April 2005, the grant of permission to appeal to  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal had effect as if it were an order that the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal  (which  came  into  being  on  that  day)  should
    reconsider the determination of the Adjudicator.  On 29 September 2005,
    the Tribunal (Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane; Immigration Judge C  H
    Bennett; Mr B D Yates) concluded that there was a material error of law
    in the Adjudicator's determination.  Its findings on that issue  (which
    form part of this determination) were as follows:-

        "1.   Although the grounds of  appeal,  upon  which  permission  to
             appeal was granted, are plainly imprecise  and  unsatisfactory,
             the Tribunal on 29 September was satisfied that rule  62(7)  of
             the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005
             could  not  be  said  to  limit  our  reconsideration  of   the
             determination to the issue of FGM in Sudan, as it is set out in
             those grounds.  This was because there is in the  Adjudicator's
             determination an obvious error in the  'Robinson'  sense  (R  v
             SSHD ex parte Robinson [1998] QB 929), which, if  it  had  been
             raised in the grounds, would have  had  a  strong  prospect  of
             success.


        2.    At paragraph 6 of her determination,  the  Adjudicator  makes
             plain that she has misunderstood the  nature  of  the  evidence
             that must be considered  in  order  to  determine  whether  the
             [first appellant's] protected human rights would be violated on
             return to Sudan.  Evidence as to that issue  was  not,  as  the
             Adjudicator thought, limited to what was in  existence  at  the
             date of the decision or within 6 months thereof.


        3.    The Tribunal agreed with Ms Cronin, Counsel for the appellant
             at the hearing on 29 September, that  this  erroneous  approach
             infected the entirety of the determination.  Thus, at paragraph
             22, the  Adjudicator  found  that  the  [first  appellant]  had
             produced no evidence to show that she or her daughters  are  at
             particular risk if they return to Sudan.  The [first appellant]
             had, however, produced evidence from [named individual] to  the
             effect that the daughters were at risk of forcible circumcision
             if returned.  Whether the Adjudicator accepted that evidence is
             not the point; it was evidence before her, yet  she  discounted
             it, either because of her error as identified  at  paragraph  2
             above or for some other unvoiced reason."

4.   The Tribunal on 29 September 2005 considered  that,  at  the  adjourned
    reconsideration hearing, all matters  (including  credibility  and  the
    first appellant's alleged political activities in Sudan) should  be  at
    large.  That was, by common consent, the approach  which  the  Tribunal
    subsequently adopted at the hearings in February and April  2007.   The
    other matter to note at  this  stage  is  that  there  was  some  doubt
    expressed at the hearing on 29 September 2005 as to whether  the  first
    appellant was the sole appellant, with her children  as  dependants  on
    her claim, or whether each was an appellant in his or  her  own  right.
    Upon analysis, the Tribunal has concluded that each of the children  is
    an appellant.  The application made on 18 January 2002  made  it  plain
    that the children were applying for an extension of stay  (3.1  of  the
    application form).  The respondent, in form ICD.0503, specified each of
    the five appellants  as  such  and  the  respondent's  bundle  contains
    separate notices of appeal in respect of each of the appellants.

5.   In order to substitute  a  fresh  decision  to  allow  or  dismiss  the
    appeals, the Tribunal, on 12 February 2007, heard oral evidence from Mr
    Peter Verney, an expert on Sudan, and from the three female appellants.
     Closing submissions were heard on 18 April.


The evidence of Mr Peter Verney

6.   Mr Verney spoke to his written  reports  of  15  November  2006  and  5
    February 2007.  Over some thirty years, he has had a  special  interest
    in Sudan.  In his first report Mr Verney noted that the first appellant
    feared that, if returned to Sudan, her daughters, raised  outside  that
    country, would be subjected to FGM.  Mr Verney considered that fear  to
    be justifiable and the risk to be "very real".  Mr  Verney  had  direct
    knowledge of FGM, having married into the Sudanese community,  and  had
    also conferred with  Dr  Toubia,  a  leading  Sudanese  women's  health
    specialist and Dr Jabrallah, a Sudanese female psychologist, as well as
    several members of the popular opposition to the Sudanese  regime.   Mr
    Verney was aware of the concern raised  on  behalf  of  the  appellants
    regarding the risk of FGM from members  of  the  extended  family.   He
    considered  that  there  was  considerable  vindictiveness   shown   by
    Islamists within the regime  in  pursuing  those  progressively  minded
    people, termed "leftists, communists and secularists".  That had been

           "well-established in  recent  years  by  human  rights  monitors.
          Moreover, the regime's agents display various sexual obsessions in
          their treatment of opponents.  It is entirely possible  that  they
          might contrive to have the operation carried out, and it is almost
          certain that they would not prevent or pursue anyone who did carry
          it out"


     on the third and fourth appellants.

7.   Although Mr Verney said that FGM had been illegal in  Sudan  since  the
    late 1940s, enforcement of the law had  been  "minimal".   Furthermore,
    the law did not apply to  the  "lesser"  forms  of  FGM.   The  current
    Sudanese regime had  "both  encouraged  the  most  retrograde  attitude
    towards women and removed  official  protection  for  victims  of  harm
    within the family".  The regime had,  according  to  Mr  Verney,  taken
    various

        "retrogressive  steps  which  have  resulted  in  an  increase   in
        frequency of the operation.  The regime's propaganda has  increased
        the social pressure to carry out the operation as a quasi-religious
        act, the obstruction of campaigners and medical workers opposed  to
        the operation, and the arrest not of the circumcisers but of  those
        dedicated to the protection of women."


     The government had interfered with


         "the respected Ahfad University and the  associated  Ahfad  Clinic
        because of antagonism to their teachings on women's  rights.   When
        the clinic gave family planning  assistance  and  focussed  on  the
        eradication of  FGM,  this  was  regarded  as  engaging  in  'anti-
        government activities'.  In late 1997, the  government  confiscated
        all the equipment from the clinic and closed it  for  approximately
        one year."

8.   On 6 April 2006, Mr Verney received news of a "fatwa" on  FGM  from  Dr
    Hassan, Executive Secretary of the Sudan National Coordinating  Network
    on FGM and President of the FGM/HTPs Network, described by Mr Verney as
    "an  authoritative  source".   The  fatwa,  said  to  be  printed   and
    distributed widely in Khartoum state as well as the northern states  of
    Sudan, had led to girls being circumcised.  Mr Verney also referred  to
    a statement in the US State Department Report on Sudan (2002), that the
    government continued to resist the presence  and  activities  of  human
    rights groups in the investigation of  human  rights  abuses  and  that
    violence and discrimination against women were problems.  FGM was  said
    to be "widespread".

9.   The report also referred to a press release of 18 June  2002  from  the
    Sudanese  Women's  Rights  Group,  stating  that  they  were   "gravely
    concerned about the intention of the government of  Sudan  to  legalise
    female circumcision".  This followed the holding, on 22 May 2002, of  a
    workshop in Khartoum, organised by the Ministry  of  Religious  Affairs
    and Endowment in  collaboration  with  the  Female  Student  Centre  in
    Omdurman Islamic University.  The title of the  workshop  was  "Towards
    the legalisation of female circumcision and establishment  of  training
    centres for operators (excisors)".

10.  According to the British Medical Journal of 15  September  2002,  there
    was a growing clamp-down on the press in  Sudan,  which  was  affecting
    public health campaigns.  According to the BMJ,  articles  regarded  by
    the Sudanese  government  as  "subversive"  included  those  discussing
    female circumcision.  The "crackdown" was  said  to  be  hampering  the
    drive against FGM.  On  24  August  2002,  publication  of  a  Khartoum
    newspaper, Al Ayam, was suspended for  a  day  after  it  published  an
    article on FGM.  North Sudan was  said  to  have  amongst  the  world's
    highest incidence of FGM, around 89% of married women  were  considered
    to have suffered it.  The suspension  of  the  Al  Ayam  newspaper  was
    confirmed in a press report from Agence France-Presse.

11.  The report also referred to an international and national NGO forum  in
    Khartoum as having been raided by government security  officers  on  22
    January 2006.  This led to the detention of  some  thirty  individuals.
    The incident was said  to  have  recalled  the  "crude  manhandling  by
    Sudanese security officers of the US Security of State Condoleezza Rice
    and her delegation during her 2005 visit to Khartoum".

12.  The report noted that the first appellant claimed to have been  active,
    whilst outside  Sudan,  in  groups  that  were  regarded  as  being  in
    opposition to the Sudanese regime.   Mr  Verney  considered  that  such
    "dissident activities abroad are  monitored  closely"  by  the  regime,
    particularly  in  the  United  Kingdom.   In  his  opinion,  the  first
    appellant's  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in  expressing  her
    opposition to FGM  and  her  support  for  women's  rights,  would  add
    significantly to the risk to her if she were forced to return to Sudan.

13.  Regarding the position of women in Sudan,  Mr  Verney  considered  that
    the regime had "turned back the clock for Sudanese women  in  terms  of
    rights and treatment, as part of  its  political  agenda.   Most  civil
    society organisations which provided the checks  and  balances  on  the
    political system have been outlawed."  This  was  in  contrast  to  the
    position earlier in the 20th Century, when Sudan was

         "relatively progressive among African and Arab  countries  in  its
        treatment of women - allowing women to  drive  cars,  for  example.
        These embryonic freedoms had been removed  by  the  current  regime
        since 1989.  The regime has affected the lives of women in numerous
        ways.  Key issues include its refusal to  accept  a  UN  treaty  on
        women's rights and  the  restrictions  on  travel  and  freedom  of
        association, the resurgence of female circumcision, and the use  of
        violent punishment for dress code infringements."

        The regime remained "openly scornful of international agreements  on
    the rights of women, despite a  few  token  appointments  of  women  to
    government and judicial posts".   Women  who  had  decided  to  present
    evidence to the UN Special Rapporteurs on human  rights  in  Sudan  had
    been interrogated and threatened as a result of their  actions.   Sudan
    refused to sign a UN Treaty on women's rights because the country could
    do without "such strange practices", according to President  Bashir  on
    14 January 2001.  In September 2000,  the  Governor  of  the  State  of
    Khartoum issued a decree barring women  from  working  in  many  public
    places, stating that this would uphold Islamic law  and  "maintain  the
    honour of women".  According to the  Sudan  Human  Rights  Organisation
    Annual Report, on 23 June 2001 security forces interrupted  a  workshop
    on "democracy and gender issues" organised  by  the  Gender  Centre  in
    Khartoum.   Mr  Verney  also  referred  to  press  reports  from  2003,
    concerning the flogging of girls for adultery and "not wearing socks".

14.  In conclusion, Mr Verney considered that the regime had

         "only to a very limited extent allowed selected groups to campaign
        against FGM, usually when it wants to present a  moderate  face  to
        the western world.  But these periods of tolerance are  short-lived
        and insubstantial.  In all other respects,  it  has  hindered  such
        work and encouraged instead those who would legitimise FGM  in  the
        name of (unjustified) religious orthodoxy."

        Those who campaign against FGM are, according to Mr Verney,  "almost
    inevitably drawn from those who oppose the totalitarian regime on other
    grounds".

15.  In his report of 5 February 2007,  Mr  Verney  provided  the  following
    information regarding FGM:-

        "The act of female genital mutilation or cutting (FGM/C) co-involve
        the removal of all external genitalia (labia and clitoris) with the
        stitching  of  the  vaginal  entrance  (known  as  infibulation  or
        Pharaonic circumcision), or the removal  of  all  or  part  of  the
        clitoris and labia (misleadingly known as Sunna circumcision).   In
        practice there is a spectrum of severity in  which  the  degree  of
        damage depends not only  on  the  amount  of  nerve-bearing  tissue
        removed, but  also  on  how  much  additional  harm  is  caused  by
        untrained surgery carried out in unhygienic conditions."

16.  The World Health Organisation classification of FGM/C is as follows:-

        "FGM I: excision of the prepuce, with or without excision  of  part
        or all of the clitoris.


        FGM II: excision of the clitoris with partial or total  removal  of
        the labia minora.


        FGM III: excision of part or all  of  the  external  genitalia  and
        stitching or narrowing of the vaginal opening (infibulation)."

17.  The Pharaonic form of FGM (FGM III) has been prohibited in Sudan  since
    1947.  According to Mr Verney, there are  reports  of  a  trend  "among
    educated urban Sudanese away from the  Pharaonic  towards  the  'Sunna'
    (FGM II type)".  Such reports, however, "only indicate  that  they  are
    starting to obey a law established 16 years ago.  They do not  indicate
    any real progress or any fading of the danger" to the third and  fourth
    appellants.  Mr Verney considered that materials, such as  that  relied
    upon by the respondent, referring to such changes  as  just  described,
    ignored the fact that FGM II in any event constituted a gross abuse  of
    physical and mental integrity and  was  likely  to  lead  to  life-long
    trauma.  Furthermore, it had to be borne in mind that  there  had  been
    reversals in the campaign in  Sudan  against  FGM,  since  the  current
    regime came to power in 1989.  Mr Verney considered that, in  order  to
    present an acceptable face to western critics,  the  regime  had  often
    "set up its own supporters  in  proxy  'non-government  organisations,'
    while continuing to attack and undermine the activities of non-Islamist
    civil society bodies".  Most Muslim Sudanese girls were brought up in a
    social milieu in Sudan which depicted FGM/C as necessary and  portrayed
    normal un-cut girls as  "unclean".   Because  the  ceremony  was  often
    accompanied by gifts and by  approving  social  attention,  many  young
    girls were encouraged to undergo the procedure.  The third  and  fourth
    appellants, however, having been raised outside  Sudan,  in  a  society
    which did not carry out FGM/C, would regard the  procedure  as  utterly
    alien and the trauma of the operation would  have  even  more  shocking
    psychological impact.  According to BBC and BMJ  reports  noted  by  Mr
    Verney, it appeared that Sudanese girls from  the  United  Kingdom  had
    been sent back to the Sudan, ostensibly for holidays, in  order  to  be
    subjected to the FGM/C operation.  Mr Verney considered that this was a
    far more common phenomenon than the handful of cases where  progressive
    Sudanese were seeking to protect their children from the practice.

18.  Mr Verney said that he had met the first appellant  at  least  once  at
    public meetings relating to Sudan and he did not have  any  doubt  that
    she had played a role in promoting Sudanese women's human rights:-

        "In summer 2005 she attended a meeting at Friends House, Euston, to
        call attention to the plight of the people  of  Darfur.   This  was
        unusual in that many northern Sudanese  have  distanced  themselves
        from the Darfur issue, and it  indicated  that  her  concerns  were
        sufficiently strong  for  her  to  go  against  the  mainstream  of
        northern Sudanese thinking."

19.  Mr Verney concluded his second  report  by  stating  that  the  instant
    appeal had three major aspects  requiring  consideration:  namely,  the
    risk in general faced by Sudanese girls returning  to  Sudan  of  being
    subjected to FGM/C; the added specific risk to  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants who, because of their long absence from  Sudan,  lacked  any
    personal identification whatsoever with the practice and who,  if  they
    conducted themselves in a manner  "reflecting  their  more  progressive
    upbringing abroad", would  attract  adverse  attention  from  hard-line
    conservative members of the extended family, who would use  this  as  a
    pretext  to  justify  carrying  out  FGM/C  on  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants; and the added specific  risk  that  the  first,  third  and
    fourth appellants would be targeted "out  of  sheer  political  malice.
    This is highly important and is born out by the regime's track record."

20.  In oral evidence, Mr Verney said that he  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellants could relocate to the south of Sudan, in order to avoid  the
    risk to them in the north, since the south was a "recovering war zone",
    which could not receive non-indigenous northern  Sudanese  people.   So
    far as the  risk  of  FGM  to  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  was
    concerned, Mr Verney did not consider that any individual  adult  could
    guarantee protection.  Mr Verney referred to Dr Ellen Gruenbaum  (whose
    written report was subsequently adduced in evidence) as having produced
    the most thorough and best-researched analysis of FGM  in  Sudan.   She
    was a specialist in that matter, whereas Mr Verney said that he himself
    was a Sudan generalist.


The Almroth Report

21.  Mr Verney was asked about the  report  contained  in  the  respondent's
    supplementary bundle entitled "Genital mutilation of girls in  Sudan  -
    community - and hospital-based studies on female  genital  cutting  and
    its  sequelae  -  Karolinska  Institutet  Stockholm,   December   2005"
    (hereafter referred to as the "Almroth Report").  That report was based
    on interviews undertaken according to questionnaires with 119  randomly
    selected  respondents  (30  young  mothers,  29   young   fathers,   30
    grandmothers and 30 grandfathers) in a village in the Gezira, south  of
    Khartoum.  To investigate adverse health effects, 255 girls  between  4
    and 9 years old,  presenting  to  the  Children's  Emergency  Hospital,
    Khartoum, were recruited.  Detailed  histories  and  full  examinations
    were obtained.  To investigate the association between FGM and  primary
    infertility, a study involving 99 women was undertaken.

22.  The results of the Almroth Report  were  that,  where  all  the  female
    respondents in  the  village  had  undergone  FGM,  44%  of  the  young
    respondents had decided not to let their daughters  undergo  it.   That
    change of practice was confirmed by a clinical study, where 22% of  the
    girls had undergone FGM but a large share of the rest  would  have  FGM
    later, leaving 26% of the girls allegedly without FGM  in  the  future.
    The form of FGM was "under-reported in an  anatomical  sense",  39%  of
    forms being reported as "Sunna", extending to the  labia  majora.   For
    girls under the age of 7 there was a  significant  association  between
    FGM and suspected urinary tract infection.  Religious belief, education
    level and socio-economic status, significantly affected to what  extent
    FGM was practised.  Re-infibulation was widely practised, with the main
    motive said to be sexual satisfaction of the husband, although that was
    contradicted by the fact that male complications  resulting  from  FGM,
    such as difficulty in penetration, wounds/infections on the  penis  and
    psychological problems, were described by a majority of the men.   Most
    of the young men questioned would  have  preferred  to  marry  a  woman
    without FGM.  As a result, young fathers  were  more  involved  in  the
    decision process when decisions were taken not to perform FGM.

23.  Almroth concluded that there "seems to be a trend  towards  abandonment
    and/or milder forms of FGM in Sudan, but  a  majority  of  girls  still
    undergo severe forms of the  practice".   The  results  of  the  report
    challenged the most important marriage-related traditional motives  for
    FGM, by exposing male complications arising from it and  male  negative
    attitudes towards it.  Although, traditionally, FGM had been  performed
    to "increase the chances of future marriage,"  Almroth's  findings,  by
    contrast, indicated "that genital mutilation of  girls  might  have  an
    opposite effect by destabilising marriages through its effect on sexual
    and reproductive health".


Mr Verney's evidence (continued)

24.  Mr Verney regarded the Almroth report as "not in itself  a  bad  little
    report", but he considered that it had little to do  with  the  present
    appeal.  The sample related to a small rural  community;  by  contrast,
    the issue regarding the third  and  fourth  appellants  involved  their
    returning from outside  Sudan,  having  had  a  progressive  education.
    Although the village studied by Almroth had 3,000 people, only 120 were
    surveyed.  The fact that Almroth required an interpreter might have had
    an effect.  Much of the questioning in  the  forms  related  to  future
    intentions.  Mr Verney did not consider the Almroth Report as being, in
    general, as reliable as the reports from UNICEF on FGM in Sudan.  Those
    reports are set out at pages 178 to 233 of the appellants' bundle.  The
    first is a country profile, which states that  FGM/C  is  a  widespread
    practice in Sudan, with 89% of women  in  the  north  having  undergone
    "some form of cutting".  Prevalence rates varied  according  to  ethnic
    and regional lines.  Levels of preference were significantly  lower  in
    Darfur (65%) and in the east (87%), indicating that  the  practice  was
    not universal throughout Sudan's various ethnic groups.  The Sunna form
    of  circumcision  was  "prevalent  among  22%  of  women",  but  varied
    significantly across religion.  "Infibulation is most  prevalent  among
    Muslim women (83% compared with 27% among Christian women)."  Sunna FGM
    was "predominantly practised by Christian  [women]  with  a  prevalence
    rate of 46%."  In 1990, it appeared  that  79%  of  ever-married  women
    between 15 and 49 supported the continuation of FGM/C but, again,  such
    support  varied  significantly  according  to  religion,   region   and
    educational status.  "Urban, Christian and higher-educated  women  were
    less likely to favour the continuation  of  FGM/C  compared  to  rural,
    Muslim, and uneducated  women."   At  that  time,  Khartoum,  with  68%
    support amongst women, was one of the lowest areas,  with  the  highest
    being women from central (86%) and Kordofan (90%) regions.  Over 60% of
    circumcisions  were  said  to  be  performed  by   "traditional   birth
    attendants" and less than 1% of women had undergone the procedure under
    medical care or attention.  Trained midwives were twice  as  likely  to
    perform the intermediate type of circumcision.


25.  The second UNICEF document is from 2005 and  is  entitled  "Changing  a
    harmful social convention: female  genital  mutilation/cutting".   This
    report covered FGM issues across the globe.  It was estimated that  130
    million girls and  women  alive  today  have  undergone  FGM/C.   FGM/C
    prevalence in the  countries  of  north-east  Africa  (Egypt,  Eritrea,
    Ethiopia and Sudan) is said to range from  80-97%,  although  care  was
    said to be  required  "when  interpreting  these  figures,  since  they
    represent national  averages  and  do  not  reflect  the  often  marked
    variation in  prevalence  in  different  parts  of  a  given  country".
    Amongst the authorities cited in this UNICEF document is Dr Gruenbaum.

26.  Mr Verney said that the Almroth Report was not looking  at  changes  in
    attitude over a period of time and that it possibly involved a  certain
    amount of wishful thinking on the part of  the  author.   Although  the
    male respondees were said not to be in favour of FGM, there was nothing
    to suggest that they would actually have prevented it from happening to
    any woman.  Even if it  could  be  said  that  there  were  changes  in
    societal attitudes, Mr Verney considered that it had to  be  remembered
    that those changes had first begun  some  25  years  ago,  only  to  be
    stifled by the advent of the current Sudanese regime.  Around 1983, the
    National Islamic Front lifted the proscription  on  type  III  FGM  and
    conducted something amounting to almost a war against  women  who  were
    advocating human rights, including opposition to FGM.  In  Mr  Verney's
    opinion, the position was now back to where  Sudan  had  been  some  25
    years ago, which did not constitute real  progress.   Furthermore,  the
    shift from infibulation to the "lighter" form of FGM still  involved  a
    gross abuse of a woman's physical integrity.

27.  Mr Verney said that he knew the first appellant and had met her  at  an
    event at the Friends Meeting House in the Euston Road.   She  had  been
    there the entire day and was clearly taking an active part in trying to
    raise the profile of  the  situation  in  Darfur.   There  was,  in  Mr
    Verney's view, "no doubt" that the  first  appellant  would  have  been
    noticed and labelled as an activist.  Although the regime was  prepared
    to allow the establishment of some  social  society  groups,  including
    those involving women, in practice these only related to members of the
    National Islamic Front and excluded those  who  were  anathema  to  the
    regime.  The first appellant's long  association  with  Sudanese  human
    rights organisations meant that she was  associated  with  groups  that
    were regarded as an embarrassment.  Indeed, they were regarded as  real
    enemies of the regime.

28.  Cross-examined, Mr Verney said that  he  had  assisted  another  person
    during the 1980s on a  book  regarding  FGM  and  had  direct  personal
    experience as a result of being married into the community and  through
    being in contact with doctors and others.  He had not carried  out  any
    academic research into FGM since the 1980s but had  researched  women's
    rights in Sudan.  FGM was in the majority of cases carried out on girls
    aged between 4 and 12 but there were "plenty of cases" of  older  girls
    and young women being subjected to the procedure.  There was  also  re-
    infibulation, where those who had given birth were "stitched  up"  once
    more.  Mr Verney's own sister-in-law, who was  from  south  Sudan,  was
    persuaded at the age of 19 by an Arab family from the  north  that  she
    should undergo FGM.  There were also incidences  of  southern  Sudanese
    women who had moved to  Khartoum  coming  under  pressure  to  have  it
    performed.

29.  Asked whether  these  women  had  been  forced,  as  opposed  to  being
    persuaded, Mr Verney said it depended what one meant  by  forced.   The
    decision depended upon the individual family,  including  grandparents,
    aunts and uncles.  The parents of a girl were  not  necessarily  to  be
    regarded as being in control of  the  situation.   Even  a  progressive
    parent could be overborne by  a  more  hard-line  relative.   A  girl's
    parents would be unable to protect her  against  FGM.   The  number  of
    parents opposed  to  the  procedure  was  very  small  and  they  faced
    pressures to conform.  Another relative might just  take  the  girl  in
    question away, in order for her to have FGM.

30.  It was put to Mr Verney that the  Almroth  Report  suggested  that  the
    decision lay with the mother.   Mr  Verney  said  that  that  view  was
    "superficial and wrong".  It would only take an aunt or uncle  to  step
    in and the parents would have no ultimate control.  There was a risk of
    abduction of the girl in question by the extended  family.   Mr  Verney
    considered that to be the primary risk in the present case.  It was not
    necessarily a question of the third and  fourth  appellants  bowing  to
    pressure.  Furthermore, the risk would exist  wherever  they  lived  in
    Sudan.  Their extended family would be able to find them in  any  place
    in which they  might  reasonably  be  able  to  live.   It  had  to  be
    remembered that most of Sudan was  desert.   In  the  populated  areas,
    there was a "village-like" atmosphere, in which it  was  impossible  to
    escape attention.

31.  Asked about different attitudes emerging amongst the educated class  in
    Sudan, Mr Verney said that this largely involved no more  than  a  move
    from the severe to the less severe form of FGM, which was still a gross
    abuse.

32.  The Sudanese regime's attitude towards FGM was  caused  in  part  by  a
    desire on its part to stand up to  western  influences  and  pressures.
    The procedure would be unlikely to be carried out in  a  hospital  but,
    rather, would be undertaken by a traditional birth attendant.

33.  Mr Verney was asked about the passage in his second  report  about  the
    likelihood that the Sudanese authorities would target the first,  third
    and fourth appellants "out of sheer political malice".  He replied that
    this did not mean that the Sudanese state itself  would  undertake  the
    FGM of the girls but, rather, that they would be unwilling  to  protect
    them and might shield anyone who carried it out.  No-one had ever  been
    punished in Sudan for undertaking FGM.  The first appellant  had  shown
    political opposition to the regime and so the latter would not stand in
    the way of those who wished to perform FGM on her daughters.  The first
    appellant had an uncle who was an Islamist who  worked  in  a  military
    hospital.  He might be a likely person to  insist  that  the  daughters
    were subjected to FGM.  If so, the regime would not be  concerned.   On
    the contrary, Mr Verney considered that the regime would regard such an
    event as, in effect, punishing the first appellant  for  her  political
    stance.  The regime itself, however, would be at pains not to  be  seen
    to be actively involved.

34.  Asked what the mother and father  of  a  girl  might  do  in  order  to
    protect her, Mr Verney said that there were no safe places to go.   The
    family in the present case had powerful members,  who  were  associated
    with the regime.  As a result, the parents of the girls were likely  to
    be completely overridden by  overt  opposition  or,  alternatively,  by
    persons  operating  by  stealth.   A  girl  might  "disappear  for   an
    afternoon".    Mr   Verney   had   experienced   for    himself    such
    "underhandedness".

35.  Re-examined, Mr Verney was asked what form  the  pressure  would  take.
    He said that the girl appellants had adopted lifestyles that  were  not
    Sudanese and  they  would  be  regarded  on  return  as  "immodest  and
    dangerously liberal".  This would lead to the assumption that they  had
    not undergone FGM.  The view would also be taken  that,  by  subjecting
    them to it, the girls would be  brought  back  "into  the  fold".   The
    degree of pressure would, Mr Verney considered, differ according to the
    nature and circumstances of the family involved, but it would be never-
    ending.  He referred again to his sister-in-law, who underwent  FGM  at
    19, at the insistence of her fianc�'s family, only  to  find  that  the
    fianc�  then  disappeared.   When  he  was  a  lecturer   at   Khartoum
    University, Mr Verney said he had known  intellectuals  who  were  very
    aware of the risks but  who  were  nevertheless  subjected  by  intense
    social pressure to undergo FGM.  The pressure was primarily social  and
    familial.

36.  In answer to a question from the  Tribunal,  Mr  Verney  said  that  he
    regarded the greatest influence as coming from  the  family  (including
    the extended family).  There was an uncle who worked  at  the  military
    hospital and also an aunt.  The uncle and aunt  were  the  most  likely
    sources of risk  to  the  third  and  fourth  appellants.   Within  any
    extended family, there would be key individuals who would be likely  to
    be keen on FGM.  Every family would have a  "hard-line  person"  within
    its ranks.  Mr Verney considered the risk in the  present  case  to  be
    real, based upon his decade and a  half  of  being  in  Sudan  and  the
    profile of the appellants, together with the fact that their uncle  was
    pro-regime.

37.  So far as the Darfur meeting at the Friends  Meeting  House  in  Euston
    was concerned, Mr Verney said that numbers there during the day  varied
    between 100 and 300.  Mr Verney confirmed that, as far as he was aware,
    the first appellant had undergone FGM.

Evidence of the first appellant

38.  The first appellant gave oral evidence.  She confirmed and adopted  her
    written statements.   These  are  set  out  at  pages  108-109  of  the
    appellants' bundle and  pages  1-7  of  the  appellants'  supplementary
    bundle A.  In summary, the first appellant said that she  was  involved
    in Sudan in  the  women's  rights  movement  and  that,  following  her
    marriage to a Sudanese citizen who worked for Saudi  Arabian  Airlines,
    she lived with him in Pakistan, where her four children were born.  Her
    husband was then posted to the United Kingdom and she  came  here  with
    the children in October 1999, in order to be with  him.   The  children
    attended local schools,  learned  English  and  mixed  with  the  local
    community.  The first appellant was employed from May 2000,  eventually
    working in the hotel business.

39.  The first appellant's husband was transferred to Saudi Arabia,  leaving
    her to look after, feed and educate the children.  She regarded herself
    as separated from her husband, whose only contribution  to  the  family
    was to pay the mortgage.  The first appellant decided  that  she  could
    not return to Sudan with her children, because her daughters  would  be
    subjected to FGM and because the children would know nothing about  the
    culture, customs and language of that country.

40.  In  her  second  statement,  the  first  appellant  described  her  own
    experience of FGM.  This occurred when she was 14 years old.   All  the
    girls in her school underwent the procedure and both the  maternal  and
    paternal sides of the family closely adhered to the tradition  of  FGM.
    The first appellant found it "the most traumatic and  awful  experience
    that I have ever experienced".  Her family decided to  subject  her  to
    it, when she was still recovering from an appendectomy.   Her  maternal
    grandmother "used a hot poker from the fire to control and restrain  me
    and I suffered a burn to [the] inside of my left  knee,  from  which  I
    still have a scar.  The circumcision was carried  out  at  a  midwife's
    house and she used a blade to cut me whilst two women held my shoulders
    down and my legs were tied with bandages to prevent  me  from  moving."
    There was then "a celebration of singing and I was given  gifts".   She
    found it extremely difficult to pass  urine  and  had  to  lie  in  bed
    because walking was painful and  difficult.   Thereafter,  menstruation
    became "a monthly torture".  Her periods lasted much longer because the
    blood could not flow naturally.   She  remained  highly  vulnerable  to
    repeated infections.

41.  The first appellant's feelings about  FGM  grew  stronger  through  her
    late teenage years.  She heard about the Sudanese  Women's  Union,  who
    spoke out against FGM, and began to distribute leaflets for them.   She
    officially joined in 1977.  In 1979, she  attended  a  WHO  meeting  in
    Khartoum on the subject of FGM.  At that time, the first appellant  was
    working as a school teacher.  Shortly thereafter, she participated in a
    demonstration against FGM and violence against women.  As a  result  of
    taking part in that protest, she lost her employment at the school.  In
    1982, following her  marriage,  she  participated  in  a  demonstration
    against FGM, again under the auspices of the  Sudanese  Women's  Union.
    The police intervened and women were beaten and  arrested.   The  first
    appellant was arrested and interrogated for  five  hours,  as  well  as
    being beaten.

42.  The same year, the  first  appellant's  husband  joined  Saudi  Arabian
    Airlines and  in  1983  he  was  transferred  to  Karachi.   The  first
    appellant joined him there the same year.   At  that  time,  Sudan  was
    ruled by President Nimeiri, who shortly thereafter  proclaimed  Shari'a
    law throughout  the  country.   This  increasing  conservatism  was  an
    important factor in the decision of the first appellant to leave Sudan.

43.  Whilst in Pakistan, the first appellant continued with  her  activities
    in respect of women's rights.  Her husband fully supported her in  this
    "and still  does  today".   Both  of  her  daughters  attended  English
    speaking  private  schools  in  Pakistan   and   their   parents   were
    "always...keen for them to live a  liberal  lifestyle  and  they  began
    doing so in Karachi and continued with this in the UK".

44.  The first appellant visited Sudan  with  her  husband  in  1991,  as  a
    result of the supposed illness of his mother.   The  first  appellant's
    mother-in-law made comments to the third appellant, then aged about  6,
    which were designed to suggest to her the benefits of FGM.  The mother-
    in-law had another granddaughter, aged  10,  who  was  to  undergo  the
    procedure around that time.  The first appellant said that the plan was
    for the third appellant and  the  latter's  cousin  to  be  circumcised
    together and that this was the reason why the first appellant  and  her
    family had been "tricked"  into  travelling  to  Sudan.   In  order  to
    prevent this happening, the family left for Karachi.

45.  In 1998, when the  first  appellant's  husband  left  Karachi  for  his
    posting in the United Kingdom, the family  had  great  difficulties  in
    obtaining Sudanese passports for the third and  fourth  appellants,  as
    the first appellant did not wish them  to  cover  their  heads  in  the
    photographs needed for the passports.  The Embassy  officials  insisted
    that they should and this led to "much disagreement" between  them  and
    the first appellant.  Eventually, the first appellant  acceded  to  the
    officials' demands.  The passport applications were then  sent  to  the
    Sudan but, according to the  first  appellant,  the  authorities  there
    "would not issue passports to our daughters but agreed that they  could
    be included on my passport after a long delay".

46.  In the United Kingdom, the first  appellant  said  that  she  continued
    with her political and human rights activities  and  joined  the  Sudan
    Human Rights Organisation.  Later,  she  joined  the  Sudanese  Women's
    Rights Group and continued to be  active  in  both  organisations.   In
    January 2003, she  joined  the  Darfur  Centre  for  Human  Rights  and
    Development, for which she undertook voluntary work.  She had  attended
    many protests, meetings and activities, and supported other  women  who
    had had similar experiences  to  her.   She  particularly  believed  in
    raising awareness amongst Sudanese and West African women, so that they
    did not subject their daughters to FGM.

47.  In 2005, the first appellant  joined  the  Sudanese  Solidarity  Group,
    described by her as  "a  voluntary  civil  society  organisation  which
    criticises the government in Sudan  and  reveals  corruption  therein".
    She attended their monthly meetings.

48.  Although both the first appellant and her husband objected to FGM,  her
    own family in  Sudan  and  that  of  her  husband  both  supported  the
    practice.  Some members of the family held, or had held,  positions  of
    influence in the regime and the first appellant considered that she and
    her husband "could not resist  their  pressure  on  this  issue".   Her
    brother-in-law was said to be a medical  doctor  and  a  senior  police
    officer in the police hospital in Khartoum.  His sister had,  over  the
    years, contacted the third and fourth appellants by telephone and

         "has pressurised them concerning the practice, telling  them  that
        they will not be respected or make a proper marriage if  they  fail
        to undergo the practice.  She has even offered them her sons' hands
        in marriage.  She is very hostile with me on the phone.  She thinks
        that I have manipulated my husband and challenged the traditions of
        the family.  Her pressure was so intense  some  years  ago  that  I
        changed our home telephone number so that  she  could  not  contact
        us."

49.  Another brother-in-law was, according to the first appellant,  Minister
    of Tourism in the Sudanese government and had strong political contacts
    and influence.  Her own maternal uncle  was  the  Director  General  of
    Khartoum Health Department.  Both of these men were said to have

        "very  strong  views  about  FGM  and  their  daughters   are   all
        circumcised.  My girls are viewed very negatively because they  are
        the only uncircumcised girls in the extended family.  The whole  of
        my extended family enjoy a prominent position in Sudan  because  it
        is one of the prominent families in Khartoum."

         The appellant said that her half-brother was a

         "senior lawyer and again his daughters are circumcised.  I mention
        these particular family members to explain the social pressure that
        my daughters and I would be placed under.  This pressure  would  be
        all the more intense because I am returning there  as  a  separated
        wife and we will be without my husband's  protection.   He  remains
        living in Saudi Arabia."

50.  The first appellant said that she could not join her husband  in  Saudi
    Arabia, as his status there depended on him being a single man and  she
    and her family could not obtain residency.  Furthermore,  Saudi  Arabia
    was unsafe for children and was "easily accessible to  members  of  the
    extended family because of its proximity  to  Sudan  and  easiness  for
    pilgrimage and 'umrah' religious visits".

51.  The first appellant considered that her sons, now 10 and 14 years  old,
    would not be able to adapt to a Sudanese life.  They had never lived in
    Sudan and, although they spoke  some  Arabic,  they  were  not  fluent.
    Neither of them could read nor write Arabic.  The fourth appellant  was
    said to be a member of Amnesty International.

52.  The first appellant's second statement ended by saying  that,  although
    her primary fears on return to Sudan were for her  children,  she  knew
    that she herself was at risk because of  her  political  activities  on
    women's rights, in respect of the Sudanese government's  activities  in
    Darfur and as a result of her opposition to their general human  rights
    abuses.  Whilst in Karachi, the  family  was  well  known  to  Sudanese
    Embassy officials, who were aware  of  her  lectures  and  meetings  on
    women's issues.  One of those officials is now posted to  the  Sudanese
    Embassy in London,  where  they  had  seen  each  other  "at  different
    political events where he is presumably observing for the Embassy".  As
    a result, the first appellant expected that the  London  embassy  would
    alert the authorities in Sudan, if  the  first  appellant  were  to  be
    returned, and that she would be  detained  and  interrogated  by  those
    authorities.

53.  Cross-examined, the first appellant said that she came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a result of her husband being  posted  here.   Although  she
    knew about the problems that would face the family in  Sudan,  she  did
    not know when her husband was going to be posted  elsewhere.   Nor  did
    she know about the law of the United Kingdom.  She was  asked  why  she
    could not go to live with her husband in Saudi Arabia.  She  said  that
    it was a condition of his contract, when he first became employed, that
    he would be a single person and so he travelled to Saudi Arabia on  his
    own.  Asked why she had not gone to Saudi  Arabia  in  2002,  when  her
    husband was posted there from the United Kingdom, she said that it  was
    again a condition of his contract that he should be  a  single  person,
    whilst in Saudi Arabia.  There were, furthermore, fears  that  she  had
    about the position of her children in Saudi Arabia, including the  risk
    to the daughters of FGM.

54.  The first appellant was asked why she had not raised the FGM  issue  in
    her application for variation of leave.  She said that the children had
    been born in Karachi and educated  there  and  she  did  not  have  any
    knowledge of the laws of the United Kingdom and she merely thought that
    a person like her could have a profession in the country in  which  she
    lived.  She also thought that she would have protection,  as  a  person
    who had bought a house here.  The appellant was further pressed on  the
    point, it being pointed out that, by the time her husband was posted to
    Saudi Arabia from this country, the first appellant was concerned about
    the FGM issue.  The first  appellant  replied  that  she  had  in  fact
    mentioned the issue to her first solicitor.  She denied  that  she  was
    refusing to answer the question put to her.

55.  The first appellant reiterated that she  had  been  involved  with  the
    Sudanese Women's Union and had participated in demonstrations, while in
    Sudan.  She lost  her  job  on  30  May  1980  as  a  result  of  these
    activities.

56.  The first appellant mentioned her uncle,  as  a  person  in  Sudan  who
    would bring pressure to bear to have  her  daughters  circumcised.   He
    worked with the Health Ministry.  Her husband's uncle was  the  manager
    of a military hospital and he too was in favour of  FGM.   Of  all  the
    female members of the  extended  family,  only  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants had not suffered FGM.  She then named three  further  family
    members, who were  in  what  the  first  appellant  described  as  high
    positions in the Sudanese regime.   She  was  asked  why  she  had  not
    referred in her statements to these other members.  She said  that  the
    uncle in the military  hospital  would  be  the  one  who  would  bring
    pressure to bear on the other family members.

57.  The first appellant confirmed  that  she  was  known  to  the  Sudanese
    Embassy in Islamabad and that  she  had  also  played  a  role  amongst
    Pakistani women, in making them aware of the issue of FGM.

58.  Asked why she could not protect her daughters in Sudan, she  said  that
    there was no court in that country to which she could go and there  was
    no specific law in respect of which she could make a complaint  in  the
    courts.  As a result, anyone from the family could take  the  daughters
    and force them to undergo FGM.  They might possibly be abducted.  There
    were lots of ways in which  the  daughters  could  be  taken  for  this
    purpose, short of outright seizure in the streets.   Girls  were  often
    enticed to undergo FGM by being offered presents.  She feared that  the
    daughters could be taken and persuaded  to  undergo  FGM,  without  her
    knowledge.   Not  having  lived  in  Sudan,  the  daughters  would  not
    understand the traditions and customs of that country.  Social pressure
    would be placed on them, rather than outright force.  Her husband would
    not be able to protect the girls as the issue of FGM was dealt with  by
    family members such as grandmothers and aunts.  The husband  would,  in
    any event, remain in Saudi Arabia.

59.  The first appellant was asked whether she and her  children  could  not
    move to a different part of Sudan.  She said  that  her  children  were
    educated in Karachi and could not speak Arabic.  Their place of shelter
    was in the United Kingdom.

60.  Re-examined, the first appellant was referred to the document  set  out
    at page 17 of the appellants' bundle.  This is an undated letter to the
    respondent's Integrated Casework Director, written  in  manuscript,  in
    which the writer states that she did not want to take her daughters  to
    Sudan  because  they  were  facing  the  prospect  of  female   genital
    mutilation.  The first appellant confirmed that she  wrote  the  letter
    and gave it to her former solicitor.  She wrote it  before  she  got  a
    Home Office letter about registering the appellants' passports with the
    police.  At page 159 of the supplementary bundle A, there was a  letter
    of 1980 addressed to the first appellant, which she received  when  she
    was sacked from her employment in Sudan.  She brought that letter,  and
    other documents, with her from Sudan to Pakistan  and,  later,  to  the
    United Kingdom.

61.  In answer  to  a  question  from  the  Tribunal,  the  first  appellant
    confirmed  that  she  eventually  got  permission  from  the   Sudanese
    authorities to have her daughters put on her passport, even though they
    could not have their own passports.  Her brother-in-law was  no  longer
    the Minister of Tourism but still had strong links with the government.
     At present, he was working in the army.  The maternal uncle was  still
    in charge of the military hospital.   Her  half-brother  was  a  senior
    lawyer.  All the individuals in question were  well-educated  and  held
    senior positions, as well as strictly adhering to Sudanese customs  and
    traditions.

62.  The first appellant considered that a woman in Sudan could have  sexual
    intercourse only in an "illegal way" if she had not undergone FGM.  Her
    own political background meant that she would be unable to protect  her
    daughters in Sudan and, indeed, she might be subjected to  an  "extreme
    type of punishment in Sudan".

63.  The first appellant said that she had been in a group of  five  people,
    who were selected from a crowd of about 1,000 in  order  to  present  a
    petition to the Greek Embassy in London about the dumping in  Sudan  of
    toxic waste from Greece.  At the December 2006 protest rally in London,
    there were around 250-300 people present.

64.  The first appellant said that she communicated  with  her  children  at
    home in English and they spoke very little Arabic.

65.  In answer to further questions from  Ms  Cronin,  the  first  appellant
    said that the rally  in  December  2006  was  to  support  the  British
    government over its stance regarding  the  situation  in  Darfur.   The
    first appellant was  known  to  the  Sudanese  Embassy  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  A particular official who had known her in Karachi was now in
    London and he had attended the December  2006  demonstration  and  been
    present at other meetings on Sudanese issues, which the first appellant
    had attended.  The first appellant then named the official concerned.

66.  The  first  appellant  was  asked  whether  her  well-connected  family
    members in Sudan would help her, if she ran into difficulties with  the
    Sudanese authorities regarding her  political  activities.   The  first
    appellant said that they would do so, if at all, only on the  condition
    that her daughters were subjected to FGM.


Evidence of Dr Ali

67.  Dr Omar Ahmed Ali gave evidence.  He confirmed as correct  and  adopted
    his written statement (pages 17 and 18 of supplementary bundle A).   In
    that statement, Dr Ali recorded that he was a Sudanese medical  doctor,
    who had been recognised in the United Kingdom as a  refugee.   He  knew
    the first appellant  and  her  family  in  Karachi,  where  he  studied
    medicine in Sindh Medical College 1991-1997.  He first  met  the  first
    appellant at a social occasion in late 1991.  As his acquaintance  with
    the family grew, the witness  noticed  that  the  first  appellant  was
    interested in issues regarding Sudanese society in general and Sudanese
    women in particular, such as violence against women, FGM and  early  or
    forced marriage.  The first appellant attended forums organised by  the
    Sudanese Students' Union - branch of  Karachi,  in  order  to  consider
    those issues.  The first appellant would go to Sindh Medical College to
    meet Dr Ali and his fellow students, in  order  to  gather  information
    about FGM and its related complications,  including  fistulae,  chronic
    infections, sex phobia and frigidity.  These activities, which included
    criticising the Sudanese government, were open ones and were  monitored
    by the Sudanese Embassy in Islamabad.

68.  After graduation, the  witness  returned  to  Sudan  and  worked  as  a
    doctor.  He had  first-hand  experience  of  the  suffering  of  women,
    between the ages of 7 and 30, who were subjected to FGM.  In those rare
    cases where women  had  escaped  the  ritual,  many  were  nevertheless
    compelled to undergo it after marriage, as  a  result  of  pressure  by
    their husbands.  FGM,  according  to  the  witness,  was  still  widely
    practised in Sudan, primarily in  the  north,  east  and  west  of  the
    country.  The witness had treated five cases of newly married women who
    needed surgical intervention, as well as counselling, after FGM, before
    consummation of the marriage could take place.

69.  The witness said that he did not know the first  appellant  personally,
    whilst she was in Sudan.  He did, however, know the person who was  the
    Director of the military hospital.  The witness named that person.  The
    witness knew of the appellants' family, as being a  well-known  one  in
    Sudan.  The witness was asked whether  her  family  could  protect  the
    first appellant, if returned.  The witness replied that,  although  the
    first appellant's family was well-known  socially,  in  particular,  in
    Khartoum, they could not provide protection because the present  regime
    did not pardon or forgive any activities carried out against it.

70.  The witness said that he did not see any FGM being  undertaken  in  the
    hospitals in which he had been employed in Sudan.   The  procedure  was
    known to be performed by midwives and, sometimes, by less  well-trained
    nurses.  The witness said that he was aware that adult women  in  Sudan
    had been subjected to FGM against their will.  He considered that  this
    happened often.  The witness considered that any member of  the  family
    could play the role of instigator of FGM; for example,  a  grandparent,
    aunt, or even more distant family member.

71.  Cross-examined, the witness said  that  he  knew  about  the  procedure
    being carried out on adult women as a result of his work in  hospitals.
    In the Obstetrics  and  Gynaecology  Departments,  he  had  seen  cases
    transferred to  hospital,  following  complications,  including  birth-
    obstructed labour caused by  FGM.   The  patients  would  talk  to  the
    witness and his colleagues about such things as when the operation  was
    carried out and how old the patient was at the  time.   Such  instances
    occurred whilst the  witness  was  working  in  the  Khartoum  Teaching
    Hospital between  July  1998  and  2000.   He  worked  in  the  Urology
    Department of a hospital in Khartoum from 2001 to 2002.

72.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal, the witness  said  that  the
    person identified as the first appellant's maternal uncle worked in the
    health sector, within the government's health ministry.


Evidence of third appellant

73.  The third appellant gave evidence.  She adopted her written  statements
    at pages 152 to 153 of the appellants' bundle and pages  10  to  13  of
    supplementary bundle A.  In the first statement,  the  third  appellant
    confirmed her birth and initial schooling in Pakistan,  and  subsequent
    schooling in west London.  The  third  appellant  described  persistent
    telephone calls from her aunt in  Sudan,  attempting  to  convince  the
    girls that FGM was "an inevitable destiny".  The third  appellant  said
    that her mother had  had  to  change  the  house  telephone  number  in
    Hounslow in order to prevent the aunt  from  making  further  telephone
    calls.  The third appellant spoke fluent  English  and  little  Arabic.
    She said that she wore western clothes, had friends of both  sexes  and
    had been raised according to western and secular values, as opposed  to
    Islamic values and the prevalent culture in Sudan.  The third appellant
    was fearful of being  subjected  to  FGM  at  the  instigation  of  her
    extended family, were she to be returned.  In her second statement, the
    third appellant said that she did not remember the trip she had made to
    Sudan, when a young  child,  but  had  been  told  about  the  trickery
    involved in getting the family to  make  the  trip  there.   The  third
    appellant had had an "intimate relationship with  my  boyfriend".   She
    was currently working for Morgan Stanley as an administrator.  She  was
    also studying for a degree.  She understood that  her  paternal  uncle,
    described as a well-respected police doctor in Khartoum,  was  strongly
    in favour of FGM.

74.  Cross-examined, the third appellant said that she could not recall  any
    family members from Sudan visiting them in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    last spoke to  her  aunt  on  the  telephone  about  2004.   She  could
    understand a few words of what  the  aunt  was  saying  but  the  usual
    practice was for the first appellant to be on an  extension  telephone,
    when the aunt was calling, and she would translate as  necessary.   The
    aunt would stress that the girls would enjoy a party and  gifts,  which
    the third appellant understood were provided when a girl underwent FGM.


Evidence of fourth appellant

75.  The fourth appellant gave evidence.  She confirmed as true and  adopted
    her written statements at pages 150 to 151 of  the  appellants'  bundle
    and pages 14 to 16 of supplementary bundle A.  In her first  statement,
    the fourth appellant confirmed  her  birth  and  initial  schooling  in
    Pakistan and subsequent education in west London.  She  said  that  she
    spoke English fluently (a fact confirmed by the Tribunal, both  in  her
    case and that of the  third  appellant).   She  also  had  been  raised
    according to western and secular values, wore western clothes and mixed
    with friends of both sexes.  The fourth appellant remembered  the  time
    when, aged about 5, the family went to Sudan as a result of what turned
    out  to  be  false  information  about  the  severe  illness   of   her
    grandmother.  The fourth appellant discovered that the real reason  was
    that the family in Sudan wished her to be circumcised on the  same  day
    as her cousin.  The immediate family left at night, so as to avoid this
    happening.

76.  The fourth appellant described  receiving  persistent  telephone  calls
    from her aunt, who wished to convince the fourth appellant that FGM was
    her  "inevitable  destiny".   The  fourth  appellant  was  considerably
    disturbed as a result of these  conversations,  which  ended  when  the
    first appellant changed the telephone number in Hounslow.

77.  In her second statement, the fourth appellant gave  more  detail  about
    the telephone calls from the aunt.  They  concentrated  upon  going  to
    Sudan for what was described as a "big celebration", which would result
    in the fourth appellant and her sister becoming women.  The  aunt  also
    talked of the third and fourth appellants  being  married  to  cousins.
    The fourth appellant was at a loss to know how to reply and  said  that
    the aunt should speak to the first appellant about these matters.   The
    fourth appellant confirmed that  the  first  appellant  attends  weekly
    meetings in the United Kingdom, regarding  political  activities.   The
    first appellant had told her daughters  a  great  deal  about  her  own
    experience of FGM.

78.  Cross-examined, the fourth appellant said that her Arabic was "not  too
    good" but that she  could  understand  it  to  an  extent.   The  first
    appellant would translate, after the aunt's telephone conversations had
    ended, things which the fourth appellant  had  not  understood  at  the
    time.  The fourth appellant said that  part  of  her  second  statement
    might be incorrect, insofar as it suggested that she was able  directly
    to understand details of what the aunt was saying to her.

79.  In answer to a question from the Tribunal, the  fourth  appellant  said
    that the telephone calls could be as regular  as  twice  a  week.   The
    fourth appellant said, however, that the  family  in  Sudan  would  not
    remember the fourth appellant's birthday.


The Gruenbaum report

80.  On 18 April 2007, the Tribunal heard closing submissions on  behalf  of
    the parties.  Prior to that date, the appellant had  served  a  written
    report (described as an affidavit) from Dr Ellen  Gruenbaum,  Professor
    of Anthropology at California State University, Fresno.   Dr  Gruenbaum
    earned her PhD at the University of Connecticut in 1982.  The focus  of
    her research in the field of anthropology is the treatment of women and
    women's health, with  specific  focus  on  female  genital  cutting  or
    mutilation in Sudan.  She is the sole author of The Female Circumcision
    Controversy:  An  Anthropological   Perspective,   published   by   the
    University Pennsylvania Press in 2001.  That work draws on her personal
    research experiences, interviewing women in Sudan, in order to describe
    and  analyse  the  cultural,  religious  and  historical  factors  that
    influence the practice of FGM in Sudan.

81.  Dr Gruenbaum lived in Sudan  from  1974  to  1979  and  taught  at  the
    University of Khartoum from 1974 to 1978.  She has also worked  at  the
    Economic and Social Research Council in  Khartoum  and  worked  on  her
    dissertation in the city of Wad Medani from 1978 to  1979.   She  spent
    six weeks in Sudan in 1989, following up on research on women's  health
    issues in rural areas.  In 1992, she visited Sudan for two  months  and
    in 2004 she undertook two separate  visits  to  the  country,  spending
    approximately five months there.  Those visits  involved  her  being  a
    visiting lecturer at Ahfad University for Women in Omdurman and  acting
    as a Research Consultant for UNICEF on  the  knowledge,  attitudes  and
    practices of  FGM  in  two  separate  regions  of  Sudan,  as  well  as
    conducting research on FGM for the organisation known as CARE in  north
    Kordofan state.

82.  Dr Gruenbaum has authored numerous articles regarding  Sudan  and  FGM.
    She is currently Secretary of  the  Society  for  Medical  Anthropology
    within  the  American  Anthropological  Association.   In   2005,   she
    presented a paper in Toronto at the annual meeting of the Sudan Studies
    Association.  In March 2007, she attended a UNICEF Task  Force  meeting
    in Ethiopia on "Research on  the  social  dynamics  of  abandonment  of
    harmful practices", which included a report on Sudan.

83.  Dr Gruenbaum's report indicates that she had  read  the  statements  of
    the first, third and fourth appellants.  She understood the  nature  of
    the appellant's claims.

84.  Dr Gruenbaum described two primary forms of FGM in Sudan:  infibulation
    (known   as   Pharaonic   circumcision)   and   "Sunna"   circumcision.
    Infibulation involves:-

        "Cutting off the clitoris, the  prepuce  above  the  clitoris,  the
        labia minora and  the  labia  majora,  followed  by  the  stitching
        together of the remaining edges of the labia over the urethral  and
        vaginal openings, such  that,  when  healed,  only  a  single  tiny
        opening remains for  the  passage  of  urine  and  menstrual  flow.
        Infibulation has serious negative health  consequences  for  women,
        making  first  intercourse  at  the  time  of  marriage   extremely
        difficult, which often requires surgical incision.  In addition  to
        the incidence of infections,  haemorrhage,  shock,  and  occasional
        deaths, first intercourse becomes extremely  difficult,  childbirth
        is risky  and  obstructed  labour  can  cause  the  development  of
        fistulae (internal openings) that result  in  urinary  incontinence
        and associated negative social consequences.  The 'Sunna'  form  of
        FGM is less mutilating,  though  still  considered  quite  harmful.
        Usually the prepuce of the clitoris and all or part of the clitoris
        is removed (clitoridectomy), but the vaginal and urethral  openings
        are not occluded.  This form can  also  have  negative  health  and
        social consequences for women.  Research supports that about 80 per
        cent of women in Arab and Muslim portions of Sudan  have  undergone
        the most severe form of infibulation; most of the  remaining  women
        in central and northern Sudan have undergone at least  the  'Sunna'
        form of circumcision."

85.  Dr  Gruenbaum  considered  that  the  Sudanese  government  had  issued
    "conflicting statements" in relation to FGM.  Recently, it  has  become
    the official position of health officials that FGM "should not occur in
    any form".  By contrast,  President  Al-Bashir  has  made  comments  in
    favour of the practice, according  to  press  reports.   Although  some
    members of the government had  later  "disavowed  these  comments"  the
    government has  nevertheless  declined  to  issue  a  law  against  the
    practice in order to replace a previous law against  infibulation  that
    had been on the books (but never in force) from 1946  to  approximately
    1993.  Dr Gruenbaum considered that, as a result of the  statements  of
    the Ministry of Health against FGM, "it has become rare for doctors  to
    openly participate in performing FGM, although there remains  some  who
    continue to advocate it despite  disapproval  from  their  professional
    colleagues".  As a result of the Ministry of Health's ban on performing
    the procedures, it would be  unlikely  that  FGM,  whether  coerced  or
    voluntary, would be performed by doctors in  hospitals.   Instead,  the
    procedures are most often performed in  homes,  in  what  Dr  Gruenbaum
    described as a non-sterile environment by either a traditional  midwife
    or a trained midwife.

86.   Those  who  practise  FGM  consider  it  important,  according  to  Dr
    Gruenbaum, for the  protection  of  morality,  family  honour  and  the
    avoidance of shame.  A Sudanese girl is expected  to  remain  a  virgin
    until marriage and any failure to do so is a source of  shame  for  the
    family concerned.  Infibulation is considered to prevent  a  girl  from
    having premarital sex by reducing her desire and blocking  penetration.
    So vital is FGM to family honour, that family members will  often  have
    it performed, even in the face of opposition from one or  both  of  the
    girl's parents.  The procedure takes only a few minutes and can be, and
    often is, performed in the absence of a parent.

87.  Against that background, Dr Gruenbaum considered it credible  that  the
    first, third and fourth appellants genuinely fear coerced  circumcision
    of the girls.  In the light of the  family  circumstances  outlined  in
    their statements, Dr Gruenbaum considered that  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants  could  not  be  "guaranteed  protection  from  having   FGM
    performed on them if they are living with or near either family,  since
    both the  families  and  the  community  support  FGM".   The  extended
    family's pursuit of  conformity  to  cultural  values  would  create  a
    "significant risk to their safety, leading to intense  social  pressure
    and  possible  use  of  force  to  make  sure  they  are  circumcised".
    According to Dr Gruenbaum, a family in Sudan without the protection  of
    a father is

         "usually  subject  to  a  degree  of  authority  from  other  male
        relatives, including grandfathers, uncles or adult  sons.   Married
        women  separated  from  their  husbands  and  lacking   in   social
        protection from a husband are generally expected to  live  with  or
        near their parents or a brother  or  other  kinsman,  and  a  woman
        living separately cannot offer the protection and social  authority
        equal to that of a home with a resident father."

88.  FGM is considered essentially  the  purview  of  women,  although  some
    reform-minded fathers have, according  to  Dr  Gruenbaum,  successfully
    prevented their daughter's circumcision in the face of family pressure.
     But more often, FGM is arranged and undertaken by women on  their  own
    "with little or no consultation with the father or other  men".   If  a
    father should disapprove, the procedure  can  easily  be  done  in  his
    absence.  Once done, any attempt to prosecute on the part of the father
    would  bring  shame  on  the  family.   Even  when  the   law   against
    infibulation was on the statute book, no known  court  cases  had  been
    successfully brought under it.

89.  In Sudanese culture, it is generally unacceptable for  unmarried  young
    women, even if adults, to live independently or  to  engage  in  sexual
    activity.  For a woman to engage in sex  prior  to  marriage  would  be
    likely to ruin prospects of that marriage.  Sudanese  women  who  marry
    are subject to  the  authority  of  their  husbands,  rather  than  the
    extended  family.   The  wearing  of  Islamic  dress   in   Sudan   has
    increasingly become expected of  young  women  and  those  who  do  not
    conform "are at risk of severe social  criticism  of  their  morality".
    Young women from Muslim families who do not conform to  expected  dress
    have, according to Dr Gruenbaum, "experienced public sanctions such  as
    loss of employment, being denied entrance to schools or offices, and in
    certain time periods, even more severe physical punishments".

90.  Looking in detail at what were said to  be  the  circumstances  of  the
    instant case, Dr Gruenbaum considered that a woman who is known to be a
    human rights activist and who is  known  to  be  opposed  to  FGM,  who
    chooses to live independently or allow her daughters freedom  to  dress
    and associate freely, faces the prospect of the extended family playing
    "an even more active role in attempting to persuade, pressure,  or  act
    by force to assure the circumcision of daughters of the family".

91.  So far as the first appellant's political activities are concerned,  Dr
    Gruenbaum believed that, if she  were  returned  to  Sudan,  the  first
    appellant would be taking "significant risks to  her  safety,  freedom,
    and  dignity,  possibly  resulting  in  detention  and  harassment,  to
    continue to engage  in  the  political  activities  she  describes  for
    herself in the UK".  The first appellant would also be "even less  able
    to protect her daughters from the extended family, since she  might  be
    separated from them for sufficient time for pressure or forced  FGM  to
    take place".

92.  As adults, the third and fourth appellants would not be  likely  to  be
    able to be forced into an arranged marriage, according to Dr Gruenbaum,
    "since increasingly women with education and resources have  access  to
    Muslim courts that insist that a woman must consent to her marriage  in
    Islam".  However, Dr Gruenbaum considered that  there  is  very  strong
    social pressure to marry one's  patrilineal  first  cousins,  which  is
    precisely what was proposed  in  the  case  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants.   That  cultural  expectation,  whilst  very  strong,   is,
    however, "not absolute, and the wishes of the girls' father are a major
    factor in protecting them from or enforcing this social expectation".

93.  The report then turns to the prevalence of FGM and, in particular,  the
    significance of the Almroth Report.  Dr Gruenbaum considered  that  FGM
    in Sudan "continues to be very high,  despite  declines  in  prevalence
    (i.e. the percentage of women and girls ages 15-49 who are altered)  in
    some areas of the country".  Large scale surveys in several  states  of
    northern Sudan over the past 20 years have found the prevalence  to  be
    "consistently about 90%, with the most severe type  of  the  operations
    being most common by far.  A recent survey of six out of 25 states, not
    yet published, shows a decline to approximately  70%  in  those  areas.
    These surveys are based on self reporting, not physical examination."

94.   Turning  to  the  Almroth  Report,  Dr  Gruenbaum  noted   that   this
    demonstrated serious health and psychological problems associated  with
    FGM, including  problems  that  had  not  received  much  attention  in
    previous studies, for example, difficulties and injuries experienced by
    men with infibulated wives.  The single village selected for the  study
    lay in "one of the most advantaged areas of the  country,  the  Gezira,
    where there have been many anti-FGM campaigns  over  the  years,  where
    there are higher rates of education  including  girls'  education,  and
    where there has been more exposure to the media".

95.  Having said this,  Dr  Gruenbaum  noted  that,  nevertheless,  all  the
    females interviewed had undergone FGM.  Dr  Gruenbaum  considered  that
    the Almroth research confirmed what  much  recent  research  indicates,
    "that there is evidence of gradual changes in social attitudes  towards
    the practices, with some courageous  families  refusing  to  circumcise
    their daughters despite the social criticism they may endure or dangers
    to their marriageability". However,  Dr  Gruenbaum  considered  that  a
    reply to a questionnaire that one was intending to change was  "clearly
    not the same as actually permanently making that change of  behaviour".
    That discrepancy between intention and actual practice was  evident  in
    Almroth's statistics.  Almroth himself projected that only some 26%  of
    girls of the study might "allegedly" escape FGM.  As  an  advocate  for
    stopping FGM, Dr Almroth "strives to demonstrate that although Sudanese
    hope to improve  marriage  by  doing  these  operations...they  are  in
    actuality causing harm in a significant number of cases".  Dr Gruenbaum
    considered that the intention behind the research was to "help  in  the
    efforts to convince people to stop the practices, because the  research
    can demonstrate that their goals (of  supporting  honourable  marriage)
    may be thwarted by the medical complications,  occasional  infertility,
    and other harmful effects that actually result".

96.  Dr Gruenbaum believed that the Almroth Report  "does  not  address  the
    question of whether FGM could be inflicted on an unwilling adult  young
    woman".  In Dr Gruenbaum's experience, it would be rare for a person in
    a city unaffected by the war to be physically assaulted as an adult and
    circumcised but it would nevertheless be unwarranted to say that  there
    would be "no chance" of this happening.  Dr Gruenbaum noted that  there
    had been reports of forced "virginity checks"  of  suspected  political
    dissident women, carried out under the direction  of  security  police,
    although most middle class women, if not involved  in  activism,  might
    not be at risk of such violations.  Young women, who,  by  their  dress
    and appearance, can appear as feminist or westernised activists,  would
    put themselves at risk by living out their political views and  western
    lifestyle practices.  Circumcision "is  also  considered  important  if
    there is any risk  that  a  woman  has  engaged  in  premarital  sexual
    activity,  thereby  endangering  family   honour.    The   process   of
    infibulation...is considered a  means  to  restore  the  appearance  of
    virginity, which could be a major issue if the woman  is  suspected  of
    dishonouring the family through pre-marital sexual activity."

97.  Dr Gruenbaum considered that  although  the  Almroth  Report  suggested
    that fathers can play an important role in  determining  whether  their
    daughters are circumcised, he would nevertheless  be  wrong  to  assume
    that an absent father could  "hold  sway  in  this  matter".   Her  own
    ethnographic research suggested that absent fathers are not necessarily
    obeyed in such matters.  Dr Gruenbaum  knew  anecdotally  of  one  case
    where a girl had been circumcised against the wishes of her father, who
    then made a legal complaint, but subsequently withdrew it after  a  few
    days, following family pressure not to shame them  by  continuing  with
    it.  Indeed, Dr Gruenbaum considered that  an  absent  father  who  was
    outside Sudan would not even  necessarily  be  informed  prior  to  FGM
    taking place.  Dr Gruenbaum also witnessed a circumcision in  Sudan  in
    2004, in the Gezira area, the same region as that of the Almroth study.
     In this case, the father was opposed to FGM but absent.  The operation
    was performed by a government-trained midwife on a 10  year  old  girl.
    Dr Gruenbaum learned that the absent father had prevented his  daughter
    being circumcised at age 8 but on this occasion had not  been  informed
    that the girl's mother and aunt had decided to go ahead with it.

98.  Dr Gruenbaum felt that it would be a misinterpretation of  the  Almroth
    study to conclude that there are no  problems  for  girls  who  do  not
    undergo FGM, in that the majority of males want their partners  not  to
    have had it.  There was no national survey  that  suggested  that  high
    percentages of Sudanese men do not want their wives to have  FGM.   The
    Almroth study did not involve interviewing young men who  were  seeking
    wives.  There was, furthermore, the fact that the  Almroth  sample  was
    from a relatively advanced area of the country - the Gezira -  and  was
    not in any sense a national one.

99.  Dr Gruenbaum further considered that it was incorrect to  suggest  that
    marriage reasons  were  not  behind  the  pressure  for  FGM.   On  the
    contrary, such reasons were pivotal, in that the  parental  generation,
    which was choosing or approving marriages for their children, would  be
    averse to allowing a marriage with an uncircumcised  girl,  unless  the
    family were already supporters of  abandoning  the  practice.   Almroth
    hoped to provide data that would be used by  activists  promoting  such
    abandonment "to demonstrate to  a  reluctant  society  that  there  are
    previously  unrecognised  risks   both   to   marriage   outcomes   and
    reproduction".  Dr Gruenbaum considered that, whilst Almroth' data  was
    helpful to that end, the information  in  question  had  not  yet  been
    widely  disseminated  to  Sudanese  society   and   attitudes,   whilst
    improving, had not experienced a wholesale shift.

100. Dr Gruenbaum agreed that in Sudan "young women  of  higher  status  are
    less likely to have FGM/C".  However, whilst that  might  be  generally
    true, it did not logically follow that

         "a family that strongly supports FGM would cease to do so  because
        of their higher social status.  Since [the appellants'] family  has
        continued to pressure the parents to circumcise the  daughters,  it
        is by no means  guaranteed  that  they  as  individuals  are  'less
        likely' to be subjected to it simply because  of  level  of  social
        status."

101. Overall, Dr Gruenbaum considered that, whilst there is significant  but
    slow social progress in Sudan towards ending FGM, the risk continues to
    be high, even for women whose parents are against it or who  themselves
    are against it.  Even if a family opposed to FGM succeeded in  stopping
    a girl from being subjected to it prior to marriage, and although  such
    a family could be expected to withhold approval for marriage to  a  man
    with whose views they did not agree, once the girl was married, control
    passed to the husband.  Accordingly, "marriage with a man from a family
    that supports the practice might result in pressure to  carry  out  the
    practice after marriage".  Although the woman in question could resist,
    she could be subjected to the following powerful social deterrents:-

        (a)  She could experience the social pressure of  being  shamed  by
             divorce;


        (b)  She could lose custody of her children  (the  law  being  that
             from the age of 7 (boys) or 9 (girls)  custody  lies  with  the
             family of the father); and


        (c)  She could be left "in limbo - partially divorced and not  free
             to remarry".

102. The report concluded by stating that, based upon her knowledge  of  the
    country conditions in Sudan and the statements of  the  appellants,  Dr
    Gruenbaum believed that the first appellant

         "is correct in  fearing  that  her  daughters  have  a  very  high
        likelihood of facing a risk of female  genital  mutilation  if  she
        returns  to  Sudan.   In  addition,  the  daughters'   values   and
        lifestyles described in their statements  are  distinctly  at  odds
        with social expectations for a Muslim middle-class family, in terms
        of personal  freedoms  expected,  manner  of  dress,  language  and
        education, and expectations concerning freedom and marriage."


Closing submissions

103. Mr Tranter relied upon his  document  entitled  "Skeleton  argument  on
    behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department".   At
    paragraph 12, the respondent accepted that, if  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants could show that they were at real risk of FGM in Sudan, then
    they would fall within a particular social group "analogous to  one  of
    those identified by their Lordships in K and Fornah [2006] UKHL 46,  in
    the context of  FGM  in  Sudan".   So  far  as  the  first  appellant's
    political activities were concerned, the respondent accepted  that  she
    had  been  involved  in  such  activities  in   the   United   Kingdom.
    Nevertheless, her claim to fear the Sudanese authorities  as  a  result
    was not credible.  Instead of arising from  a  genuine  and  entrenched
    hostility towards the Sudanese regime, the first appellant's activities
    were "an opportunistic  device  designed  to  enhance  the  appellant's
    chances of remaining in the UK".  Reliance was placed upon the findings
    regarding sur place activities in the Tribunal's determination in  HGMO
    (relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 and upon paragraph
    305 of HGMO, where the Tribunal found  that  the  Sudanese  authorities
    would not be adversely interested in  a  female  returnee  in  her  own
    right.  Such a returnee would not be at  real  risk  unless  there  was
    reason to believe her to be associated with a man who  was  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities.  The same point could be made in  relation
    to the first appellant's children.

104. So  far  as  FGM  was  concerned,  Mr  Tranter  acknowledged  that  the
    documentary evidence appeared to show  that  the  first  appellant  had
    raised the issue of FGM with her former  solicitors  in  October  2002,
    prior to the respondent's immigration decision that was the subject  of
    the appeal.   Furthermore,  the  respondent  accepted  that  the  first
    appellant had a history of opposition to and activism in respect of FGM
    and that this was shared by her husband.  However, the attitude of  the
    first appellant and her husband towards FGM meant that, if  there  were
    any risk to the third and fourth appellants from their extended  family
    in Sudan,  the  parents  would  be  in  a  position  to  protect  their
    daughters.

105. The respondent placed considerable reliance upon  the  Almroth  Report.
    This showed that, of those questioned, 50% of young women  and  38%  of
    young men had decided not to let  their  first  daughter  undergo  FGM.
    Only two of the young men and four of the young  women  had  let  their
    eldest daughter undergo the  procedure,  which  had  been  carried  out
    between the ages of 4 and 7.  Whilst the mother of the girl in question
    was said to be the decision maker in most cases of FGM, the father  was
    more involved when there was a decision not to perform it.  So  far  as
    social attitudes were concerned, whilst most  of  the  interviewed  men
    thought that it would be socially very difficult for a  Sudanese  woman
    who had not undergone FGM, 24% thought that it would be no  problem  at
    all.  86% of young men would have accepted a woman without  FGM  to  be
    his son's or grandson's wife, compared to 57% of old men.  55% of young
    men would have preferred to marry a woman who had  not  undergone  FGM.
    There was no difference in response, by reason of level of education in
    the group of young men.  However, those who have  or  would  let  their
    daughter undergo FGM had significantly lower socio-economic status  and
    significantly fewer years in school, compared with those who had not or
    would not.  Most young men  would  have  preferred  to  marry  a  woman
    without FGM.  Almroth concluded that "not only...the attitudes  of  men
    have changed, but also...there is a change  in  the  attitudes  in  the
    whole society".

106. In the village surveyed by Almroth, there were girls who had  undergone
    FGM and also those who had not, but who had passed the normal  age  for
    the procedure, and thus probably would not have to face it.

107. The respondent submitted that the Almroth Report showed  that  not  all
    females in Sudan were at real risk of FGM.  It was only girls (at best)
    between 1 and 12 years old whose parents (mother in particular)  desire
    that  the  girl  should  undergo  FGM  who  would  be  at  such   risk.
    Accordingly, the respondent contended that there "is no  evidence  that
    can possibly support the proposition that an adult female whose parents
    are opposed to FGM faces such a risk".

108. The respondent pointed to other documentary evidence,  which  showed  a
    "growing momentum of public opinion against FGM in Sudan".  At pages  1
    to 4 of the respondent's supplementary bundle, there is a document from
    the Foundation for Women's Health, Research and Development  (FORWARD),
    an international non-governmental organisation that  works  to  advance
    the sexual and reproductive health and human rights  of  African  girls
    and women.  This document records that, on 6 December 2005,  a  4  year
    old Sudanese girl lost her life, following  an  FGM  procedure.   As  a
    result, on 14 December "a group of Sudanese civil society organisations
    led by the Sudanese Nurses' Union took to the streets  in  Khartoum  to
    protest against [the girl's] death.  They marched from the hospital  in
    which she died to the Ministry of Justice, in order  to  demand  a  law
    specifically banning all forms of FGM in Sudan."

109. The respondent also particularly  relied  upon  the  UNICEF  report  at
    pages 60 to 62 of the respondent's first bundle.  This recorded that "a
    number of religious leaders are questioning deeply-held convictions  on
    FGM/C in their communities and urging other leaders to support  an  end
    to the practice".  At pages 63 to 66 of the respondent's first  bundle,
    there is a UNICEF report of 6 February 2006, in which it is stated that
    throughout Sudan a "social movement is unfolding to end FGM".

110. As an alternative submission, the respondent  contended  that  internal
    relocation would be available to the appellants, particularly since the
    husband of the first appellant  was  clearly  willing  to  continue  to
    support his family.

111. On the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR, the  respondent  drew  attention
    to the five questions identified by Lord Bingham  in  paragraph  27  of
    Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  17.
    There was no evidence before the Tribunal that private or  family  life
    could not be carried on by the appellants  in  Sudan.   There  were  no
    exceptional  factors,  so  as  to  render   removal   disproportionate.
    However,  Mr  Tranter  informed  the  Tribunal  that   the   respondent
    acknowledged that the policy  known  as  DP5/96  was  relevant  in  the
    present case.  Under that policy, there is a general  presumption  that
    the respondent would not usually proceed  with  enforcement  action  in
    cases where a child, having come to the United Kingdom at an early age,
    had accumulated seven years' or more  continuous  residence.   Although
    the policy had not  been  considered  in  detail  in  relation  to  the
    appellants, Mr Tranter acknowledged that there were no doubts which  he
    could properly raise in relation to the application of  the  policy  to
    the appellants.

112. For the appellant, Ms Cronin submitted  that  the  assertion  that  the
    first appellant's claim based upon a fear arising  from  her  political
    activities was  opportunistic  had  not  been  put  to  her  in  cross-
    examination.  In any event, Mr Verney had seen the appellant at the all-
    day meeting in London on Darfur.  There was also  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Ali, regarding the first appellant's political activities in  Pakistan.
    The first appellant was known to a Consul in the  Sudanese  Embassy  in
    London, who had previously  become  aware  of  her  whilst  serving  in
    Pakistan.   The  fact   that   the   Sudanese   authorities   undertake
    surveillance operations within the Sudanese diaspora was recognised  in
    the UN "ACCORD" Seminar Report which was considered in  detail  by  the
    Tribunal in HGMO.  So far as paragraph 305 of HGMO  was  concerned,  Ms
    Cronin submitted that the first appellant's case  was  one  of  the  no
    doubt small minority, where a woman would be at real risk by reason  of
    her own (as opposed to her husband's) political activities.  So far  as
    turning to well-connected family members for protection was  concerned,
    Ms Cronin asserted that, whilst that might be possible in the case of a
    "benign" state, the proposition was no more  than  speculative  in  the
    case of a "rogue" state, such as Sudan.  It was reasonable to infer  in
    such  a  case  that  the  relatives  concerned  would  not  want  their
    reputation to be besmirched in any way by association  with  the  first
    appellant.  The family might wish to "trade off  family  loyalties"  in
    order to enhance their own reputations with the regime.

113. The "political" and FGM risks were, Ms  Cronin  submitted,  effectively
    inter-twined and also extended to the fact that the  third  and  fourth
    appellants would exhibit a westernised non-submissive  attitude,  which
    would be regarded as hostile in Sudan.  Although a  young  woman  could
    change her clothing, so as to reduce the risk of offence,  her  manners
    and general attitude could not so easily be altered.   In  the  present
    case,  what  would  be  required  would  be  no  less  than  the  total
    renunciation of the characters which the third  and  fourth  appellants
    had developed.  At paragraph 7 of her written  submissions,  Ms  Cronin
    observed that Amnesty International  have  stated  that,  although  the
    Sudanese government had made numerous  gestures  towards  human  rights
    promotion, the fact remained that virtually every kind of human  rights
    violation  had  been  perpetrated  by  the   political   and   security
    establishment.  The public order law allowed the  arrest  of  women  in
    order to enforce dress or behaviour codes.

114. As to FGM, Ms Cronin submitted  that  the  general  run  of  statistics
    showed that the procedure was carried out in respect of around  90%  of
    women.  Whilst that figure did not necessarily mean  that  every  woman
    was at real risk, it showed that the "societally-sanctioned  norm"  was
    persecutory in nature.  Dr  Gruenbaum  was  internationally  recognised
    with a wealth of field research in Sudan.  Considerable  weight  should
    be given to her views.  UNICEF's demographic  and  health  surveys  and
    multiple indicator cluster surveys, which showed a 90% rate in northern
    Sudan, also indicated that the rate in urban areas was higher than that
    in rural ones.  Although a mother's education could contribute  to  the
    reduction in FGM, this was not sufficient to lead  to  its  abandonment
    and Sudan had shown no real change over recent decades.  The  US  State
    Department's FGM/C Report contained  unsourced  commentary  notes  that
    only 50% of university graduate mothers had undergone any form  of  FGM
    and that many educated urban families did not practise it  (appellants'
    bundle page 234).  That data should  nevertheless  be  considered  with
    caution in view of the UN ACCORD Seminar Commentary, which cited a 2004
    survey at Khartoum University  as  demonstrating  that  98%  of  female
    students had been subjected to FGM (mostly Sunna  cutting  (appellants'
    bundle page 281)).

115. The essence of the risk to the third and fourth appellants  arose  from
    the extended family  members,  exacerbated  because  of  the  political
    activities of the first appellant and the "manifest westernisation"  of
    the girls themselves.  Although Mr  Tranter  had  sought  to  expose  a
    contradiction in the evidence of Mr Verney and Dr  Gruenbaum  regarding
    the likelihood of abduction of the third and fourth  appellants,  there
    was in substance no contradiction.  The evidence of both was  that  FGM
    was often carried out in the absence of a parent.  Even  if  the  girls
    eventually consented, that would be as  a  result  of  fear  of  social
    stigma.  In any event, consent to such an act would not be such  as  to
    prevent it being regarded as a  serious  crime.   It  was  also  to  be
    observed that Dr Gruenbaum thought that another motivation for  FGM  in
    the case of the third and  fourth  appellants  would  be  to  mask  any
    ruptured hymen, caused by pre-marital intercourse.

116. Even if there were doubts about the nature of the  telephone  calls  to
    the United Kingdom allegedly made by the third and  fourth  appellants'
    aunt, the extended family would view the girls, upon arrival in  Sudan,
    as having inappropriate tendencies.  There was also the risk of FGM, at
    the instigation of a husband or his family, after  marriage  had  taken
    place.

117. Ms Cronin submitted that the size of the Almroth study  was  such  that
    it could barely support the statements made in  the  report.   Internal
    relocation in the present case was out of the question.  The suggestion
    from the respondent that the family could relocate  to  southern  Sudan
    was inappropriate.  That was an area  which  was  still  struggling  to
    recover from the effects of the civil war and where society  was  still
    largely dysfunctional.  Having regard to the judgment of Buxton  LJ  in
    AH (Sudan) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] EWCA Civ 297, relocation to the south would be unduly  harsh  in
    the circumstances of the present case.

118. Ms Cronin submitted that the appellants' appeal should  be  allowed  on
    asylum grounds and also by reference to Article 3 of the ECHR.  So  far
    as Article 8 was concerned, she relied upon the seven year child policy
    (DP5/96).  In the circumstances of this case, the  Tribunal  could  and
    should apply the policy itself (Tozlukaya, R (on the application of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 379; Baig  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1246).   The
    appeal should, accordingly, be allowed under Article 8.




(1) Women in Sudan

119. Article 32 of the draft Interim National Constitution states  that  the
    equal rights of men and  women  to  the  enjoyment  of  all  civil  and
    political  rights  and  all  social,  cultural  and  economic   rights,
    including the right of equal pay for  equal  work,  shall  be  ensured.
    According to the Refugee Studies Centre of Oxford University,  however,
    cited at paragraph 19.02 of the COI Report  on  Sudan  (January  2007),
    women  do  not  have  legal  access  to  land  or  resources   due   to
    discrimination in Sudanese statutory and customary law.  The  US  State
    Department Report on Human Rights Practises in  Sudan  (8  March  2006)
    states that  violence,  including  spousal  abuse,  against  women  was
    common, although there were no reliable statistics.   Women  who  filed
    claims were subjected  to  accusations  of  lying  or  spreading  false
    information.  However, the  government  in  November  2005  launched  a
    "Violence Against Women Action Plan", with a  programme  that  included
    awareness posters and a media campaign of zero tolerance  for  violence
    against women.  The number of female  police  officers  was  increased.
    The same report noted  that  some  aspects  of  the  law  discriminated
    against women.  In accordance with Islamic law, a Muslim woman has  the
    right to hold and dispose of her own property without interference  and
    women are entitled to inheritance from their parents.  However, a widow
    inherits only one-eighth of her husband's estate; the majority going to
    sons.  It was easier for men  than  women  to  initiate  legal  divorce
    proceedings (COI Report 19.05).

120. The US State Department  Report  noted  that  women  could  not  travel
    abroad without the permission of  their  husbands  or  male  guardians,
    although this was not enforced  strictly  for  NCP  members.   Although
    women generally were  not  discriminated  against  in  the  pursuit  of
    employment, they were not legally permitted to work after 10pm.   Women
    were accepted in professional roles, with more than half the professors
    at Khartoum University being women.


(2) FGM in Sudan

121. The  report  and  oral  evidence  of  Peter  Verney  has  already  been
    summarised (paragraphs 6 to 37 above).  So too have the Almroth  Report
    and the Gruenbaum report (paragraphs 21 to 23, 81 to 102 and 105 to 107
    above).  It is,  however,  necessary  also  to  mention  the  following
    materials, contained in the bundles submitted by the appellants and the
    respondent.  The UNICEF Country Profile on  FGM/C  in  Sudan  (November
    2005) (appellants' bundle page 178) stated, as has already been  noted,
    that 89% of  ever-married  women  aged  15-49  in  northern  Sudan  had
    undergone some form of FGM/C.  Prevalence rates varied across  regional
    and ethnic lines, with the  level  of  preference  being  significantly
    lower in Darfur and in the eastern region.  Over 60%  of  circumcisions
    were performed by traditional birth attendants  and  less  than  1%  of
    women had undergone the procedure under medical care or attention.  The
    UNICEF "Innocenti Digest" Report: Changing a Harmful Social Convention:
    Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (2005) also noted that in  Sudan  the
    national prevalence of FGM/C was 90%.  Looking at a  range  of  African
    countries, the report identified three significant trends.  First,  the
    average age at which a girl is subjected to FGM is decreasing  in  some
    countries.  The  countries  cited  do  not  include  Sudan.   Secondly,
    "medicalisation" of FGM/C, whereby girls were cut by trained  personnel
    rather than by traditional practitioners, was on the rise.  The  report
    considered  that  this  "may  reflect  the  impact  of  campaigns  that
    emphasised the health risks associated with the practice, but failed to
    address the underlying motivations for its  perpetuation"  (appellants'
    bundle page 195).  Thirdly, the importance of  the  ceremonial  aspects
    associated with FGM/C was declining in many  communities.   That  trend
    was considered to be related, in part, to the existence of  legislation
    prohibiting FGM/C.

122. The US State Department Report  on  Sudan:  Report  on  Female  Genital
    Mutilation (FGM) or Female Genital Cutting (FGC) (2001) referred  to  a
    1991 survey of women in northern Sudan, in which it was found that  89%
    practised one form or another of FGM.  That survey would appear  to  be
    the same  as  that  referred  to  in  the  Innocenti  (UNICEF)  Report.
    Reference was also made to a study conducted  by  SNCTP  and  Save  the
    Children Sweden, which found  that  in  urban  areas  87.6%  of  female
    students and 89.5% of mothers had been circumcised.   In  rural  areas,
    the figures were 90.8% and 91.3% respectively.  A very high  prevalence
    of infibulation was found  throughout  most  of  the  northern,  north-
    eastern and north-western  regions.   According  to  the  report,  many
    educated urban  families  did  not  subject  their  daughters  to  this
    practice and the numbers of those who did  not  were  increasing.   The
    SNCTP study found that, in the case of women born after 1980, 57%  were
    infibulated, while nearly 43%  were  subjected  to  the  "Sunna"  form.
    Reference was made to the fact that in  northern  Sudan  "an  elaborate
    ceremony generally surrounds the procedure".  A young  woman  subjected
    to it would emerge marriageable; whilst a younger  girl  would  receive
    gifts of special food and clothes.  The ceremonial aspect was, however,
    "disappearing in most groups".

123.  According  to  the  same  report,  with  the  weight  of  the  present
    government behind it, an intensive campaign against the practice of FGM
    had  been  launched.   "Religious  groups,  the   media   and   women's
    organisations have joined forces to eradicate this  damaging  practice.
    The government has made limited efforts to educate health personnel  on
    this issue and to introduce information about this  practice  into  the
    school curricula."  An organisation known as the Mutawinat Group held a
    workshop  in  1997  that  brought  together   governmental   and   non-
    governmental organisations and was pursuing a study that would document
    the status of women who had not undergone the procedure  and  who  were
    working to get information about the practice  into  school  curricula.
    In addition, "Members of the medical profession are starting to involve
    themselves in the issue.   People  are  discussing  the  issue  openly.
    While few have abandoned the practice altogether, many have  opted  for
    the milder 'Sunna' procedure."

124. So far as legal status was  concerned,  the  report  stated  that  "The
    government  of  Sudan  publicly  opposes  type  III  or   infibulation.
    Although today there is no law against  FGM/FGC,  Sudan  is  the  first
    country in Africa to have a record of legislating against it.  As early
    as 1930 an article appeared, written by a medical  student,  about  the
    harmful effects of the practice  and  urging  that  it  be  abolished."
    Reference was then made to a medical committee having been  established
    in 1943, followed by a radio and media campaign, although this resulted
    in nothing being done.  Finally, type III FGM was outlawed in the  1946
    amendment to the 1925 penal code.  The law provided for imprisonment of
    up to seven years and a fine for those who carried out  the  procedure.
    "There were violent demonstrations after the first arrests."   The  law
    was ratified again in 1956, after  Sudan  became  independent  but  was
    finally dropped  in  the  1983  penal  code.   In  1991,  the  Sudanese
    government affirmed its commitment to the eradication of type III  FGM.
    "It claims it was against Islam and a crime punishable under the  penal
    code.  The 1991 penal code, however, does  not  mention  any  of  these
    forms.  There is currently no law that forbids this practice  per  se."
    Other provisions of the  penal  code  might,  however,  cover  injuries
    inflicted by FGM.  "There are reports that some practitioners have been
    arrested but no further information is available."  Although in 1992  a
    case involving FGM/C was brought under the general physical injury law,
    the outcome  was  unknown.   The  report  concluded  by  stating  that,
    "Despite a massive effort to eradicate the more severe form of  FGM/FGC
    and a law that prohibited it, there has been  little  effort  over  the
    years to enforce it."

125. At page 237 of the appellant's  bundle  there  is  a  copy  of  a  2002
    Article from the Ahfad Journal, published by the Ahfad  University  for
    Women, Omdurman.  The article, written by a Professor Ahmed Magied  and
    others, describes FGM as being  widely  practised  in  all  regions  of
    Sudan, with some variations in the prevalence and types of circumcision
    performed according to the indigenous local customs and  traditions  of
    the area.  The article concerned a  study,  whose  specific  objectives
    were to explore the attitudes  of  men  towards  FGM;  to  obtain  more
    information from men about the reasons behind re-circumcision of  women
    and to find out the impact of the level of education and socio-economic
    status of the male respondents towards FGM.  Fifty males were  randomly
    selected from the El Muhandiseen area  and  fifty  males  from  the  Al
    Fitehab area in Omdurman.  In the El Muhandiseen  sample,  58%  of  the
    respondents preferred the  uncircumcised  state.   In  the  Al  Fitehab
    sample, 58% preferred the  Sunna  form.   75%  of  the  El  Muhandiseen
    sample, however, supported FGM "because  of  traditions".   In  the  El
    Muhandiseen sample, 32% said that re-circumcision had a positive effect
    on sexual enjoyment, whilst 12% stated that it had a  negative  effect.
    In the Al Fitehab sample, the figures were 62%  and  14%.   In  the  El
    Muhandiseen sample, 36% would let their wives  free  to  do  what  they
    want, whilst 24% would divorce their wives if they refused to  practise
    re-circumcision.  In the Al Fitehab sample, the figures  were  56%  and
    26%.

126. The study stated that the majority of respondents from  El  Muhandiseen
    were  "highly  educated,  compared  with  the  majority  (72%)  of  the
    respondents  from  the  Al  Fitehab  area  who  had  lower  levels   of
    education".  98% in the Al Fitehab study were of low  economic  status,
    whereas the respondents in the  El  Muhandiseen  sample  were  of  high
    economic status with high living standards.  The writers concluded that
    the study showed that, "Some of  the  male  respondents  (32%  from  El
    Muhandiseen and 62% from Al Fitehab)  are  in  favour  of  their  wives
    becoming re-circumcised, completely ignoring the feelings or consent of
    the female spouse.  This  may  be  indicative  of  the  selfishness  of
    Sudanese males and dominance in sexual matters."   Re-circumcision  was
    considered to be "a complex social problem which  is  mainly  connected
    with some repugnant traditions and by far lesser extent connected  with
    erroneous religious beliefs".

127. At page 244 of the appellant's bundle, there is a copy of  a  Voice  of
    America news item of 19 November 2005, concerning FGM in Sudan,  which,
    though "widely condemned", is said to be "still rampant".  The  article
    focussed on a young woman named Asma, who was circumcised, despite  her
    mother's opposition, because Asma's grandmother insisted upon it.  Asma
    herself, however, was adamant that she would not have her own  daughter
    circumcised.

128. At page 31 of the appellants'  supplementary  bundle  A,  there  is  an
    article  by  Dr  Gruenbaum,  which  was  published   in   the   Medical
    Anthropology Quarterly.  Entitled  "The  Cultural  Debate  over  Female
    Circumcision: The Sudanese are Arguing this One  Out  for  Themselves",
    the  article,  which  dates  from  December  1996,  "critiques  medical
    ecological analysis of female circumcision as a  'maladaptive  cultural
    pattern' and argues that this highly controversial  procedure  must  be
    analysed within the larger contexts of women's lives in under-developed
    countries.  International efforts  to  eradicate  female  circumcision,
    while  often  couched  in  seemingly  progressive  feminist   rhetoric,
    inadvertently serve to mask the negative health effects of the economic
    exploitation of poor countries such as Sudan.   Reproductive  histories
    and ethnographic data are used to argue that though female circumcision
    is not maladaptive, cultural discourse about it is resulting in changes
    in the  meaning,  techniques  and  frequency  of  this  practice."   Dr
    Gruenbaum sought in the  article  to  confront  what  she  regarded  as
    simplistic or arrogant criticisms of FGM:-

        "Although women are harmed and men are benefited  by  infibulation,
        we cannot conclude that the practice is simply  a  matter  of  male
        exploitation of subordinated women.  We must first  understand  how
        various interest groups conceptualise  and  justify  the  practice.
        Western  critics  often  utilise  western   values   and   feminist
        consciousness in their analysis of infibulation  (a  common  enough
        reaction  especially  for  feminists  schooled  in  'consciousness-
        raising' groups of the 1960s).  As a  consequence,  these  analyses
        portray  Sudanese   cultural   values   as   examples   of   'false
        consciousness'.   Values  relating  to  morality  and  honour  that
        require  Pharaonic  circumcision  are  dismissed.   They  similarly
        dismiss as 'unnatural' or perhaps 'maladaptive' the  aesthetics  of
        infibulation,  that  the  labia  and  clitorises  are  the  'ugly',
        'masculine' parts of girls,  and  removal  results  in  beauty  and
        cleanliness.


        Such responses strike many  African  women  scholars  as  arrogant,
        especially  because  western  culture  has  its  own  aesthetically
        motivated medical disasters such as silicone  breast  implants  and
        useless cosmetic surgeries.  The ethnocentric  views  of  outsiders
        fail  to  recognise  the  dynamic  nature  of  cultural   patterns,
        imagining  'the  other'  perhaps  as  frozen  in  time,  bound   by
        'traditional' ways of doing things, and as  'prisoners  of  ritual'
        who are not rational makers of their own history.  But as  Edgerton
        makes clear in his discussion of customs such as Sati in  India  as
        well as female circumcision in Africa, insiders  to  such  cultures
        often have widely differing opinions and disagreements  about  them
        (1992:139).  Culture, in fact, is far from static, as the  cultural
        debates now raging in Sudan over the issue of  female  circumcision
        illustrates."

129. The article went on to note  how  Dr  Gruenbaum  had  herself  observed
    changes in female circumcision practices, since her first fieldwork  in
    Sudan in 1974.  In the 1970s, many rural and urban women believed  that
    infibulation was part of being a Muslim and that "their  way  of  life"
    was synonymous with their religion.  By the 1970s, numerous individuals
    and organisations within Sudan had already spoken  out  against  female
    circumcision.   Some  supported  the  modified  Sunna  type  over   the
    Pharaonic, whilst others supported total abandonment of all its  forms.
    It appeared that efforts for change were poised to take off  after  the
    1979 Khartoum conference and the renewed commitment of doctors and  the
    Ministry of Health to  pursue  a  policy  against  all  forms  of  FGM.
    However, Dr Gruenbaum's observations  and  interviews  in  more  recent
    times indicated that "although much has changed  in  the  past  decade,
    including some reduction of the incidence  and  a  shift  towards  less
    severe forms, Pharaonic circumcision has still not  been  displaced  as
    the operation of choice among the majority of families.  Still there is
    every reason to believe  that  the  cultural  debates  that  have  been
    stirring for the last several decades  have  accelerated,  and  that  a
    fairly dramatic process of change is underway."

130. Dr  Gruenbaum  considered  that  the  ideological  struggle  "is  quite
    vehement at present and often focuses on women's roles".  Islamists are
    seeking  to  overturn  many  Sudanese  cultural  practices,   including
    Pharaonic circumcision,  which  they  regard  as  pre-Islamic  or  non-
    Islamic.  Those in opposition to the Islamists view this  criticism  of
    Sudanese cultural practices as a new form of cultural imperialism  from
    the Middle East.  Dr Gruenbaum considered that the implication of these
    struggles for female circumcision were that  the  serious  interest  in
    religious study and practice evident  among  so  many  of  the  younger
    educated people will reinforce the public health effects to  modify  or
    abandon the practice  of  circumcision  and,  secondly,  that  cultural
    arguments favouring the practice as part of  "Sudanese  heritage"  will
    become less acceptable under  a  hegemonic  interpretation  of  Islamic
    heritage.  "However, it is unfortunate that the  term  Sunna  has  been
    associated with any form of the surgeries, since the role  of  religion
    in the ideological debates might lead some to feel that they  ought  to
    do the Sunna type rather than none at  all."   Dr  Gruenbaum's  article
    concluded by stating that her  data  was  intended  to  underscore  the
    advice of others "to look to Sudanese and Egyptian women to lead  their
    own struggle on female circumcision: it is...something for Egyptian and
    Sudanese women 'to argue out for themselves'".

131. In the respondent's first bundle there is set out the protocol  to  the
    African Charter on Human and People's Rights on the Rights of Women  in
    Africa (July 2003) to which the government of Sudan  was  a  signatory.
    Article 4 provides that every woman shall be entitled  to  respect  for
    her life and the integrity and security of  her  person  and  that  all
    forms of exploitation,  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading  punishment  and
    treatment shall be prohibited.  Contracting  parties  are  required  to
    take appropriate and effective  measures  to  (inter  alia)  enact  and
    enforce laws to prohibit all forms of violence against women.

132. At page 60, there is the article, to which reference has  already  been
    made, concerning the speaking out of Sheikh Ali Hashim  Al  Siraj,  the
    Director of the Population Enlightenment Programme in the  Ministry  of
    Guidance and Endowments, against the practice of FGM/C.   At  page  63,
    there is a UNICEF press release of February 2006, applauding "the women
    and men who are working together to end the practice of female  genital
    mutilation/cutting...and to respect the  right  of  girls  to  grow  to
    womanhood without harm to  their  bodies".   The  article  stated  that
    throughout sub-Saharan Africa "and in Egypt and Sudan a social movement
    is unfolding to end FGM/C.  In Sudan, religious leaders are using their
    authority to  affirm  that  FGM/C  is  a  violation  of  spiritual  and
    theological principles.  On Monday, government officials, the  National
    Council for Child Welfare and UN agencies  will  hold  a  commemorative
    event that will include an exhibition, religious and secular  songs  on
    abandonment of FGM/C and children's performances.  The exhibition  will
    include images of girls who died of FGM/C."

133. At page 68, there is a Sudan Tribune press article  of  17  June  2006,
    referring to the African Union as having urged member states to put  an
    end to the practice of FGM and quoting the African Union as  describing
    the procedure as an "atrocity".

134. At pages 69 to 111, there is a  selection  of  papers  from  the  Sudan
    National Committee on Traditional Practices (October 2006), relating to
    the health of women and children in Sudan.  At page  83,  reference  is
    made to a "Training of Trainers Workshop" on FGM religious views,  held
    in Red Sea State.  Participants included "midwives, religious  leaders,
    decision makers, teachers and women union" members.  At page 84,  there
    is a description of organised monthly community based sessions  on  FGM
    etc. in Sinnar state.  At page 86,  there  is  a  photograph  of  women
    attending a three day workshop on HIV/AIDS and FGM in White Nile state.
     At page 87, reference is made to Training  of  Trainers  Workshops  on
    gender-based violence in relation to FGM "zero  tolerance"  in  western
    Kordfan State.  At pages 92 to 95, there is a summary by Dr Amna Hassan
    of the Sudan National Committee  on  Traditional  Practices,  regarding
    recent research findings on FGM, psycho-social-sexual consequences  and
    attitude change in Khartoum North and East Nile provinces (July  2000).
    Factors which contributed to the continuation of FGM were  regarded  as
    being related to "faulty socialisation" and the absence  of  scientific
    and legal information.  Amongst university graduates, the incidence  of
    infibulation was put at 50%,  with  a  "marked  transformation  of  the
    tradition from the infibulation to the so-called 'Sunna'".  The SNCTP's
    future vision was said to be focussed on an approach to "eradicate FGM"
    involving  the  proper  sensitisation  of  "youth,  fathers,  religious
    leaders and legislators in order to put great pressure on the  mothers,
    grandmothers  and  health  workers  who  perform  the  practice".   The
    Ministry of Health and Ministry of Education were  said  to  have  "put
    considerable efforts in injecting the above  matter  in  the  education
    curricula.  Successfully it  is  becoming  reality  in  the  basic  and
    secondary education in the Sudan since the academic year (2000/2001)."

135. At page 103, there is a description of an SNCTP "FGM International  Day
    Celebration" held on 6 February 2005, during  which  drama,  music  and
    poems against FGM were performed.  During what appears to have  been  a
    football match between teams from  Al-Salama  and  Kurkog,  watched  by
    1,800 spectators, messages were broadcast about the elimination of FGM.
     In the  evening,  there  was  a  debate  amongst  200  people  on  the
    relationship between the Islamic religion and FGM, which concluded that
    there was "no linkage of FGM with Islam and they urged  the  attendants
    to discourage the deadly practice".


(3) Risk of FGM in Sudan

136. The large-scale statistical evidence regarding FGM in Sudan,  cited  by
    UNICEF  and  others,  whilst  not  particularly   up-to-date,   remains
    generally valid.  From this and many of the other materials to which we
    have referred, it is plain that FGM in Sudan as a whole, and the  north
    in  particular,  is  widely  practised.   That  includes  both  type  I
    (infibulation) and type III (or "Sunna" form), both  of  which  plainly
    constitute serious harm and persecution.  That is the backdrop  against
    which  any  particular  claim  to  international  protection  must   be
    analysed.  Most girls and young women in Sudan are, today, still likely
    to undergo one or other of these forms of FGM.

137. Nevertheless, it is also apparent from the evidence  as  a  whole  that
    not every uncircumcised girl or young woman of what (in Sudanese terms)
    might be described as marriageable age will as such be at real risk  of
    FGM on return to Sudan.  Ms Cronin did not argue for  such  a  finding;
    she was right not to do so.  From Dr Gruenbaum's writings,  upon  which
    the Tribunal has  placed  significant  weight,  as  she  is  plainly  a
    relevant expert of international stature, there are forces of change at
    work in Sudan, the aim of which is not merely to encourage a move  from
    infibulation to Sunna circumcision but  to  eradicate  FGM  altogether.
    That is also clear from the other sources referred to in paragraphs 121
    to 135 above.  What Dr Gruenbaum has to say about the  linkage  between
    circumcision and  Islamic  teaching  in  her  most  recent  article  is
    significant.  The article, which  begins  at  page  54  of  appellants'
    supplementary bundle A, written when she was a PhD candidate, noted the
    perceived  relationship  between  "Sunna"  circumcision   and   Islamic
    teaching but that must now be read in the  light  of  her  more  recent
    work.  Furthermore, that earlier  paper  plainly  did  not  accept  the
    legitimacy of the connection, as is evident from the reference on  page
    57 to "presumed religious reasons".  It  is  apparent  that  FGM  as  a
    practice in Sudan faces attack on several fronts.  According  to  those
    wishing to move Sudan towards a more  overtly  Islamic  character,  FGM
    (certainly in its infibulation form but possibly also in all forms)  is
    regarded, as Dr Gruenbaum observes, as  an  unwelcome  and  essentially
    Sudanese social practice.  At the same time,  those  within  Sudan  who
    regard the procedure as physically and psychologically  harmful  and  a
    serious health  issue,  are  taking  steps  to  seek  to  persuade  the
    population to end it.  Anti-FGM reformers, such as the SNCTP, have  the
    support of the Ministry of Health and others within government.  In the
    context of what is plainly a politically repressive regime,  it  is  in
    the Tribunal's view significant that comments by the  President,  which
    appeared to favour FGM, were the subject of  contradiction  from  other
    government sources.

138. Overall, we prefer the evidence of Dr Gruenbaum on this issue, to  that
    of Mr Verney (paragraphs 7 to 14 above) who very fairly acknowledged Dr
    Gruenbaum's expertise on the subject of FGM in Sudan.  Looking  at  the
    evidence as a whole, it appears to the Tribunal that Mr Verney somewhat
    understated the momentum that is currently building  in  Sudan  against
    the practice of female circumcision. The fact that  government  members
    are willing publicly to dissociate themselves from  pro-FGM  utterances
    of the President shows that Mr Verney's comments recorded at  paragraph
    14 above are unduly negative. But, having so found, it  is  plain  that
    the present state of Sudanese society is,  however,  such  that  it  is
    still not possible to say as a general proposition that a girl or young
    woman who does not wish to undergo FGM in any  form  will  be  able  to
    avoid it.  The previous  law,  which  prohibited  infibulation,  is  no
    longer on the Sudanese statute book.  Prosecutions  under  the  general
    criminal law prohibiting assault on the person appear to be  (at  best)
    extremely rare.

139. The position of women in Sudan is such that a  girl  or  young  woman's
    risk of FGM will turn on the attitude of her family.   Whilst,  in  the
    case of an educated family or one from  a  higher  social  stratum  (or
    both), that attitude is likely to be against inflicting FGM on a female
    family member, the evidence is not such that it  can  be  automatically
    inferred that a family of such a  kind  will  be  opposed  to  FGM.   A
    specific finding on this issue will need to be made in each case.

140. The "family" in question will be the girl  or  young  woman's  extended
    family.  The evidence of  Dr  Gruenbaum  and  Peter  Verney  (to  whose
    evidence the Tribunal accords weight - albeit less on this  issue  than
    that accorded to Dr Gruenbaum) is consistent in showing that the wishes
    of parents, though important,  are  not  decisive.   In  particular,  a
    father who opposes FGM but who is absent on a particular occasion,  may
    well be unable to stop his wife and other female  family  members  from
    having the procedure performed on his daughter.

141. At the hearing, there was considerable emphasis  placed  upon  what  Mr
    Verney described as the abduction of girls and young  women,  in  order
    for FGM to be performed on them.  The concept of "abduction",  however,
    is not particularly helpful or relevant in this regard. Dr  Gruenbaum's
    comments at paragraph 96 above, that it would be rare,  indicates  that
    there is no reasonable likelihood of it happening as a general  matter.
    What emerges from the evidence of Dr Gruenbaum  in  particular  is  the
    possibility of extended family members,  who  are  in  favour  of  FGM,
    taking advantage of the temporary absence of one or  both  parents,  in
    order to bring themselves into contact with the girl or young woman  in
    question, whereupon pressure to submit to FGM would be brought to bear.
      The  nature  and  extent  of  that  pressure  will  depend  upon  the
    circumstances, not least the age of the potential victim.  In the  case
    of a young girl, enticements such as presents might be sufficient.   In
    the case of an older person, appeals or threats based on familial shame
    or the fear of  unmarriageability  are  more  likely  to  be  employed.
    Again, the existence and degree of  any  such  risk  will  need  to  be
    established on an individual basis, bearing in mind that  the  response
    to any such appeals or threats will vary, depending  on  the  character
    and general circumstances of the person concerned.

142. We turn now to the issue of risk from those other than  the  girl's  or
    woman's extended family.  There is no evidence to which  our  attention
    has been drawn which shows that a female  might  be  at  real  risk  of
    having FGM performed on her at the instance of  a  person  who  has  no
    familial connection with her.  That is so, even where, for example, FGM
    is particularly favoured in the social milieu (such as  a  village)  in
    which the girl or young woman lives.  In such a situation, however,  it
    would no doubt require a particularly independent-minded family  to  be
    opposed to FGM.

143. On behalf of the appellants, it was submitted  that  the  risk  of  FGM
    might come  from  a  woman's  husband  or  the  husband's  family.   Dr
    Gruenbaum, however, considered that, if a girl's parents  were  opposed
    to FGM, they could and would withhold their consent to  their  daughter
    marrying a man who, or whose family, was likely to inflict it upon her,
    following her marriage.  In such a case,  it  is  accordingly  unlikely
    that a woman will be able  to  succeed  in  a  claim  to  international
    protection, based upon an asserted fear of what  might  happen  to  her
    after marriage.  In so finding, the Tribunal is aware of  the  argument
    that a woman in such a position might in such a practice  find  herself
    unable to marry, if returned to Sudan.   The  Almroth  Report  suggests
    that any such fear may in reality be unfounded.  Whilst the Tribunal is
    aware of the relatively narrow nature of the group surveyed by Almroth,
    support for this conclusion can be found elsewhere in the evidence, for
    example, in the materials emanating  from  the  SNCTP  and  the  UNICEF
    document of November 2005.


(4) Nature of Particular Social Group in relation to FGM

144. In the present case, the respondent accepted  that,  if  there  were  a
    real risk of the third and fourth appellants being  subjected  to  FGM,
    the Refugee Convention would be engaged, having regard to the  opinions
    of the House of Lords in K and Fornah.  It is nevertheless necessary to
    categorise the nature of the particular social  group  into  which  the
    appellants fall.  Although the position of women in  Sudan  appears  to
    have markedly improved in recent years, the evidence as a  whole  shows
    that they are the subject of societal  discrimination  (see  paragraphs
    119 and 120 above).  Such a conclusion also flows from the evidence  of
    Ms Maguire to the Tribunal in HGMO, as analysed in paragraph 305 of the
    determination in that case.  The reason why Ms Maguire  in  effect  did
    not consider that a Sudanese female returnee would be at real  risk  of
    persecution on return, was that such a returnee would  be  regarded  by
    the authorities merely as an adjunct of her husband.  If  that  husband
    was a  person  in  whom  the  authorities  had  a  significant  adverse
    interest, then the female returnee would suffer serious harm.

145. For present purposes,  the  Tribunal  considers  that  women  in  Sudan
    constitute a particular social group and, for the reasons given by  the
    House of Lords in K and Fornah, the infliction of  FGM  on  a  Sudanese
    woman would be persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.


Determination of the appeals

146. The burden of proof in this case is upon the appellants, who must  show
    that, if returned to Sudan, they would face a real risk of  persecution
    or serious ill-treatment, such as to  entitle  them  to  the  grant  of
    refugee status, the grant of humanitarian protection or  to  a  finding
    that their rights under article 3 of the ECHR would  be  violated.   In
    reaching our decision, we have in the case of each  of  the  appellants
    considered each item of evidence and have reviewed that evidence in the
    round.  The documentary evidence before us is itemised in the Annex  to
    this determination.


(a) Political opinion

147. We shall examine first the  claim  of  the  first  appellant  that,  if
    returned to Sudan, she would be at real risk of persecution  by  reason
    of her political opinion.  This claim is related to the issue  of  FGM,
    to the extent that the first appellant has allegedly adopted  an  anti-
    FGM stance whilst in Sudan and, later, in both Pakistan and the  United
    Kingdom.  The third and fourth appellants also assert a fear in respect
    of political opinion.  This arises from their being imputed to hold the
    same political views as their mother and because they would  dress  and
    behave in a manner proscribed or politically condemned as  immodest  or
    inappropriate for young Sudanese women.

148. So far as the first  appellant's  political  activities  in  Sudan  are
    concerned, those occurred a considerable time  ago  and  in  any  event
    cannot be described as particularly high level or otherwise such as  to
    cause the Sudanese authorities to take an adverse interest in the first
    appellant.  The same is true of the  first  appellant's  activities  in
    Pakistan,  in  connection  with  human  rights  for  women,   including
    opposition to FGM.  That this is so is borne out by the fact  that  the
    appellant was able  in  1991,  after  some  seven  or  eight  years  in
    Pakistan, to return to  Sudan  with  her  husband,  in  order  (so  she
    thought) to pay her last respects to her dying mother-in-law.  We  have
    been presented with no evidence to suggest that, on  that  return,  the
    first appellant was subjected  to  any  difficulties,  let  alone  ill-
    treatment at the hands of the Sudanese  authorities.  The  difficulties
    regarding obtaining passports for  the  third  and  fourth  appellants,
    described in paragraph 45  above,  were  in  reality  no  more  than  a
    bureaucratic irritation. They in no sense give the impression that  the
    authorities in Pakistan or Sudan were making  life  difficult  for  the
    first appellant as a result of any perceived political opinion  on  her
    part.

149. Whilst the Tribunal accepts the genuineness of  the  first  appellant's
    interest in women's rights in Sudan, and her stance  on  the  issue  of
    FGM, we do not consider that  she  has  shown  a  genuine  interest  in
    overtly anti-regime activities, during her time in the United  Kingdom.
    Her participation in a complaint to the Greek Embassy in  London  about
    the dumping by Greece in Sudan of toxic substances is not the  sort  of
    matter that is likely to lead  the  Sudanese  authorities  to  take  an
    adverse interest in her. She was one of  many  involved  and  does  not
    appear to have taken any sort of pivotal role in an issue which, on its
    own  terms,  was  essentially  environmental,  rather   than   narrowly
    political.  So far as her alleged  interest  in  Darfur  is  concerned,
    whilst we accept Mr Verney's evidence  that  the  first  appellant  was
    present, together with many others, throughout the duration of  a  day-
    long meeting at the Friends Meeting House in north London, that appears
    to be the extent of her involvement.

150. In HGMO, the Tribunal found that sur place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom would not put a Sudanese citizen at real risk on return  unless
    those activities were reasonably likely to be regarded by the  Sudanese
    government as being significantly harmful to its  interests  (paragraph
    299).  That is so even where, as we accept may be  the  case  with  the
    first appellant, the Sudanese Embassy in London has become aware of the
    activities concerned.  Bearing in mind the expert  evidence  considered
    in  HGMO,  that  the  Sudanese  authorities  would  not  be   adversely
    interested in a female returnee in her  own  right,  those  authorities
    would have to regard  the  threat  posed  by  the  first  appellant  as
    considerable, before she could be said, on the  state  of  the  present
    evidence, to be at real risk on return today by reason of her political
    opinion.  The Tribunal does not consider that this element of the claim
    has been made out.

151. Given her past and current stance on the issue  of  FGM,  the  Tribunal
    considers that  it  is  reasonably  likely  at  least  that  the  first
    appellant would continue to speak out on the matter, if returned.  That
    will not, however, put her at real risk.  As is plain from the evidence
    to which reference has already been made, members  of  the  government,
    religious leaders and NGOs are all publicly voicing concerns.  Projects
    are being undertaken in Sudan to seek to  persuade  people  to  abandon
    FGM.  Against this background, it is wholly unrealistic to suggest that
    the first appellant would be in danger in this regard.

152. As for the third and fourth appellants, the Tribunal does not  consider
    that the evidence shows that any political opinion is reasonably likely
    to  be  attributed  to  them,  whether  by  reason  of  their  mother's
    activities or their own dress and appearance, or a combination of both.
     Since the first appellant will not be at real risk by  reason  of  her
    own political activities, there is no basis upon which  the  third  and
    fourth appellants (or indeed any of the other appellants) is likely  to
    suffer by reason of any imputed political opinion.  So far as dress  is
    concerned, the Tribunal has not been  referred  to  any  evidence  that
    shows that the third and fourth appellants are  reasonably  likely,  if
    returned, to put themselves  at  risk  by  refusing  to  adopt  a  more
    conservative sartorial appearance than they might choose  to  adopt  in
    the United Kingdom.

153. Ms Cronin relied upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  Noune  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2000]  EWCA  Civ  306  in
    support of the proposition that the third and fourth  appellants  would
    be at real risk as a result of being perceived as  "westernised".   The
    facts of Noune are, however, significantly different  from  those  with
    which we are concerned.  That case involved a claim that a female civil
    servant from Algeria, who had a "westernised" appearance  or  attitude,
    would be targeted by Islamists.  The IAT had accepted  that  there  was
    evidence that "westernised" women had been targeted within Algeria  and
    that public servants might be targeted as such by people hostile to the
    government (paragraph 6 of the judgment).  In  the  present  case,  the
    evidence does not show that women whose views  might  be  described  as
    "westernised" are, as such, subjected to  persecution,  either  by  the
    Sudanese authorities or by Islamic activists in Sudan.  To  the  extent
    that Mr Verney may be said to have suggested  otherwise,  the  Tribunal
    considers he somewhat exaggerated the degree of risk.  Furthermore,  as
    is apparent from paragraph 28 of the judgment in Noune,  the  Court  of
    Appeal remitted the appeal in that case to the IAT  for  reasons  other
    than any alleged failure to deal properly with  risk  to  "westernised"
    women in Algeria.


(b) Risk of FGM

154. There is no dispute that the first appellant is opposed to the  FGM  of
    her daughters and that she  has,  over  many  years,  openly  expressed
    herself as hostile to the practice.  The respondent, however, has taken
    issue with the credibility of the claim of the first, third and  fourth
    appellants, that the daughters would be  at  real  risk  of  having  to
    undergo FGM, were they returned to Sudan.  So far as the timing of  the
    claim relating to FGM is concerned, the respondent now accepts that the
    first appellant raised the matter with her former solicitor,  prior  to
    receiving the respondent's notice of decision in 2002.

155. On the  basis  of  the  Tribunal's  analysis  of  the  general  country
    position on FGM, as set out above, the crucial issue is,  we  consider,
    whether there are elements within the extended family of the appellants
    in Sudan who could and would take steps to have the  third  and  fourth
    appellants circumcised, either by infibulation or "Sunna" cutting.  The
    evidence as to the extended family's attitude relates mainly to (a) the
    alleged attempt in 1991 to  achieve  the  circumcision  of  the  fourth
    appellant, when the first, third and fourth appellants and the  husband
    returned to Sudan and (b) the alleged telephone calls made by the third
    and fourth appellants' aunt, in which the aunt made it plain  that  she
    considered that the girls should be circumcised.

156. The respondent  has  not  established  any  serious  challenge  to  the
    credibility of the evidence relating to the trip to Sudan in 1991.   We
    consider the evidence on that matter to be both  reasonably  consistent
    and inherently plausible.  So far as the evidence relating to the  aunt
    is concerned, despite minor inconsistencies in the oral evidence of the
    first, third and fourth appellants, concerning how much the girls could
    understand of  the  aunt's  telephone  calls,  the  Tribunal  finds  it
    reasonably likely that those calls were made and that during  them  the
    aunt expressed  the  views  and  comments  attributed  to  her  by  the
    appellants.

157. In assessing the risk  to  the  third  and  fourth  appellants,  it  is
    plainly important to consider the evidence of the first appellant, that
    a family member is a former Minister of Tourism, with strong  political
    contacts and influence, and that another was involved at a senior level
    with the Khartoum Health  Department.   As  the  Tribunal  has  already
    found, the evidence before the Tribunal cannot be said  to  demonstrate
    any official or, indeed, deep-seated unofficial support on the part  of
    the Sudanese government for the continuation  of  FGM  in  Sudan.   The
    evidence shows clearly that there are powerful anti-FGM forces at work,
    including within the government itself.  On the other hand, it  is  not
    possible to conclude  on  the  state  of  the  present  evidence  that,
    whatever might be the official stance of the Ministry of Health towards
    FGM, all those within government and its associated agencies  must,  as
    such, be regarded as opposing FGM, not  only  officially  but  also  in
    their own private lives.  The fact that the first  appellant  has  male
    relatives in the positions she described has not been challenged by the
    respondent.  Given our overall positive credibility  finding  regarding
    the evidence of the appellants  relating  to  the  issue  of  FGM,  the
    Tribunal considers  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  those  male
    relatives hold conservative views on the issue of circumcision, when it
    comes to their own extended family members.

158. It  is  here  that  the  Tribunal  considers  that  the  issue  of  the
    "westernisation"  of  the   third   and   fourth   appellants   becomes
    significant.  The introduction of the third and fourth appellants  into
    an extended family, which is in favour of FGM, is, we consider,  likely
    to be regarded by that family as a threat to  its  established  values.
    That concern is likely to lead to a desire on the part of the  extended
    family  to  ensure  that  the   third   and   fourth   appellants   are
    "reintegrated", by undergoing  infibulation  or,  at  the  very  least,
    "Sunna" cutting.

159. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Mr Verney and  Dr  Gruenbaum  that
    an absent father is, in practice, unlikely to be able to  prevent  FGM,
    even if he is opposed to it.   The  father  of  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants has, in our view, shown himself to be a person who puts  his
    own career very high on his list of priorities.  It cannot be said that
    he is highly likely to return to Sudan,  if  the  appellants  are  sent
    there, in order to ensure that the third and fourth appellants are  not
    circumcised.

160. Notwithstanding that the first appellant would  be  likely  to  do  all
    that  she  reasonably  could  to  prevent  FGM  occurring,   there   is
    nevertheless a reasonable likelihood that, sooner or later, one or more
    members of the extended family will have the opportunity of bringing to
    bear on the third and fourth appellants the kind of  pressure  we  have
    described in paragraph  141  above.   The  fact  that  extended  family
    members are well-connected with the regime is likely  to  preclude  the
    first appellant from invoking the assistance of the  authorities,  such
    as the police, either to provide some form of protection for the  third
    and fourth appellants or to institute and pursue a prosecution,  should
    FGM take place.  This is the nature of the real risk facing  the  third
    and  fourth  appellants.  Although  the  third  and  fourth  appellants
    presented as reasonably confident,  in  the  environment  of  a  United
    Kingdom tribunal hearing, they are still young and,  importantly,  have
    no experience of conducting themselves in Sudanese society, where  they
    are reasonably likely to face a formidable assortment of relatives  who
    are in favour of FGM. In such circumstances, the Tribunal does not find
    that it can be said that there is no reasonable  likelihood  that  very
    serious pressure will be brought  to  bear  on  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, such as to result in them suffering one  of  the  forms  of
    FGM.

161.   The Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  any  risk  arises  from  the
    attitude of any  future  husband  of  either  of  the  appellants  (see
    paragraph 143 above).  Given the first appellant's abhorrence  of  FGM,
    any infliction of  it  upon  either  of  her  daughters  is,  we  find,
    reasonably likely  to  have  so  profound  an  effect  upon  the  first
    appellant as to amount to the infliction on her  of  persecutory  harm.
    In the light of our finding as to the nature of the  particular  social
    group in the present case, it follows that the first  appellant  is  at
    real risk of persecution for a Refugee Convention  reason  (Katrinak  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ 832; recital
    (27) to Council Directive 2004/83/EC).

162. There has been no submission to the effect that the  second  and  fifth
    appellants (who are male) would be reasonably likely to suffer  in  the
    same way, if their sisters were subjected to FGM.  The second and fifth
    appellants, accordingly, are not at real risk of persecution on  return
    to Sudan.


(c) Article 3 ill-treatment

163. In the light of the Tribunal's findings, the first,  third  and  fourth
    appellants are at real risk  on  return  of  treatment  that  would  be
    contrary to article 3 of the ECHR.  For the reasons set out above,  the
    second and  fifth  appellants  would  not  be  at  real  risk  of  such
    treatment.


(d) Internal relocation

164. The Tribunal finds that, in the circumstances of this particular  case,
    the first, third and fourth appellants would not be able to  avoid  the
    persecutory attentions of the extended family by relocating to  another
    part of Sudan.  The first  appellant  comes  originally  from  northern
    Sudan.  Notwithstanding the size of  that  country,  it  is  reasonably
    likely that the extended family,  through  its  governmental  contacts,
    would discover if the appellants, having re-entered Sudan,  endeavoured
    to live somewhere in the north, other than in or near the  former  home
    area of the first appellant.  The respondent submitted that  relocation
    to the south of Sudan could be an option.

165. The Tribunal disagrees.  Southern Sudan is  a  Christian  area  of  the
    country, where there has until recently been a serious civil  conflict.
    It is common ground that the infrastructure in the south is in  a  very
    significantly worse condition than that in the north.  There  is  every
    reason to believe  that,  even  assuming  that  the  first  appellant's
    husband were to continue  to  provide  the  appellants  with  financial
    support, life in the south, where the appellants would  have  no  other
    support system, would be extremely  difficult.  Having  regard  to  the
    propositions concerning internal relocation set out at paragraph 33  of
    the judgment of Buxton LJ in AH (Sudan), the Tribunal  finds  that  the
    nature of the life that would face the appellants  in  southern  Sudan,
    having regard to their history and particular characteristics, would be
    such that it could not be said  that  they  could  live  in  the  south
    reasonably or without undue harshness. Whilst the starting point on the
    facts of this case involves a  comparison  between  conditions  in  the
    north and south of Sudan, and whilst a move from north to  south  might
    well ordinarily be one that can be reasonably expected to be made by  a
    person from the north, it would be wrong to exclude from  the  analysis
    the fact that the third and fourth  appellants  have  had  very  little
    exposure to life in Sudan and that the change in their lives  would  be
    more traumatic than that of a person who had grown up in the north.


(e) DP5/96 and article 8

166. The second appellant is now aged 9.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    in 1999 when he was 2 years old.   There  is  no  dispute  that  he  is
    settled in school in Hounslow and has been brought up in a way that has
    enabled him to mix with the community.  The fifth appellant is now aged
    14.  He was 6 when he arrived in the United Kingdom.  What we have just
    said about the second appellant  applies  in  the  case  of  the  fifth
    appellant.

167. In MA (Seven Year Child Concession) Pakistan [2005]  UKIAT  00090,  the
    IAT set out the terms of Policy DP5/96 as follows:-

        "Deportation in cases where there are children with long residence:
        Policy Modification announced by Under-Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department Mr O'Brien on 24 February 1999.


        3.1  Whilst it is important  that  each  individual  case  must  be
             considered on its merits, there are specific factors which  are
             likely to be of particular relevance when  considering  whether
             enforcement action  should  proceed  or  be  initiated  against
             parents who have children who have  lengthy  residence  in  the
             United Kingdom.  For the purpose of proceeding with enforcement
             action in a case involving a child, the general presumption  is
             that we would not usually proceed with  enforcement  action  in
             cases  where  a  child  was  born  here  and  has  lived   here
             continuously to the age of [7] or over, or where,  having  come
             to the United Kingdom at an early age,  they  have  accumulated
             [seven] years or more continuous residence.  However, there may
             be circumstances in which it  is  considered  that  enforcement
             action is still appropriate despite the  lengthy  residence  of
             the child, for example  in  cases  where  the  parents  have  a
             particularly poor immigration  history  and  have  deliberately
             seriously delayed consideration of  their  case.   In  all  the
             cases,  the  following  factors  are  relevant  in  reaching  a
             judgment on whether enforcement action should proceed:


        -    The length of the parents' residence  without  leave;  whether
             removal  has  been  delayed  through  protracted   (and   often
             repetitive) representations or by the parents going to ground;


        -    The age of the children;


        -    Whether the children were conceived at a time when  either  of
             the parents had leave to remain;


        -    Whether return to the parents' country of origin  would  cause
             extreme hardship for the children or put their health seriously
             at risk.


        -    Whether either of  the  parents  has  a  history  of  criminal
             behaviour or deception.


        3.2  It is important that full reasons are given for  making  clear
             that each case is considered on its individual merits."

168. In an accompanying Home Office press release, it was said:-

        "A child who has spent a substantial, formative part of life in the
        UK should not be uprooted without strong reason and that is why  we
        are changing the time-limit from ten to seven  years  for  families
        with young children who have been unable to establish  a  claim  to
        remain.


        We are committed to delivering  a  system  of  immigration  control
        which is firm but also fair.  Those who are not entitled to be here
        should be removed.


        However for those who have been in this country for a long time  we
        need to recognise that they will  have  become  established  within
        their community."

169. As we have already noted, Mr Tranter  did  not  seek  to  persuade  the
    Tribunal that the policy set out above would not apply in the facts  of
    the present case.  Nor did he suggest  that  there  were  circumstances
    that might make it unlikely for the respondent to  decide  against  the
    relevant appellants, were the respondent  to  apply  the  policy.   The
    relevant facts are, indeed, not in dispute.

170. The notices of decision to the appellants made it plain that  they  had
    a right of appeal under section 61 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999, whereby a person may appeal against a  decision  to  vary  or  to
    refuse to vary any limited leave if  as  a  result  the  decision  that
    person may be required to leave the  United  Kingdom  within  28  days.
    There being no restriction on the right of appeal under section 61, the
    Tribunal must allow the appeal if satisfied that the decision  appealed
    is in any respect not in accordance with the law (paragraph 21(1)(a) of
    Schedule 4 to the 1999 Act). In all the  circumstances,  including  the
    position adopted by Mr Tranter, the Tribunal has concluded that this is
    a case where we could and should decide the application of  the  policy
    for ourselves. On the facts, we find that the first, second  and  fifth
    appellants meet the terms of the policy and  that,  as  a  result,  the
    immigration decision against which they appeal  is  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

171.  So far as article 8  is  concerned,  the  first  and  second  of  Lord
    Bingham's five questions in paragraph 17 of Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  are
    to be answered affirmatively. On the facts  of  the  present  case,  it
    would be unreasonable to expect family life to be carried on  elsewhere
    and removal would thus  have  consequences  of  sufficient  gravity  to
    engage article 8. In view of our finding  in  relation  to  DP5/96,  it
    cannot be said that the importance of maintaining a  proper  system  of
    immigration control  can  be  prayed  in  aid  by  the  respondent,  in
    determining  whether  his  decision   represents   a   disproportionate
    interference  with  the  appellants'  article  8  rights.  In  all  the
    circumstances, requiring the first,  second  and  fifth  appellants  to
    leave the  United  Kingdom  would  be  disproportionate  and  they  are
    accordingly entitled to succeed by reference to article 8.


Country Guidance in HGMO (Relocation to  Khartoum)  Sudan  CG  [2006]  UKAIT
00062

172. In AH (Sudan), the Court of  Appeal  overturned  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in HGMO, insofar as the Tribunal found  that  the  appellants,
    Sudanese citizens from Darfur, could reasonably be expected to relocate
    to Khartoum, in circumstances where they would be reasonably likely  to
    find themselves having to live  in  a  camp  for  internally  displaced
    persons.  As is apparent from  paragraphs  18  to  21  and  57  of  the
    judgment, however, there was found  to  be  no  error  of  law  in  the
    Tribunal's findings as to the lack of general risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm to a person from Darfur who might  be  sent  to  Khartoum.
    The Court also did not hear argument on, or make a finding  that  there
    was an error of law in, the  conclusions  of  the  Tribunal  concerning
    particular categories of persons who may be at  real  risk  on  return,
    including those engaging in sur place activities (paragraph 309(8)) and
    in relation to military  service  (paragraph  309(3)).   Those  country
    guidance findings remain authoritative, within the terms  of  paragraph
    18 of the Practice Directions.


Summary of findings on risk of FGM in Sudan

173. We summarise our findings at paragraphs 136 to 143  above  as  follows.
    As at April 2007, the position in Sudan is that significant  action  is
    being taken both within government and by NGOs to combat  the  practice
    of FGM in Sudan  in  all  its  forms.  Legal  sanctions  are,  however,
    unlikely to be applied where a woman has been subjected by  her  family
    to FGM.

174. There is in general no real risk of a woman being subjected to  FGM  at
    the instigation of persons who are not family  members.  As  a  general
    matter, the risk of FGM being inflicted  on  an  unmarried  woman  will
    depend on the attitude of her family, most particularly her parents but
    including her extended family.  A woman  who  comes  from  an  educated
    family and/or a family of a high social status is as such  less  likely
    to experience family pressure to submit to FGM.  It  is,  however,  not
    possible to say that such a background will  automatically  lead  to  a
    finding that she is not at real risk. The risk  of  FGM  from  extended
    family members will depend on a variety of factors, including  the  age
    and vulnerability of the woman concerned, the attitude and  whereabouts
    of her parents and the location and "reach" of the extended family.

175. If a woman's parents are opposed to FGM, they will  normally  be  in  a
    position to ensure that she does not marry a man who (or whose  family)
    is in favour of it, regardless of the attitude of  other  relatives  of
    the woman concerned.


Decision

176. The determination of the original Tribunal contains  a  material  error
    of law.  This Tribunal accordingly substitutes for it a decision:-

        (i)  allowing the appeals of the first, third and fourth appellants
             on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds (article 3);


        (ii) allowing the appeals of the first, second and fifth appellants
             on human rights grounds (article 8) and because the decision of
             the respondent is not in accordance with the law.

177. None of the  appellants  is  entitled  to  the  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.


                                Signed                                  Date


                                           Senior Immigration Judge P R Lane




































                                    Annex

Documents submitted on behalf of appellants:-

Documents particular to the appellants

"Clearance Certificate" from the Office of the Director of Khartoum
Province Education Directorate (June 1980)

Correspondence with MK Solicitors (2002)

First appellant's letter in response (undated) raising FGM claim

Respondent's letter of refusal and refusal notice to appellants (13
    December 2002)

Notices of appeal

Letters regarding status and progress of appeal (2003 and 2004)

Witness statements of first appellant, KH and Dr ME

Statements of first appellant, BR, third appellant, fourth appellant, Dr
OAA and birth certificates

Photographs of first appellant's knee and scar from her injuries caused in
order to circumcise her

Photographs of appellant demonstrating in United Kingdom

Photographs of appellant at a meeting in the United Kingdom

Documents relating to children's schooling

Example of petition against the dumping of radioactive waste in Sudan


Photographs of third and fourth appellants at school and with friends

Music and drama department award - Heston Community School (2004)

Further school reports, photographs, letters from head teachers,
certificates, etc.

Various school reports and certificates relating to educational
qualifications obtained in Pakistan

Expert reports

 Report of Dr Ellen Gruenbaum (2 February 2007)

Report of Mr Peter Verney (2007)

General evidence relating to FGM in Sudan and political issues

Ellen Gruenbaum: "The Cultural Debate over Female Circumcision: The
Sudanese are Arguing this One Out for Themselves; The Movement Against
Clitoridectomy and Infibulation in Sudan; The Islamist State and Sudanese
Women" (various dates)

The US State Department: Sudan: Report on Female Genital Mutilation or
Female Genital Cutting (June 2001)


UNICEF "Changing a Harmful Social Convention Female Genital
    Mutilation/Cutting" (2005)

US State Department Report on Female Genital Mutilation in Sudan (2001)

Amnesty International Sudan: "Empty Promises - Human Rights Violations in
Government Controlled Areas" (July 2003)

SHRO press release:" Under Emergency Law, Continuous Losses in Lives and
Property" (May 2005)

IRIN Khartoum (25 May 2005)" Sudan Living with the Trauma of FGM"
Leaflet from Jewish Forum for Justice and Human Rights: Darfur's Killing
Fields (June 2005)

AI News Flash: "Human Rights Activists Harassed by National Security" (26
July 2005)

OHCHR Special Report, Access to Justice for Victims of Sexual Violence (29
July 2005)

Voice of America News, News Report, Sudanese Women Seeking Divorce Find
Themselves in Prison (18 August 2005)

Voice of America News FGM Widely Condemned Still Rampant in Sudan (November
2005)

UNICEF: Female Genital Mutilation - A Statistical Exploration (2005)

Article from Sudan Online.com: First London Symposium on Greek Nuclear
Waste Disposal in Sudan (18 January 2006)

Memorandum to Basel Convention in Switzerland (January 2006)

US State Department Report Sudan (March 2006)

OHCHR Report of the Special Representative of the Secretary General on the
Situation of Human Rights Defenders (March 2006)

SHRO newsletter Human Rights and Humanitarian Organisations at Risk in
Sudan (March 2006)

Annual Report on the Human Rights Situation in Sudan (March 2005-March
2006)

ACCORD Sudan 10th ECOI Seminar Report (20 April 2006)

Human Rights First: USA News Report: Support Sudanese Rights Group Facing
Persecution (May 2006)

World Health Organisation: New Study Shows Female Genital Mutilation
Exposes Women and Babies to a Significant Risk at Childbirth (June 2006)

SHRO Arbitrary Detention of Two Human Rights Defenders (July 2006)

Freedom House, Annual Report (6 September 2006)

World Organisation Against Torture, News Report, Sudan Wave of Arbitrary
Arrests (September 2006)

Sudanese Human Rights Quarterly, Issue 22 (September 2006)

"SHRO Arbitrary Arrests/Harassment" (October 2006)
Letter from Darfur Centre for Human Rights and Development (December 2006)

Amnesty International Report on Sudan (2006)

Human Rights Watch World Report 2007: Chapter on Sudan

Article: "Re-circumcision: the Hidden Evil of Female Genital Mutilation in
    Sudan"

UNICEF Sudan Female Genital Mutilation Country Profile

Female Genital Mutilation Fact sheet

Sudanese Network to Eradicate FGM "Female Circumcision is an Abuse of the
Right to Life"

Post-mortem of Inaam with Translation: "A 4 year old girl who died from
infection after extensive FGM involving total removal of external genitals"

"Imam Saddiq Al-Mahdi states his opinion on female circumcision": Future
Family Magazine

Article from Voice of America News: Blair calls situation in Darfur
"totally unacceptable"

"Time to protect Darfur" leaflet


Documents submitted on behalf of respondent:-

"Sudan Government to Ban FGM": Global Health Council Document of 3
September 2003
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People's Rights on the Rights
of Women in Africa - Africa Union: 11 July 2003

"Sudan:  Living With the Trauma of FGM" - IRIN News.org article (May 2005)

"Sudan: Religious Leader Speaks Out Against Female Genital
Mutilation/Cutting UNICEF document (November 2005)

"Genital Mutilation of Girls in Sudan - Community and Hospital-Based
Studies on Female Genital Cutting and its Sequelae" - Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm (the Almroth report) (December 2005)

"Make FGM History in Sudan Campaign" - article produced by Foundation for
Women's Health, Research and Development (post-dates December 2005)

US State Department Report on Sudan (March 2006)

UNICEF Hails Progress Towards Ending Female Genital Cutting
"Home Office Operational Guidance Note on Sudan (May 2006)

"End Female Genital Mutilation" - African Union - Sudan Tribune article
(June 2006)

Selection of papers from Sudan National Committee on Traditional Practices
(SNCTP) (October 2006)

Operational Guidance Note on Sudan (November 2006)

COI Report on Sudan (January 2007)


























