
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

OA and Others (human rights; 'new matter'; s.120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 00065
(IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 October 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                            OA - FIRST APPELLANT
                            OB - SECOND APPELLANT
                            EB - THIRD APPELLANT
                        (anonymity order maintained)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr M Jibowu, Solicitor, MJ Solomon & Partners
(Commercial Rd)
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Human rights appeals

(1) In a human rights appeal under  section  82(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, a finding that a person (P)  satisfies  the
requirements of a particular immigration rule,  so  as  to  be  entitled  to
leave to remain, means that (provided Article 8 of  the  ECHR  is  engaged),
the Secretary of State will not be  able  to  point  to  the  importance  of
maintaining immigration controls as a  factor  weighing  in  favour  of  the
Secretary of State in the proportionality balance, so  far  as  that  factor
relates to the particular immigration rule that the judge has  found  to  be
satisfied.

(2)  The fact that  P  completes  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence
during the course of P's human rights appeal  will  generally  constitute  a
"new matter" within  the  meaning  of  section  85  of  the  2002  Act.  The
completion of ten years' residence will normally have a material bearing  on
the sole ground of appeal that can be advanced in  a  human  rights  appeal;
namely, whether the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  P's  human
rights claim is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  This
is because paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules provides  that  a  person
with such a period of residence is entitled to indefinite  leave  to  remain
in the United Kingdom, so long as the other requirements of  that  paragraph
are met.

(3) Where the judge concludes that the ten years' requirement  is  satisfied
and there is nothing to indicate an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
remain by P would be likely to be rejected by the Secretary  of  State,  the
judge should allow P's human rights appeal, unless the  judge  is  satisfied
there is a discrete public  interest  factor  which  would  still  make  P's
removal proportionate. Absent such factors, it would be disproportionate  to
remove P or require P to leave the United Kingdom  before  P  is  reasonably
able to make an application for indefinite leave to remain.

(4) Leaving aside whether P has any  other  Article  8  argument  to  deploy
(besides  paragraph  276B)  and  in  the  absence  of  any  policy  to  give
successful human rights appellants a particular  period  of  limited  leave,
all the Secretary of State is required to do in such a case  is  grant  P  a
period of  leave  sufficient  to  enable  P  to  make  the  application  for
indefinite leave to  remain.  If  P  subsequently  fails  to  make  such  an
application, P will continue to be subject to  such  limited  leave  as  the
Secretary of State has granted in consequence of the allowing of  the  human
rights appeal.


Statements of additional grounds

(5) A statement of additional grounds for the purposes  of  section  120  of
the 2002 Act must be made in writing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. Introduction

 1. This is the re-making of decisions in the appeals of three  appellants,
    who are citizens of Nigeria born respectively in 1979, 2007  and  2010.
    The first appellant is the mother of the second and  third  appellants.
    She entered the United  Kingdom  in  October  2007,  with  leave  as  a
    student.

 2. The first appellant was subsequently granted periods of  further  leave
    to remain as a student, followed  by  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    Migrant, until 4 May  2013.   After  this,  she  became  the  dependent
    partner of the father of the second and third appellants, and was given
    leave in that capacity until 30 January 2016, as were  the  second  and
    third appellants.

 3. On 29 January  2016,  the  appellants  applied  for  leave  to  remain.
    Pursuant to section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, this had the effect
    of extending their existing leave.

 4. On 9 August 2016, the respondent refused the  applications  for  leave,
    which he  also  treated  as  human  rights  claims.   The  respondent's
    decision, in respect of each of the appellants, constituted  a  refusal
    of their human rights claims, with the result that the appellants had a
    right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  section  82  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.



B. The appeals in the First-tier Tribunal

 5. On 28 February 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross  on  15  January  2018,  decided  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeals.   On  21  August
    2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch set aside  Judge  Fox's  decision  and
    stated that the re-making of the decisions  in  the  appeals  would  be
    undertaken by the Upper Tribunal. This was the purpose of  the  hearing
    before us on 25 October 2018.

 6.  Judge Fox's conclusion that he did not have jurisdiction involved  the
    fact that, by the time the appeals came to the hearing, the  first  and
    second appellants had completed ten years' continuous lawful  residence
    in the United Kingdom.  They accordingly submitted that they  each  met
    the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    reads as follows:-

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
                leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
                United Kingdom are that:
                (i) (a)     he has had at least 10 years  continuous  lawful
                     residence in the United Kingdom.
                (ii)   having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                    reasons why it would be undesirable for him to be  given
                    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
                    residence, taking into account his:
                    (a)    age; and
                    (b)    strength of connections in  the  United  Kingdom;
                        and
                    (c)    personal history, including  character,  conduct,
                        associations and employment record; and
                    (d)    domestic circumstances; and
                    (e)    compassionate circumstances; and
                    (f)    any  representations  received  on  the  person's
                        behalf; and
                (iii)  the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
                    general grounds for refusal.
                (iv)   the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge
                    of the English language and sufficient  knowledge  about
                    life in the United Kingdom, in accordance with  Appendix
                    KoLL.
                (v)    the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                    immigration laws, except that, where  paragraph  39E  of
                    these Rules applies, any current period  of  overstaying
                    will be disregarded. Any previous period of  overstaying
                    between periods of leave will also be disregarded  where
                    -
                    (a)     the previous  application  was  made  before  24
                        November 2016 and within 28 days of the  expiry  of
                        leave; or
                    (b)    the further application was made on or  after  24
                        November 2016 and  paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules
                        applied."
 7. Judge Fox found that the issue of paragraph 276B was not  one  that  he
    had jurisdiction to consider. However, Judge Fox failed  to  appreciate
    that the appellants were, in reality, seeking to raise a "new  matter",
    within the meaning of section 85(6) of  the  2002  Act.  Unfortunately,
    Judge Fox proceeded on the basis that section 85A of that Act  was  the
    key provision, without appreciating that this section had been repealed
    in October 2014.




C. New matters and statements of additional grounds

 8.  Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act provides  that  the  Tribunal  must  not
    consider a new matter unless the  Secretary  of  State  has  given  the
    Tribunal consent to do so.

 9. Section 85(6) defines a "new matter" as follows:-

         "(6) A matter is a "new matter" if -

             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of the kind  listed  in
                  section 84, and

             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of -

                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or

                  (ii) the statement made by  the  appellant  under  section
                      120."

10. Section 120 of the 2002 Act provides as follows:-

         "Requirement to state additional grounds for application etc.

         (1)  Subsection (2) applies to a person ('P') if -

             (a)  P has made a protection claim or a human rights claim,

             (b)  P has made an application  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom, or

             (c)  a decision to depart or remove  P  has  been  or  may  be
                  taken.

         (2)  The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may  serve  a
             notice on P requiring P to provide a statement setting out -

             (a)  P's reasons for wishing to enter or remain in the  United
                  Kingdom,

             (b)  any grounds on which P should be permitted  to  enter  or
                  remain in the United Kingdom, and

             (c)  any grounds on which P should  not  be  removed  from  or
                  required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (3)  A statement under subsection (2) need not  repeat  reasons  or
             grounds set out in -

             (a)  P's protection or human rights claim,

             (b)  the application mentioned in subsection (1)(b), or

             (c)   an  application  to  which  the  decision  mentioned  in
                  subsection (1)(c) relates.

         (4)  Subsection (5) applies to a person ('P') if P  has  previously
             been served with a notice under subsection (2) and -

             (a)  P requires leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
                  but does not have it, or

             (b)  P has leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom only
                  by virtue of  section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
                  (continuation of leave pending decision or appeal).

         (5)  Where P's circumstances have changed since  the  Secretary  of
             State or an immigration office was last  made  aware  of  them
             (whether in the application or claim mentioned  in  subsection
             (1) or in a statement under subsection (2) or this subsection)
             so that P has -

             (a)  additional reasons for wishing to enter or remain in  the
                  United Kingdom,

             (b)  additional grounds on which  P  should  be  permitted  to
                  enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or

             (c)  additional grounds on which P should not be removed  from
                  or required to  leave the United Kingdom, P must, as  soon
                  as  reasonably  practicable,   provide   a   supplementary
                  statement to the Secretary  of  State  or  an  immigration
                  officer  setting  out  the  new  circumstances   and   the
                  additional reasons or grounds.

         (6)  In this section -

             'human rights claim' and  'protection  claim'  have  the  same
             meanings as in Part 5; reference to 'grounds' are  to  grounds
             on which an appeal under Part 5 may be  brought  (see  section
             84)."

11. Given that Judge Fox was unaware of the relevant legislation concerning
    new matters, it is  unsurprising  that  he  did  not  engage  with  the
    decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Mahmud  (s.85  NIAA  2002  -  "new
    matters") [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC), in which the Upper Tribunal held  as
    follows:-


         "29. A matter is the factual substance of a  claim.   A  ground  of
             appeal is the legal basis on which  the  facts  in  any  given
             matter could form the basis of a  challenge  to  the  decision
             under appeal.  For example,  medical  evidence  of  a  serious
             health condition could be a matter which constitutes a  ground
             of appeal on human rights grounds based on Article  3  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights which if  breached,  would
             mean that removal would be contrary to section 6 of the  Human
             Rights Act, a ground of appeal in section 84(2)  of  the  2002
             Act.  Similarly, evidence of a relationship with a partner  in
             the United Kingdom could  be  a  matter  which  constitutes  a
             ground of appeal based on Article 8 and for the  same  reasons
             could fall within section 84(2) of the 2002  Act  as  if  made
             out, removal would be contrary  to  section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act.

         30.  A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  In the absence  of  this
             restriction, section 85(5) of the 2002 Act  could  potentially
             allow the Respondent to  give  the  Tribunal  jurisdiction  to
             consider something which is not a ground of appeal by consent,
             thereby undermining sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act.

         31.  Practically, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under section 120.  This requires the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive.  By way of example,  evidence  that  a  couple  had
             married since the decision is likely to be  new  evidence  but
             not a new matter where the relationship  had  previously  been
             relied  upon  and  considered  by  the  Secretary  of   State.
             Conversely, evidence that a couple had had a child  since  the
             decision is likely to be a new matter as it adds an additional
             distinct   new   family   relationship   (with   consequential
             requirements to consider the best interests of the child under
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009) which itself  could  separately  raise  or  establish  a
             ground of  appeal  under  Article  8  that  removal  would  be
             contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act."





D.  Questions to be addressed on re-making the decisions in the appeals

12. Having set aside the decision of Judge Fox, Upper Tribunal Judge  Finch
    gave directions, which required the parties, at the  re-making  hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal, to address the following questions:-

    (a)  Whether the first and second  appellants'  reliance  on  paragraph
         276B of the Immigration Rules amounts to a  "new  matter"  for  the
         purposes of section 85(5) of the 2002 Act;

    (b)  Whether the appeals of the  first,  second  and  third  appellants
         should be allowed or dismissed; and

    (c)  Whether additional grounds for the purposes of section 120 of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 can be raised within a
         witness statement or orally.

13. In preparation for the hearing on  25  October  2018,  Mr  Ian  Jarvis,
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, prepared  a  skeleton  argument,
    with annexes.   Mr  Walker,  who  represented  the  respondent  at  the
    hearing, spoke to this skeleton argument.  We wish to  record  that  we
    found Mr Jarvis's written submissions extremely helpful.

E. Discussion

(a)  Whether the reliance of the first and second  appellants  on  paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules amounts to a "new matter"

14. Section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         (1) A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where-

              ................

            (b) the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human rights
            claim made by P...

15. Section 84(2) provides as follows:

         "(2) An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
           claim) must be brought  on  the  ground  that  the  decision  is
           unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."

16. Section 113 of the 2002 Act defines a human rights claim as:

        "a claim made by a person that to remove him from or require him  to
         leave the United Kingdom or to  refuse  him  entry  to  the  United
         Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
         1998".

17. Section 6(1) of the 1998 Act says:

         "(1) It is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is
           incompatible with a Convention right".

18. In order to constitute a new matter, the assertion that a  person  has,
    by reason  of  completing  ten  years'  continuous  residence,  brought
    themselves within the ambit of paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules
    must be capable of having an effect on the  outcome  of  that  person's
    human rights appeal.  It must, in other words, have a material  bearing
    on the sole ground of appeal that can be advanced  in  a  human  rights
    appeal; namely, whether the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim is unlawful under section 6 of the 1998 Act.

19. As the Upper Tribunal said in  Charles  (human  rights  appeal:  scope)
    [2018] UKUT 00089 (IAC):-

         "45. We find we must take issue with the last part of paragraph  23
             of Greenwood (No. 2).  The former ability of the  Tribunal  to
             conclude that  a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was
             unlawful, with the result that a lawful decision  remained  to
             be made by her, depended upon the fact that under the  version
             of section 86 of  the  2002  Act  as  it  was,  prior  to  its
             amendment by the 2014 Act, the Tribunal was required to  allow
             an appeal insofar as it thought that a decision against  which
             the appeal was brought or was treated as being brought was not
             in accordance with the law (including immigration rules). That
             requirement has been removed from the  legislation.   In  this
             regard, therefore, Parliament has most definitely  "taken  the
             opportunity to interfere".

         46.  The correct approach to adopt in a human rights  appeal  under
             section 82(1)(b) is as follows.  As section 84(2) makes clear,
             and as is reflected in the present notice of decision,  served
             in compliance with the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003,
             the decision being appealed is  the  decision  to  refuse  the
             claimant's human rights claim.  Section  84(2)  provides  that
             the only ground upon which that decision can be challenged  is
             that "the decision is unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998".  Section 6(1) of the 1998 Act provides  that
             it "is unlawful for a public authority to act in a  way  which
             is incompatible with the Convention rights".

         47.  The definition of "human rights claim" in  section  113(1)  of
             the 2002 Act involves the making of a claim by a  person  that
             to remove him or her from or to require him or  her  to  leave
             the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6.

         48.  The task, therefore, for  the  Tribunal,  in  a  human  rights
             appeal is to decide whether such removal or requirement  would
             violate any of the provisions  of  the  ECHR.   In  many  such
             cases,  including  the  present,  the  issue  is  whether  the
             hypothetical removal or requirement to leave would be contrary
             to Article 8 (private and family life).

         49.  In such a paradigm human rights appeal, therefore, we  do  not
             consider that paragraph 21 of the decision in Greenwood No  2,
             including its sub-paragraphs (a) and (b),  has  any  purchase.
             If the decision to refuse the human rights claim would violate
             section 6 of the 1998 Act, the Tribunal must so find.  In such
             a paradigm case, we see no purpose in the Tribunal making  any
             statement to the effect that "a lawful decision remains to  be
             made by the Secretary of State".  It would certainly be  wrong
             to conclude that, having allowed the appeal,  the  appellant's
             human rights claim remains outstanding, in the sense that  the
             Secretary of State must make a fresh decision on  that  claim.
             The actual position will be that the Secretary of State, faced
             with the allowing of the appeal by the Tribunal,  will  decide
             whether and, if so, what leave to enter or remain  she  should
             give to the appellant.  Any deportation decision  or  decision
             under section 10 of the 1999 Act that the Secretary  of  State
             may have made in respect of  the  appellant  will  fall  away.
             Again, we see no need for the Tribunal  to  make  any  express
             statement to that effect.

         ...

         68.  ...  The basic limitation of a human rights appeal is that  it
             can be determined only through the  provisions  of  the  ECHR;
             usually Article 8. A person whose human rights claim turns  on
             Article 8 will not be able to advance  any  criticism  of  the
             Secretary of State's  decision-making  under  the  Immigration
             Acts, including the immigration rules,  unless  that  person's
             circumstances are such as to engage Article 8(2).

         69.  Although section 85  of  the  2002  Act  makes  provision  for
             certain matters to be considered on an  appeal  under  section
             82(1)(b), we do not see how section 85 can expand the scope of
             a human rights appeal of the kind with which we are concerned,
             so as to require the separate judicial adjudication -  outside
             section 6 of the 1998 Act - of matters  such  as  whether  the
             claimant had or had not, breached the  immigration  rules.  On
             the contrary, the wording of section 85(1) makes it clear that
             the appeal can include only "an appeal against any decision in
             respect of which the appellant has a  right  of  appeal  under
             section 82(1)", which is limited to refusal  of  a  protection
             claim or of a human rights claim and revocation of  protection
             status. Likewise, section 85(2), which  concerns  section  120
             statements, is tied to the grounds of appeal under section 84.



         70.  Section 85(4) permits the Tribunal  to  consider  "any  matter
             which it thinks is relevant to the substance of the decision".
             In a human rights appeal, therefore, a matter will be relevant
             if and only if it goes to the question of whether the decision
             is unlawful under section 6 of the 1998 Act."

20. Commenting on Charles, the  Home  Office  Guidance:  Rights  of  Appeal
    (Version 7.0 - 30 July 2018) says this:-

         "The question of whether a decision was in accordance with the  law
         will nevertheless be highly relevant in many human rights  appeals.
         Under section 84(2) of the current statutory framework,  an  appeal
         against the refusal of a human rights claim must be brought on  the
         ground that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.  Where it is  found  that  the  claimant's  rights
         under Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human  Rights  are
         engaged,  the  Tribunal  will  go  on  to  consider   whether   any
         interference occasioned by the decision under  challenge  would  be
         "in accordance with the law" for  the  purposes  of  Article  8(2).
         That is the point at which the lawfulness  of  the  decision  in  a
         wider sense may now be relevant."

21. As a general proposition,  the  completion  of  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom by a  person  who  has  appealed
    against the refusal of a human rights  claim  will  be  a  matter  that
    constitutes a ground of appeal, compatibly with the decision in Mahmud,
    because that fact is capable  of  having  a  material  bearing  on  the
    outcome of the appeal.

22. Precisely how that might occur  is  something  we  shall  address  when
    dealing with paragraph  (b)  below.   For  the  present,  however,  the
    parties before us were agreed that the  completion  by  the  first  and
    second appellants of ten years'  continuous  lawful  residence,  whilst
    their appeals were pending before the First-tier Tribunal,  constituted
    a "new matter" for the purposes of section 85 of  the  2002  Act.   The
    respondent gave consent for the new matter  to  be  considered  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.




(b)  Whether the appeals of the first, second and  third  appellants  should
    be allowed or dismissed

23. Having established that reaching ten years' continuous lawful residence
    brings a person within paragraph 276B,  to  the  extent  that  this  is
    capable of having a bearing on the outcome of the person's human rights
    appeal, it is necessary to examine,  in  the  context  of  the  present
    appeals, whether that fact is determinative  of  a  positive  appellate
    outcome for the first and second appellants.

24. The first point to  make  is,  of  course,  that  satisfying  paragraph
    276B(i)(a) is a necessary but by  no  means  a  sufficient  factor  for
    indefinite leave to be granted.  The remainder of the requirements must
    also be satisfied, in order for a person to be entitled  to  indefinite
    leave.  Amongst these requirements are the manifestly important  public
    interest considerations dealt with in paragraph 276B(ii).

25. In the present case, Mr Jarvis's  skeleton  argument  stated  that  the
    respondent "does not raise a public interest objection to  leave  being
    granted".  The respondent also indicated that paragraph 276B(v) did not
    represent a difficulty for the first and second appellants.

26. On behalf of  the  appellants,  Mr  Jibowu  submitted  that  the  first
    appellant satisfied paragraph 276B(iv) by reason of the fact  that  she
    had a master's degree certificate  and  also  a  "Life  in  the  United
    Kingdom" certificate.  The second appellant did not require these.

27. The significance of an appellant proving to a First-tier Tribunal judge
    that he or she meets the requirements of a particular immigration rule,
    so as to be entitled to be given leave to remain, lies in the fact that
    - provided Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged - the respondent  will  not
    be able to point to the importance of maintaining immigration  controls
    as a factor weighing in favour of the respondent in the proportionality
    balance, so far as that factor relates to  the  particular  immigration
    rule that the Tribunal has found to be satisfied.

28. Whether or not such a finding in favour of an appellant is likely to be
    determinative of the human rights appeal will depend upon  whether  the
    respondent has  any  additional  reason,  effectively  overriding  that
    particular rule,  for  saying  that  the  effective  operation  of  the
    respondent's immigration policy nevertheless outweighs the  appellant's
    interest in remaining in this country.  To take one simple example,  an
    appellant who persuades the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to entrepreneur migrants
    will not thereby succeed in his human rights appeal  if  the  appellant
    has been found by the respondent (and the  Tribunal  agrees)  that  the
    appellant falls foul of one or more of the general grounds  of  refusal
    contained in Part 9 of the Rules; for example, because  he  made  false
    representations in connection with a  previous  application  for  leave
    (paragraph 322(2)).

29. It also has to be emphasised that where  the  Tribunal  finds  that  an
    appellant's compliance with an immigration rule is such as  to  require
    the human rights appeal to be allowed, this  does  not  mean  that  the
    appellant is entitled, without more, to be given leave of  the  precise
    nature and duration envisaged  by  that  rule.   As  was  explained  in
    Charles, the task of the Tribunal in a human rights appeal is  confined
    to determining the sole ground in section 84(2) of  the  2002  Act.  We
    shall have more to say about this later.

30. Let us now return to paragraph 276B.  We have seen how,  as  a  general
    proposition, satisfying the  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence
    requirement will be sufficient to constitute a "new matter" because  it
    is capable of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the  human  rights  appeal.
    However, as we have also seen, paragraph  276B  contains  a  number  of
    other requirements.  In the present appeals,  the  respondent  has  now
    been able to confirm that the requirements of paragraph 276B are met in
    the case of the first and  second  appellants  (the  respondent  having
    taken no point on paragraph 276B(iii)).

31. Nevertheless, despite any case management in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which may serve to put the respondent on notice that there  is  a  long
    residence element  to  be  considered  at  the  hearing,  a  First-tier
    Tribunal judge may  still  often  be  faced  with  a  situation  where,
    although  the  ten  years'  requirement  is  found  to  be   met,   the
    respondent's  representative  at  the  hearing  will  submit  that  the
    respondent is not in a position to say  that,  as  matters  stand,  the
    other elements of the paragraph are also  met;  for  instance,  because
    checks need to be made regarding paragraph 276B(ii)(c).

32. What should the judge do in these circumstances?  The  answer  lies  in
    continually bearing in mind that this is a human rights  appeal,  where
    the sole ground is whether the decision  to  refuse  the  human  rights
    claim is unlawful under section 6 of the 1998 Act.

33. Accordingly, where the judge concludes that the temporal requirement of
    paragraph 276B is satisfied and that there is nothing in  the  evidence
    before the judge to indicate that an application under paragraph  276B,
    made by the appellant within a reasonable time after the hearing, would
    be likely to be rejected by the respondent, the judge should allow  the
    human rights appeal; provided, of course, he or she is  satisfied  that
    the respondent cannot rely upon any  discrete  public  interest  factor
    which would still make removal proportionate.  In the absence of such a
    factor, it would not (at least as a general matter) be proportionate to
    remove the appellant or  expect  the  appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom (see paragraph 16 above).

34. In the present case, since there  was  no  disagreement  regarding  the
    ability of the first and second appellants to satisfy  paragraph  276B,
    Mr Jibowu submitted that the respondent  should  grant  the  first  and
    second appellants indefinite leave to remain.

35. Two points need to be made in response. First, even where (as here) the
    human rights appeal falls to be allowed because the  first  and  second
    appellants have been found, as matters stand at the date of hearing, to
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276B, it remains the  position  that
    the only action the Tribunal can take is to allow  the  appeal  on  the
    ground specified in section 84(2). Neither the First-tier Tribunal  nor
    the Upper Tribunal (exercising its appellate jurisdiction) has power to
    direct the respondent to grant  any  particular  form  or  duration  of
    leave.

36.  The second point follows from the  first.  In  all  cases,  therefore,
    including where (as here) there is not merely no reason to suppose that
    indefinite leave  would  not  be  granted  but  an  acceptance  by  the
    respondent that all the requirements of the  rule  are  currently  met,
    after the appeal is allowed, an application will need to be made to the
    respondent by the successful appellant for indefinite leave to  remain.
    If the Rules so require, that application will require payment of a fee
    (or proof of entitlement to fee remission).

37. Unless waived by the  respondent,  the  requirement  to  make  such  an
    application is, thus, unaffected by the  allowing  of  a  human  rights
    appeal.  Leaving aside whether the appellant has any  other  Article  8
    argument to deploy besides paragraph 276B (as to which, see  paragraphs
    39 to 44 below), and in the absence of any policy  to  give  successful
    human rights appellants a particular period of limited leave, all  that
    the respondent is required to do is grant the  appellant  a  period  of
    leave  that  is  sufficient  to  enable  the  appellant  to  make   the
    application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  (Section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 will extend  that  leave  if  it  would  otherwise
    expire  before  the  respondent  has  reached   a   decision   on   the
    application).

38.  If an appellant,  whose  appeal  has  been  allowed  by  reference  to
    paragraph  276B,  subsequently  fails  to  make  an   application   for
    indefinite leave to remain, then he or she will continue to be  subject
    to such limited leave as the respondent has granted, in consequence  of
    the allowing of the human rights appeal.

39. Although we have spent considerable time on paragraph 276B, Mr Jarvis's
    skeleton argument concedes that all three of the  appeals  fall  to  be
    allowed. Besides the issue of paragraph 276B,  the  respondent  accepts
    that the second and third appellants satisfy  the  specific  Article  8
    private  life  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  that,   as   a
    consequence, the refusal of the first appellant's human  rights  appeal
    will result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for her, as  provided
    by GEN.3.2(2) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

40. Paragraph 276ADE reads as follows:-

         "276ADE (1).  The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:
         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.1 to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-LTR.4.5.  in
             Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously  in
             the UK for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or
         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."
41. GEN.3.2, so far as relevant, provides as follows:-

         "GEN.3.2.(1)  Subject to sub-paragraph (4),  where  an  application
         for entry clearance or leave to enter or  remain  made  under  this
         Appendix, or an application for leave to remain which has otherwise
         been considered under this Appendix, does not  otherwise  meet  the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph  (2)
         apply.
         (2)  Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
            consider, on the basis  of  the  information  provided  by  the
            applicant, whether there are  exceptional  circumstances  which
            would render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to  enter  or
            remain, a breach of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
            Human  Rights,   because   such   refusal   would   result   in
            unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the  applicant,  their
            partner, a  relevant  child  or  another  family  member  whose
            Article 8 rights it is evident from that information  would  be
            affected by a decision to refuse the application.
          ..."
42. In the light of the detail provided in respect of the private lives  of
    the second and third appellants,  their  length  of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom and (when applying the reasonableness test at  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv)) the continuous lawful residence of the second  appellant
    and the first appellant, the respondent accepts (and we agree) that  it
    would be unreasonable in the circumstances to  expect  the  second  and
    third appellants to leave the United Kingdom.

43. Accordingly, the respondent accepts (and we agree) that the appeals  of
    the second and third appellants fall to be allowed on  the  basis  that
    each of them satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and that the  respondent
    has  no  other  public  interest  argument  for  contending  that   the
    proportionality balance nevertheless falls to be struck  against  these
    two appellants.

44. As for the first appellant, quite apart from the fact that it would  be
    disproportionate to remove her or require her to leave before  she  has
    had the opportunity of making a paragraph 276B application,  it  would,
    in all the circumstances, be unjustifiably harsh for  her  to  have  to
    leave the second and third appellants and return on her own to Nigeria.
     Accordingly, she meets the requirements of GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM.  In
    her case also, the respondent has no other public interest argument  to
    deploy.

45. The outcome, therefore,  is  that  the  hypothetical  removal  from  or
    requirement  to  leave  the   United   Kingdom   would   constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with the respective Article 8  rights  of
    all three of the appellants.

(c)  Whether additional grounds for the purposes of section 120 of the  2002
    Act can be raised within a witness statement or orally at a meeting

46. In MU ("Statement of Additional Grounds": Long Residence -  Discretion)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that there is
    no particular form specified for the purposes of section 120(2) of  the
    2002 Act.  Nor is there a specific time limit  for  the  production  of
    such a statement.

47. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis accepts that it is, accordingly,
    possible for the contents  of  a  witness  statement  to  constitute  a
    statement for the purposes of section  120(2);  provided,  importantly,
    that the witness statement is served on the Secretary of  State  or  an
    Immigration Officer.

48. The Upper Tribunal held in Ahmad (Scope of Appeals)  [2018]  UKUT  0084
    (IAC) that:-

         "56. ... any statement required to be made under [section 120]  has
             to take the form of a statement made to the respondent  or  an
             Immigration Officer, as the case may be.  Section 120(5) makes
             this requirement express in the case of subsequent statements;
             that  is  to  say,  where  a  section  120  notice  has   been
             subsequently served.  The requirement is, however, in our view
             inherent in the preceding subsection of section 120."

49. In Jaff (s120 Notice; Statement of "Additional  Grounds")  [2012]  UKUT
    00396 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that  a  statement  of  additional
    grounds "must as a minimum set out with some level of particularity the
    ground or basis relied upon  by  the  appellant  as  a  basis  for  him
    remaining in the UK and  upon  which  he  has  not  previously  relied"
    (paragraph 24). That may be "in a document served after the  Notice  of
    Appeal is filed" (ibid).

50. The suggestion in the italic words preceding the reported  decision  in
    Jaff, that a statement of additional grounds may "perhaps" be made  "at
    the time of ... the hearing of the appeal" finds no expression  in  the
    body of the decision. In any event, it  has  now  to  be  read  in  the
    context of the "new matter" provisions in section 85 of the  2002  Act,
    which were introduced in 2014.

51. We agree with the respondent  that  a  statement  made  pursuant  to  a
    section 120 notice must be in writing and cannot merely be made orally,
    such as at a meeting between the appellant  and  one  or  more  of  the
    respondent's officials.

52. Although such a requirement is not expressed in terms in  section  120,
    it is implicit.  As Mr Jarvis says, it plainly  cannot  have  been  the
    intention of Parliament that a  person  might  be  able  to  provide  a
    statement required by section 120 in the course of a conversation  with
    an official.  Communication in oral conversation (such as  a  telephone
    call) would be a recipe for confusion and misunderstanding.

53. The legislature has accorded considerable importance to the making of a
    statement in response to a section 120  notice.  For  example,  section
    85(2) of the 2002 Act places a duty on the  Tribunal  to  consider  any
    matter raised in the statement which constitutes a relevant  ground  of
    appeal.  Section 96 gives the respondent power of certification, so  as
    to deprive a person of a  right  of  appeal,  in  circumstances  where,
    amongst other things, that person was served with a section 120  notice
    and appeals on a ground that "should  have  been,  but  has  not  been,
    raised in the statement made under  section  120(2)  or  (5)",  without
    satisfactory reason being given for that failure.

54. In the light of this, it would, in our view, be no less  than  perverse
    to construe the word "statement" in section 120 as including  a  merely
    oral utterance.

Decision

55. The appellants' appeals are allowed.
















                               Signed                     4 January 2019


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

