

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Baihinga (r. 22; human rights appeal: requirements) [2018] UKUT 00090 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                              JULIANA BAIHINGA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                   - AND -

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:                 Mr O Haastrup, Solicitor of Nathan  Aaron
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



1.  The scope for issuing a notice under rule 22 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum   Chamber)   Rules   2014
(circumstances in which the Tribunal may not accept a notice of  appeal)  is
limited. A rule 22 notice may be issued at the stage  where  the  First-tier
Tribunal scrutinises a notice of appeal as soon as practicable after it  has
been given. Where no rule 22 notice is issued at that stage and  the  matter
proceeds to a hearing, the resulting decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
may be challenged on appeal to the Upper Tribunal, rather than  by  judicial
review (JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
EWCA Civ 78; Practice Statement 3).

2.  An application for leave or  entry  clearance  may  constitute  a  human
rights claim, even if the applicant does not, in terms, raise human  rights.
In  cases  not  covered  by  the  respondent's  guidance  (whereby   certain
applications under the immigration rules will be  treated  as  human  rights
claims), the application will constitute a human rights  claim  if,  on  the
totality of the information supplied, the  applicant  is  advancing  a  case
which requires the caseworker to consider whether a  discretionary  decision
under the rules needs to be taken by reference to ECHR  issues  (eg  Article
8) or requires the caseworker to look beyond the rules and decide,  if  they
are  not  satisfied,  whether  an  Article  8  case  is  nevertheless  being
advanced.

3.  The issue of whether a human rights  claim  has  been  refused  must  be
judged by reference to the decision  said  to  constitute  the  refusal.  An
entry clearance manager's decision, in  response  to  a  notice  of  appeal,
cannot, for this purpose, be part of the decision  of  the  entry  clearance
officer.

4.  A person who has not made  an  application  which  constitutes  a  human
rights claim  cannot  re-characterise  that  application  by  raising  human
rights issues in her grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, who was born in July 1986.
       She was granted indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
      10 September 2003.


   2. On 21 June 2004, the appellant left the United Kingdom,  returning  to
      Sierra Leone.  In June 2015, the appellant applied for entry clearance
      as a returning resident, pursuant to paragraph 18 of  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   3. On 26 June 2015, an entry clearance officer  refused  the  appellant's
      application. The notice of decision  stated  that  the  appellant  had
      arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2001 and left in 2004.  That
      was, accordingly, a period of absence of more than  2  years  (indeed,
      over eleven years at the date of refusal).

   4. Paragraph 19 of the immigration rules provides that a person who  does
      not benefit from paragraph 18 (which enables a person to obtain  entry
      clearance provided that, inter alia, they have not been away from  the
      United Kingdom for more than two years) may nevertheless  be  admitted
      as a returning resident "if, for example, he has lived  here  most  of
      his life". There is, thus, a  discretion  that  may  be  exercised  in
      favour of the person.

   5. Accordingly, the entry clearance officer  considered  the  matter  and
      concluded as follows:-
           " . . .
                     . Given that you have not been in the UK since 2004 and
                       the  amount  of  time  you  have  spent  there  since
                       obtaining your indefinite leave to remain, I  am  not
                       satisfied  that  you  have  demonstrated   a   strong
                       connection with  the  UK.   To  be  considered  as  a
                       returning resident you need  to  show  that  you  are
                       habitually resident in the UK and that  any  absences
                       have  been  of  a  temporary  or  occasional  nature,
                       however I do not consider an absence of  over  eleven
                       years to be temporary and it  appears  that  you  are
                       settled in Sierra Leone.


                     . I have considered the compassionate circumstances  of
                       your application.   You  have  stated  in  your  visa
                       application form that you left the UK in 2004 because
                       your grandmother in Sierra Leone was  seriously  ill.
                       However, you have stated  that  you  lived  with  her
                       until 21 September 2013.  In his  letter  of  support
                       submitted with your application your father  confirms
                       that you were living with your grandmother until 2013
                       and that since returning to  Sierra  Leone  you  have
                       completed a  college  course.   He  states  that  you
                       cannot find employment in Sierra Leone and  that  you
                       have no close relatives in Sierra Leone  to  support.
                       I have considered that you are 28 years old and  that
                       you have submitted evidence that you have received an
                       education.  It is not clear why  you  are  unable  to
                       find employment.  You have submitted a limited amount
                       of money transfer slips  as  evidence  that  you  are
                       financially dependent on your father.  However, these
                       have  been  submitted  in  isolation  and  I  am  not
                       satisfied that alone they demonstrate a dependence.


           I am... satisfied my decision  to  refuse  your  application  is
           proportionate under the Immigration Rules.


           Given all of the above, I am not satisfied that you qualify  for
           entry  as  a  returning  resident  because  you  do  meet  (sic)
           [presumably, do not meet] the requirements of paragraph 18"


   6. Underneath these passages, the notice of  decision  stated:  "You  are
      entitled to appeal against this decision under section  82(1)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".   An  appeal  form  was
      provided for this purpose.  It was also  stated:  "If  you  decide  to
      appeal against a refusal of this application,  the  decision  will  be
      reviewed, with your grounds of appeal and the supporting documents you
      provide".




   The appellant attempts to appeal


   7. The appellant filed a notice of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  tribunal
      against the entry clearance officer's decision.  As promised  in  that
      decision, an entry clearance manager reviewed the  grounds  of  appeal
      and  supporting  documents.   Having  done  so,  the  entry  clearance
      manager, in a decision dated 13  November  2015,  concluded  that  the
      decision of the entry  clearance  officer  was  correct.   It  was  in
      accordance with the law and  the  immigration  rules;  and  the  entry
      clearance manager was not  prepared  to  exercise  discretion  in  the
      appellant's favour.



   8. The entry clearance manager then said:-


           "I have considered the appellant's rights  under  Article  8  of
           ECHR.  Article 8 of the ECHR is a qualified right, proportionate
           with the need to maintain an effective  immigration  and  border
           control and decisions under the Immigration Rules are deemed  to
           be  compliant  with  human  rights  legislation.   Although  the
           appellant may have a family life with relatives resident in  the
           UK, I am satisfied that  the  decision  is  proportionate  under
           Article 8(2).  I note that no satisfactory reason has  been  put
           forward as to why the appellant's family in the UK are unable to
           travel to Sierra Leone to be with the appellant. I am  therefore
           satisfied that the decision is justified by the need to maintain
           an effective immigration and border control.


           I have also considered whether the particular circumstances  set
           out in the appeal constitute  exceptional  circumstances  which,
           consistent with the right to respect for private and family life
           contained in Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
           Rights, might warrant a grant of entry clearance to  the  United
           Kingdom outside  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
           Following a thorough assessment of the  appeal  I  am  satisfied
           that there is no basis for such a claim.


           Given all of the above, I do not consider  that  the  evidential
           balance has been tipped in the appellant's favour, as I maintain
           the decision to refuse entry clearance ".


   9. At some later point, the appellant travelled to the United Kingdom and
      was granted temporary admission. She made an asylum claim,  which  has
      subsequently been withdrawn.




   Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal


  10. On 22 December 2016, the appellant's  appeal  came  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Eldridge, sitting  at  Harmondsworth.   The  presenting
      officer submitted to the judge  as  a  "preliminary  issue"  that  the
      appellant had no right of appeal "because of  the  changes  in  appeal
      rights brought about by the Immigration Act 2014" (paragraph 4 of  the
      judge's decision).   Mr  Haastrup,  who  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant, sought an adjournment of an hour  to  consider  the  matter
      "which  had  been  raised  only  at  the  hearing".   Judge  Eldridge,
      accordingly,  granted  a  short  adjournment,  following   which   the
      presenting officer renewed her submissions and Mr  Haastrup  addressed
      the judge on the issue.  Mr Haastrupt sought  a  further  adjournment,
      which was not opposed by the presenting officer.

  11. Judge Eldridge adjourned the matter, which he  considered  to  be  "an
      issue of great importance to the appellant", fixing a new hearing date
      of 13 January 2017.

  12. On that date, Judge Eldridge heard submissions on the issue of whether
      there was a right of appeal.  In a decision promulgated on 25  January
      2017, the judge held as follows:-


           "8. The Immigration Act 2014 made considerable  changes  to  the
           rights of appeal under the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
           Act 2002. The changes made by the 2014 Act have been brought  in
           effect (sic) in a series of Orders, and the most  pertinent  are
           Commencement  Order  No.  3  made  on  15   October   2014   and
           Commencement Order No. 4 made on 25 February 2015.


           9. My understanding of the legal position is that there  is  now
           no right of appeal in respect of applications made after 6 April
           2015, unless the decision concerned is a refusal of  an  asylum,
           protection of (sic) human rights claim.  This was not  claim  on
           any of those three bases but as a returning resident.  A  "human
           rights  claim" is defined in [section] 113 of the 2002 Act, and,
           whilst it is clear  that  the  appellant  mentioned  her  father
           living in this country and a sister, her application was put  on
           the basis of her being a returning resident and not otherwise.


           10. I conclude that there was no valid appeal before me  because
           the appellant had no right of appeal".


  13. On 18 August 2017, Acting Resident Judge Appleyard (as  he  then  was)
      refused permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Judge  Appleyard
      referred to a notice, purporting to be  made  under  rule  22  of  the
      Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) Rules  2014,  which  had  apparently  been  sent  with  Judge
      Eldridge's decision, stating that  "the  notice  of  appeal  you  have
      lodged is invalid and the Tribunal will  take  no  further  action  in
      relation to it".


  14. Judge Appleyard said:-


           "2. That being the position there  is  accordingly  no  decision
           against which  the  appellant  can  seek  permission  to  appeal
           against and in the circumstances her remedy would have  been  to
           seek judicial review".


  15. With respect, that statement is wrong.  Compatibly with the  judgments
      of the Court of Appeal in JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 78, Practice Statement  3  (Where  the
      Tribunal may not accept a notice of appeal) of the Practice Statements
      of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal  and
      the Upper Tribunal makes it plain that the scope for issuing a  notice
      under rule 22 is limited.  Rule 22 may be employed  where  the  First-
      tier Tribunal scrutinises a notice of appeal as  soon  as  practicable
      after it has been given, and concludes that no right of appeal exists.
       Where, as in the present case, no rule 22 notice was issued  at  that
      stage and the matter proceeded to a  hearing,  rule  22  can  play  no
      further role.  Practice Direction 3.4 says:


           "3.4 The fact that the hearing date may have been given  to  the
           parties does not mean that the appeal must be treated as  valid.
           Accordingly, if a further hearing (including a CMR hearing),  it
           transpires that the notice  of  appeal  does  not  relate  to  a
           decision against  which  there  is,  in  the  circumstances,  an
           exercisable rights of appeal, the Tribunal must so find; but  it
           will do so in the form of a determination, rather than by  means
           of a notice under First-tier rule 22".

  16. In other words, once this point is reached, the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal, holding that it lacked  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
      notice of appeal and grounds, may be challenged on appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal.  This was recognised by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen  who,  on
      20 October 2017, granted permission to appeal on the basis that it was
      "arguable that a human rights claim was made in  this  case  and  that
      therefore the appellant had a right to appeal".




   The appellant's application for entry clearance as a returning resident

  17. The  entry  clearance  officer's  decision,  as  we  have  seen,  made
      reference to information, supplied by the appellant in connection with
      her application for leave to enter  as  a  returning  resident,  which
      concerned family members in Sierra Leone and the United  Kingdom.   In
      answer to the question "What have you been doing since  you  left  the
      UK?", the appellant  said  "I  was  living  with  my  grandmother  and
      attending school.  After High  School  I  attended  the  Opportunities
      Industrial Centre ... where I obtained  a  certificate  in  Electrical
      Installation".  Asked why she had left the UK, the appellant  replied,
      "I was living with my grandmother who had taken (sic)  seriously  ill.
      She sadly passed away on 21 September 2013".

  18. In answer to the question "Why do you wish to return to the  UK?"  the
      appellant said "To join the rest of my family, and  finish  education.
      Since my grandma passed away in 2013, I have felt lonely  without  [my
      family] in the United Kingdom  I feel guilty  for  not  supporting  my
      grandmother in her last days... living in the same house  still  makes
      me feel even worse".

  19. A letter from  the  appellant's  father  in  the  UK,  sent  with  the
      application, referred to the appellant having  been  "taken  back"  to
      Sierra Leone in 2004.  Since her grandmother's  death,  the  appellant
      was said by her father to have


         "been struggling as she has no close  relatives  to  give  her  the
        emotional support she needs as she had been  practicably  raised  by
        her grandmother.  She does not  have  contact  with  her  biological
        mother.  Her biological mother has had another relationship to start
        a new family.  I would appreciate if Juliana could  be  granted  the
        opportunity to return to the United Kingdom  in  order  for  her  to
        reunite with myself and her sister. This will make it easier for  me
        to support her while she is living with me".



       The letter went on to state that the appellant's father "would  have
      applied for her very much earlier, but due to the  Ebola  outbreak  in
      the sub-region, I thought it  fit  to  wait  until  the  epidemic  had
      subsided".



Appeal against refusal of a human rights claim

  20. Section 82(1)(b) of the 2002 Act provides that  a  person  may  appeal
      against the refusal of a human rights claim.  Section 113 of  the  Act
      defines such a claim as:




        "a claim made by a person to the Secretary  of  State  ...  that  to
        remove the person from or require him to leave the United Kingdom or
        to refuse him entry into the United Kingdom would be unlawful  under
        section 6 of the Human rights Act 1998 ..."


  21. The respondent has issued guidance for Home Office staff in a document
      entitled "Rights of Appeal".  The current version is that published on
      9 October 2017.  The part of the guidance under the heading "What is a
      human rights claim?" on pages 9 to 15 of the document is  set  out  in
      the Appendix to this decision.


  22. Before us, Mr Deller submitted that the present case may not provide a
      satisfactory vehicle for examining in detail what constitutes a  human
      rights claim for the purposes of  section  82  of  the  2002  Act,  as
      amended by the Immigration Act 2014.  We do, however, consider that it
      is possible to say the following.




(a) What is a human rights claim?

  23. As regards the guidance found on page 11 of the document, we  consider
      the respondent may in due course need to  defend  the  position  taken
      there, that a  person  who  expressly  makes  a  human  rights  claim,
      asserting that it is a breach of their rights under Article 8  not  to
      be granted ILR (or, we would  add,  entry  clearance)  is  not  to  be
      treated as having made a human  rights  claim  under  section  113  if
      "nothing more is provided than a bare statement of this sort".


  24.  A "bare" or "unsubstantiated" claim is, however, very arguably, still
      a claim.  In such a  situation,  the  appropriate  course  may  be  to
      certify under section 94 of the 2002 Act, on the basis that the  claim
      is clearly unfounded.

  25. The guidance is on stronger ground, in our view, in  stating  that  in
      order for an application properly to raise human rights, and therefore
      constitute a claim,


         "it is not necessary for the application form to say  so.   If  the
        application does not state that it is a human rights claim, you will
        need to consider what the applicant's reasons  are  for  wanting  to
        remain in the UK and decide whether those reasons amount to a  human
        rights claim".

  26. We think this must be correct.  The examples which the guidance gives,
      of an application for leave to remain on medical grounds or to  remain
      whilst court proceedings in  the  United  Kingdom  are  ongoing,   are
      plainly ones where, even if the applicant does not refer expressly  to
      his or her human rights, the applicant, is in  fact,  making  a  human
      rights claim.

  27. Other cases, however,  may  be  much  less  clear-cut.   The  guidance
      provides that certain applications under the immigration rules are  to
      be treated by the respondent as constituting, in effect, human  rights
      claims.  These include a number of "overseas" applications,  including
      ones made under Part 8 of the Rules where the sponsor is  present  and
      settled in the United Kingdom or has certain refugee  or  humanitarian
      protection status.  Certain applications made by reference to Appendix
      FM (family members) also covered by the guidance.


  28.  What, though, of applications made by reference to  other  provisions
      of  the  immigration  rules?   In  the  present  case,  the  appellant
      completed an application form  for  entry  clearance  as  a  returning
      resident under paragraphs 18  and  19  of  the  rules.   She  did  not
      expressly claim, whether in the application form or  the  accompanying
      documentation, that a refusal to grant her re-entry  into  the  United
      Kingdom would  violate  her  ECHR  Article  8  Rights.   Nevertheless,
      compatibly with the guidance, the respondent would need to  treat  her
      application as including a human rights claim if it appeared from  the
      totality of the information supplied that the appellant was  advancing
      a case which, on  the  facts,  properly  required  the  caseworker  to
      consider whether  a  discretionary  decision  to  be  made  under  the
      relevant immigration rule or rules needed to be taken by reference  to
      Article 8 issues, or to look beyond the provisions of the  immigration
      rules and decide, if  those  rules  were  not  satisfied,  whether  an
      Article 8 case was nevertheless also being advanced.


  29.  As we have seen, the appellant was putting forward,  as  reasons  for
      wishing to return, (a) that she had gone to Sierra Leone  in  2004  to
      look after her grandmother; (b) that her grandmother  had  died,  with
      the result that the appellant was left without any element  of  family
      in Sierra Leone; (c) that she was lonely without her relatives in  the
      United Kingdom; and (d) that she  wished  to  rejoin  her  father  and
      sister in the United Kingdom.


  30.  The  letter  from  the  appellant's  father  asserted  (a)  that  the
      appellant, despite her  qualification  as  an  electrician,  had  been
      unable to obtain a permanent job in Sierra Leone;  (b)  that  she  was
      being supported by the father; (c) that she had no close relatives  in
      Sierra Leone to give her emotional support; and (d) that it  would  be
      easier to support the appellant if she were living with the family  in
      the United Kingdom.

  31. Having regard to the guidance,  which  in  this  respect  we  consider
      properly accords with the meaning and scope of section 113 of the 2002
      Act, the appellant's application was, we find, a human rights claim.


(b) What is a refusal of a human rights claim?


  32. The fact that, as is evident from  the  entrance  clearance  officer's
      decision, that officer did not accept the  strength  of  the  asserted
      family life between the appellant and  her  relatives  in  the  United
      Kingdom, including her alleged dependants, does not, of  course,  cast
      doubt on whether  a  human  rights  claim  was  being  made.   On  the
      contrary, these passages of the decision make it plain, in  our  view,
      that the entry clearance officer was examining these matters  as  ECHR
      Article 8 issues, in  order  to  decide,  in  all  the  circumstances,
      whether the appellant should be re-admitted as a returning resident.


  33. As we have seen, paragraph 19 of the immigration rules confers a broad
      discretion  on  the  entry  clearance  officer.   In  the   particular
      circumstances of this case, it accordingly  matters  not  whether  the
      entry clearance officer was considering the human rights claim of  the
      appellant as  an  aspect  of  the  decision  whether  to  grant  entry
      clearance under the rules or, alternatively, whether to do so  outside
      the rules, expressly by reference to Article 8.  The statement in  the
      decision that refusing the application  "is  proportionate  under  the
      immigration rules" probably indicates that the entry clearance officer
      was taking the former course.  In either  event,  however,  the  entry
      clearance officer was refusing the appellant's human rights claim.

  34. As we have also seen, the entry clearance manager's  review  expressly
      considered the appellant's Article  8  rights.   The  entry  clearance
      manager was responding to the grounds of appeal. These contended  that
      "refusing appellant to join her family in the  UK  would  violate  her
      human right under Article 8 ECHR", on the basis that the:


          "appellant has  strong  connections  in  the  UK.  All  her  close
         relatives live in the UK.  Her father and sister (British Citizens)
         live in the UK" [and] appellant no longer has any  close  relatives
         in Sierra Leone".


      There were also said to be "exceptional reasons  why  appellant  lived
      outside the UK for over two years".

  35. As a matter of law, the issue of whether a human rights claim has been
      refused must be judged by reference to the decision which is  said  to
      constitute the refusal of such a claim.  The entry clearance manager's
      review cannot, for this purpose, be part of that earlier decision.  If
      a person has not made an application  which  constitutes,  in  law,  a
      human rights claim, she cannot change that position by  raising  human
      rights issues in her grounds of appeal to the Tribunal.  By  the  same
      token, the entry clearance manager's review cannot  re-characterise  a
      decision of the respondent which  was  not,  in  its  own  terms,  the
      refusal of a human rights claim.


  36.   That  said,  however,  both  the  grounds  of   appeal   and,   more
      particularly, the terms of the entrance  clearance  manager's  review,
      may, depending on the circumstances, shed light on the true nature  of
      the application and its refusal.   In  the  present  case,  the  entry
      clearance manager's review may, we consider, be seen as casting  light
      on what the entry clearance officer had been doing  when  she  refused
      the appellant's application.

  37. For these reasons, based  on  the  application  and  its  accompanying
      materials, we find that the appellant made a human rights claim, which
      was refused by the entry clearance  officer  on  26  June  2015.   The
      statement in the notice of decision, that the appellant had a right of
      appeal to the Tribunal, was, accordingly, entirely correct.

  38.  Although  it  has  played  no  part  in  our  determination  of   the
      jurisdictional issue, we should  perhaps  mention  that  matters  have
      moved on, in that witness statements have been filed which assert that
      the appellant was returned to Sierra Leone by her father in  2004,  as
      some sort of punishment for her unruly behaviour.   Whether  there  is
      any truth in this  will  need  to  be  determined  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  In doing so, that Tribunal will no doubt wish to assess the
      credibility of the appellant and  her  witnesses.   This  will  entail
      consideration of the fact  that,  after  her  arrival  in  the  United
      Kingdom,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis   that   her
      grandmother was the head of a secret society and  that  the  appellant
      was in fear of having to take over the running of that society.   This
      asylum claim was specifically withdrawn by the appellant in  September
      2016 (see paragraph 9 above).



Decision

  39.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an  error  of  law.
      Contrary to what is said in that decision, the Tribunal had before  it
      a valid appeal, which needed to be decided.  We remit the case to  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


                                                     The Hon Mr Justice Lane
                                                                   President
                                                             1 February 2018





























                                  Appendix


                                                       HOME OFFICE


                                                      Rights of appeal
                                                          Version 6.0


       Guidance on where there is a right of appeal against decisions
        in immigration cases, including mechanisms to prevent repeat
           rights of appeal and prevent delay from appeals against
                              unfounded claims.


                                    ....


           What is a human rights claim?


           This section explains what amounts to a human rights claim and
           how you identify and consider such claims.


           How to identify a human rights claim


           In the UK: application under the Immigration Rules


           The applications listed in this section and made under the
           Immigration Rules are human rights applications and the starting
           position is that there is a right of appeal against refusal.


           Where paragraph 353 (further submissions) applies and the
           further submissions do not amount to a fresh claim or where the
           claim is certified under section 96, there will be no right of
           appeal, and if certified under section 94 or 94B no right of
           appeal until the person has left the UK.


           These applications can be made while the applicant has leave
           under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 as a consequence of
           an ongoing appeal against the refusal of another application.


           No other applications under the rules other than those in this
           section can be made where the applicant has 3C leave. If the
           applicant withdraws their appeal, they will no longer be
           prevented from making any other application under the rules.
           Alternatively, the applicant may make an application once their
           appeal rights are exhausted.


           The relevant applications are those made under:


           . Paragraph 276B (long residence)
           . Paragraphs 276ADE(1) or 276DE (private life)
           . Paragraphs 276U and 276AA (partner or child of a member of HM
           Forces)
           . Paragraphs 276AD and 276AG (partner or child of a member of HM
           Forces), where: o the sponsor is a foreign or Commonwealth
           member of HM Forces and has at least 4 years' reckonable service
           in HM Forces at the date of application
           . Part 8 of these Rules (family members) where: o the sponsor is
           present and settled in the UK or has refugee or humanitarian
           protection in the UK, not paragraphs 319AA to 319J (points-based
           system (PBS) dependents), paragraphs 284, 287, 295D or 295G
           (sponsor granted settlement as a PBS Migrant)
           . Part 11 (asylum)
           . Part 4 or Part 7 of Appendix Armed Forces (partner or child of
           a member of HM Forces) where: o the sponsor is a British Citizen
           or has at least 4 years' reckonable service in HM Forces at the
           date of application


           . Appendix FM (family members), not: section BPILR (bereavement)
           or section DVILR (domestic violence)


           Refusal notice to be served: Asylum (except in deportation
           cases)
           . ASL.0015.ACD.IA (refusal of protection with a right of appeal
           with section 96 option to certify)
           . ASL.1000.IA (refusal of protection where the applicant failed
           to attend the screening interview - decision not certified)
           . ASL.1006.IA (protection refusal of dependents with section 96
           option)
           . ASL.1956 (refusal of protection certified under section 94)
           . ASL.2704. (rejection of further submissions under paragraph
           353)
           Refusal notice to be served: all other human rights applications


           . ICD.3050.IA (refusal with a right of appeal)
           . ICD.1182.IA (refusal with section 94 certification)
           . ICD.3051.IA (refusal with no appeal because not a fresh claim
           under paragraph Rule 353)
           . ICD.3052.IA (refusal with no appeal because of section 96
           certification)


           In the UK: application outside the Immigration Rules


           Applications for leave to remain outside the rules on human
           rights grounds are made on forms FLR(O) for further leave to
           remain (LTR) and SET(O) for indefinite leave to remain (ILR).


           It is important to note that these forms are only to be used for
           human rights applications where there is no specific form
           available. For example, neither the FLR(O) nor the SET(O) should
           be used for applications under Appendix FM or on the private
           life route under paragraphs 276ADE and 276DE. Where the
           applicant uses the wrong form, you must reject the application
           as invalid under paragraph 34 Immigration Rules.


           These forms are multi-purpose and not all applications made on
           these forms are human rights claims.


           The FLR(O) and SET(O) forms require the applicant to tick a box
           indicating which application they are using the form for. Only
           one box may be ticked.
           It is only where the applicant ticks the box 'Other purposes or
           reasons not covered by other application forms' that it should
           be treated as a human rights claim. Though even if this box is
           ticked, the application may not be a human rights claim.
           In order to decide whether the application is one for a human
           rights claim, you should consider the following questions:


           . does the application say that it is a human rights claim?
           . does the application raise issues that may amount to a human
           rights claim even though it does not expressly refer to human
           rights or a human rights claim?
           . are the matters raised capable of engaging human rights?


           Determining if a human rights claim has been made


           For the purposes of Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and
           Asylum Act 2002 (appeals in respect of protection and human
           rights claims), a human rights claim is defined as a claim made
           by a person that to remove them from or require them to leave
           the UK or to refuse him entry into the UK would be unlawful
           under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


           The form does not ask the applicant to indicate whether the
           claim being made is a human rights claim. You will need to
           identify whether a human rights claim is being made so that you
           know whether to serve a section 120 notice on receipt of the
           application and whether a refusal will attract a right of
           appeal.
           Does the application say this is a human rights claim? If so,
           does the application set out why this is a human rights claim?
           An application may say no more than:


           . I am making a human rights claim
           . It is a breach of my rights under Article 8 not to grant me
           ILR


           The claim needs to be particularised in order to be considered.
           If nothing more is provided than a bare statement of this sort,
           it is not a human rights claim and should be refused with no
           right of appeal.


           In order for an application to raise human rights, it is not
           necessary for the application form to say so. If the application
           does not state that it is a human rights claim you will need to
           consider what the applicant's reasons are for wanting to remain
           in the UK and decide whether those reasons amount to a human
           rights claim.


           For example, an applicant seeks leave to remain on medical
           grounds, to receive medical treatment or has a fear of return or
           of an undignified death because medical facilities in their home
           country are unavailable, unaffordable, inaccessible or of a
           lower standard than the UK. This should be considered as an
           Article 3 and


           Article 8 medical claim. For further guidance see related link:
           Recognising an implied claim.


           A further example would be where an applicant states that they
           are engaged in court proceedings and need to remain in the UK in
           order to conduct them or to appear as a witness. This should be
           considered as an Article 6 claim.
           It is not possible to give a full list of the facts that may
           amount to a human rights claim as individuals may raise any
           facts in any combination. Considering human rights claims
           provides a list of all human rights.
           You should ask yourself whether, having regard to the human
           rights protected by the European Convention on Human Rights
           (ECHR), is it obvious that the application relates to one of
           those rights. If it is obvious that the application relates to
           one of these rights, a human rights claim may have been made.


           Determining if human rights are engaged


           If the claim raises human rights, consider whether the claim
           made is capable of engaging the human right relied on. This will
           involve examination of the merits of the claim.


           You should refer to considering human rights guidance which sets
           out how to undertake a substantive examination of the merits of
           human rights claims.
           If no human rights claim has been made, the application should
           be refused with no right of appeal and no right to seek
           administrative review. You should serve notice ICD.4985.


           It is not generally possible to make a human rights claim as
           part of an application made under the Immigration Rules except
           where the application is deemed to be a human rights claim, or
           the claim is made in a section of the application seeking
           further grounds to enter or remain in UK. See the section on how
           to identify a human rights claim for more information.


           Notices to be served


           If the claim made does engage the human right relied upon, a
           human rights claim has been made. If the claim is refused, the
           appropriate notice from the following list should be served
           (except in deportation cases):


           . ICD.3050.IA (refusal with a right of appeal)
           . ICD.1182.IA (refusal with section 94 certification)
           . ICD.3051.IA (refusal with no right of appeal because not a
           fresh claim under paragraph 353)
           . ICD.3052.IA (refusal with no right of appeal because of
           section 96 certification)


           In the UK: applicant is detained


           Any human rights claim must be made direct to a prison officer,
           a prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a
           member of Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention.
           See paragraph GEN.1.9 Appendix FM, of the Immigration Rules.


           There is no requirement to complete a specific form or follow a
           specific process.
           Where removal is imminent, it is more likely that the applicant
           will not be required to follow a formal process to make a claim.




           The individual to whom the claim is made should pass the
           submissions made to a member of Home Office staff to consider
           the questions in Determining if a human rights claim has been
           made to establish whether a human rights claim has been made.


           Notices to be served


           If a human rights claim has been made, its refusal will attract
           an appeal right. If removal is imminent, consideration should be
           given to certification of the claim under section 94 (clearly
           unfounded) or section 96 (late claim). The appropriate notice
           from the following should be served (except in deportation
           cases):
           . ICD.3050.IA (refusal with a right of appeal)
           . ICD.1182.IA (refusal with section 94 certification)
           . ICD.3051.IA (refusal with no right of appeal because not a
           fresh claim under paragraph 353)
           . ICD.3052.IA (refusal with no right of appeal because of
           section 96 certification)


           Overseas: applications under the Immigration Rules


           The following claims made under the Immigration Rules are human
           rights applications and attract a right of appeal against
           refusal:


           . Paragraphs 276U and 276AA (partner or child of a member of HM
           Forces)
           . Paragraphs 276AD and 276AG (partner or child of a member of HM
           Forces) where the sponsor: o is a foreign or Commonwealth member
           of HM Forces
           o has at least 4 years' reckonable service in HM Forces at the
           date of application
           . Part 8 of these Rules (family members) where the sponsor: o is
           present and settled in the UK
           o has refugee or humanitarian protection status in the UK, but
           not under paragraphs 319AA to 319J (points-based system (PBS)
           dependents), paragraphs (281-283), (sponsor granted settlement
           as a PBS Migrant)
           . Part 4 or Part 7 of Appendix Armed Forces (partner or child of
           a member of HM Forces) where: o the sponsor is a British Citizen
           or has at least 4 years' reckonable service in HM Forces at the
           date of application
           . Appendix FM (family members), but not section BPILR
           (bereavement) or section DVILR (domestic violence)


           Where a human rights claim has been made and there is a right of
           appeal serve refusal notice GV51 (refusal with right of appeal).




           This guidance does not cover decision-making where the
           application is made under one of these routes. Entry clearance
           officers (ECO) should refer to Appendix FM guidance, family
           applications transitional cases (Part 8) guidance or armed
           forces guidance.


           Overseas: applications outside the Immigration Rules


           Outside the UK, applications based on a human rights claim
           outside the Immigration Rules must form part of a valid
           application for entry clearance.
           The list under section overseas: application under the
           Immigration Rules gives the forms available for human rights
           applications under the rules. Where applicants
           cannot find an appropriate form or believe that they cannot meet
           the requirements of the Immigration Rules, they must contact
           their local visa application centre.
           If the applicant cannot meet the requirements of the rules, the
           local visa application centre should tell them to complete the
           visitor form (VAF1 A to K).


           Part 9 of a visitor form allows the applicant to set out any
           other information that should be considered as part of the
           application. This can include a human rights claim that leave
           should be granted outside the rules.


           Decision making process


           When a visitor application is received in which Part 9 has been
           completed, you must first consider whether a human rights claim
           has been made. Guidance on identifying whether such a claim has
           been made is set out in this section.
           If a human rights claim has been made, you must go on to
           consider it substantively and decide whether it is to be refused
           or granted. The answer to this question will determine whether
           the application can be dealt with at the visa application centre
           or whether it must be referred to the Referred Cases Unit (RCU).




           Where the application obviously falls for refusal, it can be
           dealt with at the visa application centre. An Entry Clearance
           Officer (ECO) can refuse an application outside the Immigration
           Rules. The refusal of a human rights claim will attract a right
           of appeal.
           Where the application has merit and may be granted, the ECO must
           refer the application to the Referred Cases Unit (RCU). This is
           because an ECO cannot grant an application outside the
           Immigration Rules.


           Determining if a human rights claim has been made


           The visitor form does not ask the applicant to indicate whether
           the claim being made is a human rights claim. Therefore the ECO
           will need to identify whether a human rights claim has been
           made.
           It is important that the ECO gives careful consideration to
           whether a human rights claim has been made. If no human rights
           claim has been made, the refusal of the application does not
           attract a right of appeal.
           ECOs should consider the following questions:


           . does the application say that it is a human rights claim?
           . does the application raise issues that may amount to a human
           rights claim even though it does not expressly refer to human
           rights or a human rights claim?
           . are the matters raised capable of engaging human rights?
           . what are the claim's prospects of success?


           Guidance on each stage is set out in the considering human
           rights claims in visitor applications guidance.
           What to do once the claim's prospects of success have been
           established
           If the human rights claim is to be refused, the ECO should issue
           a refusal by serving notice GV51 (refusal with right of appeal).


           If the ECO considers that the claim should be granted, or
           believes that it may result in a grant, the application should
           be referred to RCU who will consider the claim. The application
           will be returned to the ECO for refusal and service of GV51
           (ROA).



