
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

TK (gay man) St Lucia [2019] UKUT 00092 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 December 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     TK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

On the evidence adduced to this Tribunal, the appellant, as  an  openly  gay
man in St Lucia, has a well-founded fear of persecution on  the  grounds  of
his sexuality. (This case is not reported as a  country  guidance  case  but
records the evidence leading to the Tribunal's conclusion at para [54].)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

I now remake the decision on the appellant's appeal.  This follows an
earlier decision of mine dated 4 March 2018, in which I found that the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 26 April 2018, contains
an error of law and must be set aside.

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Saint Lucia ('St Lucia') and is 26 years old.
 He arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK') on 30 May 2017 and claimed asylum
on 7 September 2017.  After hearing detailed oral evidence relatively
recently at a hearing on 17 April 2018, the FTT accepted that the appellant
is gay.  The FTT was concerned that adverse inferences could be drawn
regarding the appellant's credibility, as a consequence of his delay in
claiming asylum.  The FTT noted that the appellant is a well-educated
person who held a job in retail banking in St Lucia and did not accept his
explanation for not claiming asylum sooner.  Nonetheless, the FTT
considered that the appellant gave detailed, plausible and consistent
evidence regarding the development of his awareness of his sexuality.  The
FTT noted that the appellant noticed he was attracted to males from a young
age but adopted an "avoidance strategy".  He did not speak to others about
his sexuality and took an "extremely cautious" approach to revealing his
sexuality whilst residing in St Lucia.  He was discreet about his sexuality
at least in part due to fear but he was also concerned about prevailing
societal norms in St Lucia.  Since arriving in the UK the appellant has had
a brief relationship, which ended when he left London for Manchester.

The FTT accepted that the appellant joined 'Grindr' (a dating website for
gay men), whilst still residing in St Lucia, in January 2014, and has been
a fairly active user since then.  The FTT also accepted that the appellant
was able to avoid anyone on the site realising he was in St Lucia by
adjusting his profile and removing any reference to distance.  The FTT
regarded the precautions taken by the appellant in his use of Grindr as
consistent with "his extremely cautious approach to revealing his sexual
orientation" whilst in St Lucia.

The FTT concluded that the "threshold of persecution suffered or
apprehended" by the appellant as a gay man had not been reached.  In my
decision identifying an error of law in the FTT's decision, I explained
that the FTT noted there were "few incidents" of violence against gay men
but failed to engage with the apparently cogent evidence that there might
be more violence in St. Lucia than the statistics  or reports indicated,
because of the underreporting of crimes and incidents of victimisation
against gay people, and this failure was sufficient to impugn the
reliability of the FTT's overall finding that there is no apprehended or
prospective risk for those who are openly gay in St Lucia.  The FTT's
finding that the appellant is gay was not subject to any cross-appeal and
is a preserved finding of fact.

I now turn to the issues to be determined by me, when re-making the
decision.

Approach to this case

This has not been designated a country guidance case.  The number of asylum
applicants from St Lucia is very low and a St Lucian country guidance
decision was considered unnecessary.  However, both representatives agreed
to prepare and conduct the appeal in a similar manner to a country guidance
case.  It is with this in mind that the appellant prepared a consolidated
bundle of all relevant country background information from a variety of
sources and instructed a country expert, Dr Bere Mahoney.  She attended the
hearing and was cross-examined by Mr McVeety.

After the hearing, I considered that the quantity and quality of the
material and submissions before me might justify the case being designated
a formal country guidance decision and wrote to the parties to seek their
views.  The appellant agreed with this course, but the respondent objected
to the case being retrospectively classified as a country guidance decision
given the small number of asylum seekers from St Lucia.  As the parties
have been unable to agree, this decision does not provide country guidance
in the formal sense.  The decision however seeks to comprehensively set out
conclusions regarding the treatment of openly gay men in St Lucia, having
considered wide-ranging country background evidence.

The issues in dispute and applicable legal framework

At the beginning of the hearing, both representatives agreed that the
correct approach to determining whether a gay person is at risk of
persecution is set out in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  At [82] Lord
Rodger said this:


             "When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a well-
             founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  tribunal
             must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  evidence
             that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
             potential persecutors in his country of  nationality.  If  so,
             the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is  satisfied  on
             the available evidence that gay people who lived openly  would
             be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's  country  of
             nationality. If so, the tribunal must go on to  consider  what
             the individual applicant would do if he were returned to  that
             country. If the  applicant  would  in  fact  live  openly  and
             thereby be exposed to a real risk of persecution, then he  has
             a well-founded fear of persecution - even if  he  could  avoid
             the risk by living "discreetly". If, on the  other  hand,  the
             tribunal concludes that  the  applicant  would  in  fact  live
             discreetly and so avoid persecution, it  must  go  on  to  ask
             itself why he would do so. If the tribunal concludes that  the
             applicant would choose to live discreetly simply because  that
             was how he himself would wish to live, or  because  of  social
             pressures, e  g,  not  wanting  to  distress  his  parents  or
             embarrass  his  friends,  then  his  application   should   be
             rejected. Social pressures of  that  kind  do  not  amount  to
             persecution and  the  Convention  does  not  offer  protection
             against them. Such  a  person  has  no  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do  with
             any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way  of
             life which  means  that  he  is  not  in  fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
             tribunal concludes that a material reason  for  the  applicant
             living discreetly on  his  return  would  be  a  fear  of  the
             persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as  a
             gay man, then,  other  things  being  equal,  his  application
             should be accepted. Such a person has a well-founded  fear  of
             persecution. To reject his application on the ground  that  he
             could avoid the persecution by living discreetly would  be  to
             defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -
             his right to live freely and openly as a gay man without  fear
             of persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing him to
             live  freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man  without  fear   of
             persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that right by
             affording the applicant a surrogate for  the  protection  from
             persecution which  his  country  of  nationality  should  have
             afforded him."

Lord Hope set out the approach described by Lord Rodger in his own words,
by reference to a staged approach, at [35].


             "(a) The first stage, of course, is to  consider  whether  the
             applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of
             that orientation he will not be entitled to be  treated  as  a
             member of the particular social group. But I would regard this
             part of the test as having been satisfied if  the  applicant's
             case is that he is  at  risk  of  persecution  because  he  is
             suspected of being gay, if his past history shows that this is
             in fact the case.
             (b) The next stage is to examine a group  of  questions  which
             are directed to what his situation will  be  on  return.  This
             part of the inquiry is directed to what  will  happen  in  the
             future. The  Home  Office's  Country  of  Origin  report  will
             provide the background. There will  be  little  difficulty  in
             holding that in countries such as Iran and  Cameroon  gays  or
             persons who are believed to be gay  are  persecuted  and  that
             persecution is something that may reasonably  be  feared.  The
             question is how each applicant, looked at  individually,  will
             conduct himself if returned and how others will react to  what
             he does. Those others will include everyone with whom he  will
             come in contact, in private as well as in public. The  way  he
             conducts himself may vary from one situation to another,  with
             varying degrees of  risk.  But  he  cannot  and  must  not  be
             expected to conceal aspects of his sexual orientation which he
             is unwilling to conceal, even from those  whom  he  knows  may
             disapprove of it. If he fears persecution as a result and that
             fear is well-founded, he will be entitled  to  asylum  however
             unreasonable his refusal to resort to concealment may be.  The
             question what is reasonably tolerable  has  no  part  in  this
             inquiry.
             (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
             able to do in the country of his nationality  everything  that
             he can do openly in the country whose protection he  seeks  is
             not the test. As I said earlier (see para 15), the  Convention
             was not directed to reforming  the  level  of  rights  in  the
             country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach the  issue
             on the  basis  that  the  purpose  of  the  Convention  is  to
             guarantee to an applicant who is  gay  that  he  can  live  as
             freely and as openly as a gay person as he would be able to do
             if he were not returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the
             human rights standards  that  are  applied  by  the  receiving
             country within its own territory. The focus throughout must be
             on what will happen in the country of origin.
             (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will  in
             fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is
             to consider why he will do so.  If  this  will  simply  be  in
             response to social pressures  or  for  cultural  or  religious
             reasons of his own choosing and  not  because  of  a  fear  of
             persecution, his claim for asylum must be rejected. But if the
             reason why he will resort to concealment is that he  genuinely
             fears that  otherwise  he  will  be  persecuted,  it  will  be
             necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.
             (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have  a
             well-founded fear that he will be persecuted?"

The stages described above can be simplified as follows in the context of
this case:

                  i. Is the appellant gay, or would he be treated as gay  by
                     potential persecutors in St Lucia? if yes
                 ii. What would the appellant do if he  is  returned  to  St
                     Lucia? Will he conceal aspects of his sexuality? if yes
                iii. Why will he do so? If  it  is  because  he  fears  that
                     otherwise he will be persecuted, then
                 iv. It  is  necessary  to  consider  whether  his  fear  of
                     persecution  is   well-founded.    This   requires   an
                     assessment of whether men who are perceived to  be  gay
                     or gay men living openly in St Lucia are liable  to  or
                     face a real risk of persecution.

The FTT has already accepted that the appellant is gay and that is now
undisputed.  It is also undisputed that the appellant has lived an openly
gay life in the UK and would wish to do so in St Lucia, but would not,
because he fears that he will be seriously harmed.  Mr McVeety accepted on
behalf of the respondent that upon return to St Lucia, the appellant would
conceal aspects of his sexuality and would be discreet, as he has done in
the past.  He also accepted that a significant and material reason for this
relates to his fear of being exposed to persecution as a gay man.  In the
circumstances, Mr McVeety and Ms Wilkins agreed that this case raises a
single discrete issue: are there substantial grounds to support a real risk
that openly gay men face persecution in St Lucia?

Although the country background evidence mostly refers to LGBT individuals,
the only factual scenario before me relates to gay men.  Although there may
be an overlap between the factors affecting other minorities, neither party
invited me to consider anything other than the experiences of gay men.

The burden is upon the appellant to establish there is a real risk of
persecution. In AA v SSHD [2006] UKAIT 00061, the AIT had to consider a
risk said to arise not because of individual circumstances of the
particular appellant but because of the belonging to or perception of
belonging to a particular class of persons.  The AIT held that in such
circumstances, the appellant needs to show "only that there is a consistent
pattern of such mistreatment such that anyone returning in those
circumstances faces a real risk of coming to harm even though not everyone
does".  That approach was upheld by the Court of Appeal in AA (Zimbabwe) v
SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 149:


             "The issue is whether the evidence establishes  a  real  risk.
             The Appellant does not need to show a certainty or probability
             that all failed asylum  seekers  returned  involuntarily  will
             face serious ill-treatment upon return.  He needs to show only
             that there is a consistent pattern of such  mistreatment  such
             that anyone returning in those circumstances faces a real risk
             of coming to harm even though not everyone does."

Lord Hope summarised the test to be met in order for there to be
persecution in HJ (Iran).


             "12. The Convention does not define "persecution". But it  has
             been recognised that it is a strong word: Sepet and  Bulbul  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2003]  UKHL  15,
             [2003] 1 WLR 856, para 7, per Lord Bingham. Referring  to  the
             dictionary definitions which accord with  common  usage,  Lord
             Bingham said  that  it  indicates  the  infliction  of  death,
             torture or penalties for adherence to  a  belief  or  opinion,
             with a view to the repression or extirpation  of  it.  Article
             9(1)(a) of the EC  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  on  minimum
             standards for the qualification and status  of  third  country
             nationals or stateless persons as refugees ("the Qualification
             Directive") states that acts of persecution must
                           "(a) be sufficiently serious by their  nature  or
                           repetition as to constitute a severe violation of
                           basic human rights ... or (b) be an  accumulation
                           of  various  measures,  including  violations  of
                           human rights which is sufficiently severe  as  to
                           affect an  individual  in  a  similar  manner  as
                           mentioned in (a)."
             In  Appellant  S395/2002  v  Minister  for   Immigration   and
             Multicultural Affairs (2003) 216 CLR 473, para 40, McHugh  and
             Kirby JJ said:
                           "Persecution covers many forms  of  harm  ranging
                           from physical harm to the  loss  of  intangibles,
                           from death and  torture  to  state  sponsored  or
                           condoned  discrimination  in  social   life   and
                           employment. Whatever form the harm takes, it will
                           constitute persecution only if, by reason of  its
                           intensity  or  duration,  the  person  persecuted
                           cannot reasonably be expected to tolerate it."


             13.  To  constitute  persecution  for  the  purposes  of   the
             Convention the harm must be state sponsored or state condoned.
             Family or social disapproval in which the state  has  no  part
             lies outside its protection. As Professor J C Hathaway in  The
             Law  of  Refugee  Status  (1991),   p   112   has   explained,
             "persecution is most appropriately defined as the sustained or
             systemic failure of state protection in relation to one of the
             core  entitlements  which   has   been   recognised   by   the
             international community." The  Convention  provides  surrogate
             protection, which is activated only upon the failure of  state
             protection. The failure of state protection is central to  the
             whole system: Horvath  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2001] 1 AC 489, 495. The question is  whether  the
             home state is unable or unwilling to  discharge  its  duty  to
             establish and operate a  system  for  the  protection  against
             persecution of its own nationals..."

It is worth repeating Lord Hope's reminder in HJ (Iran) that the surrogate
protection of the Refugee Convention is only activated upon the failure of
state protection.   In Horvath v Home Secretary [2001] 1 AC 489 Lord Hope
said this:

             "...I consider that the obligation to afford refugee status
             arises only if the person's own state is unable or unwilling
             to discharge its own duty to protect its own nationals. I
             think that it follows that, in order to satisfy the fear test
             in a non-state agent case, the applicant for refugee status
             must show that the persecution which he fears consist of acts
             of violence or ill-treatment against which the state is unable
             or unwilling to provide protection. The applicant may have a
             well-founded fear of threats to his life due to famine or
             civil war or of isolated acts of violence or ill-treatment for
             a Convention reason which may be perpetrated against him. But
             the risk, however severe, and the fear, however well-founded,
             do not entitle him to the status of a refugee. The Convention
             has a more limited objective, the limits of which are
             identified by the list of Convention reasons and by the
             principle of surrogacy."

Lord Clyde put it in similar terms at 510f, as follows:


             "There must be in place a system of  domestic  protection  and
             machinery for the detection,  prosecution  and  punishment  of
             actings contrary to the purposes which the Convention requires
             to have protected.  More importantly there must be an  ability
             and readiness to operate that machinery."

Lord Clyde added at 511c that "it will require cogent evidence that the
state which is able to afford protection is unwilling to do so, especially
in the case of a democracy".

The Horvath test has been clarified by the Court of Appeal on several
occasions.  In DK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 682 the Court of Appeal
highlighted that the issue is not merely whether the authorities are
willing to provide protection, but whether they are capable of providing
the particular individual with adequate protection.  This chimes with
Article 7 of the Qualification Directive, which requires individualised
assessment of whether there is sufficient protection, stating that
protection is "generally" provided when the actors:

             "take reasonable steps to prevent the persecution or suffering
             of serious harm, inter alia, by operating an effective legal
             system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts
             constituting persecution or serious harm, and the applicant
             has access to such protection."

It is also important to consider the extent to which there are
organisations outside of the framework of the state that are able and
willing to assist in providing protection, for example, by making
complaints on behalf of individuals.

I must consider whether persecution extends to the whole of the country and
if it does not whether the appellant can be reasonably expected to relocate
to another part of the country - see SSHD v AH (Sudan) and others [2007]
UKHL 49.

Hearing

Mr McVeety indicated that he did not want to cross-examine the appellant.
Mr McVeety made it clear that the respondent now accepted his credibility
and the case requires a more objective and general assessment of the
conditions for openly gay men in St Lucia.

Dr Mahoney was the only witness to give evidence.  She relied upon her
report dated 26 October 2018.  She was cross-examined by Mr McVeety
regarding her written report as well as an academic article she co-
researched and co-authored published on 19 June 2017 in 'Frontiers in
Psychology' entitled, "It's just more acceptable to be white or mixed race
and gay than black and gay": The perceptions and Experiences of Homophobia
in St Lucia.  During the course of this decision, I shall refer to this as
'the academic article'.  Mr McVeety noted that the academic article refers
to some participants as being openly gay in the north of St Lucia, where
they believed they were treated with a degree of respect.  Dr Mahoney
acknowledged that some participants considered that they were able to be
openly gay at times but that they still had to modify their behaviour
dependent on where there were and who they were with.  All participants
regardless of where they lived or worked, concealed their sexual
orientation when at work.  This in itself calls into question the extent to
which the two participants who identified the north as a safer place, were
able to be openly gay.  Dr Mahoney also drew attention to the self-
confessed limitations of the academic article.  The research involved a
very small sample size of nine participants (of whom five were gay men, the
remainder identifying as lesbian or bisexual) and the inherent difficulties
in recruiting a large and diverse sample of St Lucian sexual minorities.
As such, the study was described as "exploratory and its conclusions
tentative".

During the course of cross-examination Dr Mahoney referred to statistics
relating to the offence of buggery alluded to in her report.  At my request
Ms Wilkins compiled a table of these statistics for the years 2011 to 2017,
which I refer to below.

Mr McVeety invited me to find that there is insufficient evidence to
support the proposition that openly gay men face a real risk of
persecution.  He asked me to note the paucity of any media reports of
homophobic violence in St Lucia.  He submitted that if it existed, there
would be reports in the media, yet Dr Mahoney was unable to point to any
recent reports.  Mr McVeety also submitted that the reports relied upon by
the appellant clearly make references to some gay men living openly in St
Lucia.  Mr McVeety described the law criminalising gay sexual behaviour as
being rarely enforced.

In a nutshell, Mr McVeety submitted that there is not in general a risk to
the life or risk of sufficiently serious harm to an openly gay returnee on
return to St Lucia.  In contrast, the appellant's case is that it is clear
from the country background evidence that a real risk exists.  In support
of this, Ms Wilkins relied upon a detailed and carefully drafted skeleton
argument summarising the relevant country background evidence.  I refer to
the representatives' respective submissions in more detail, when making my
findings on the evidence below.

At the end of submissions, I reserved my decision, which I now provide with
reasons.

Country background evidence

Dr Mahoney's evidence

Dr Mahoney is a chartered psychologist (CPsychol) and chartered scientist
(CSci).  She is a Fellow of the Higher Education Academy and a Senior
Lecturer in Psychology / PhD course leader at the University of Worcester.
She is also an approved researcher for the Office of National Statistics.

Dr Mahoney is not a citizen of St Lucia and has never visited St Lucia.
She cannot be properly described as a country expert on St Lucia with
extensive experience of researching or reporting on a variety of matters
relating to St Lucia.  Importantly, Dr Mahoney does not describe herself as
such.  Her qualifications and expertise for the purposes of her report, are
set out at the beginning of the report in these terms:

             "I am a Chartered Psychologist, Chartered Scientist, Associate
             Fellow of the British Psychological Society, and a Fellow of
             the Higher Education Academy with over 20 years of experience
             working as academic and researcher.  Victimisation and
             sexuality, the role that social contexts and culture play in
             victimology, and the impact of victimisation on wellbeing are
             aspects of my specialist research, and relevant to the issues
             I have been asked to express an opinion on in relation to the
             client. I have also worked with police constabularies on
             projects exploring how their strategies are perceived by the
             public, and conducted and published research on perceptions of
             criminality, additional specialist research topic knowledge I
             have that is relevant to the client's case. My research
             expertise in victimisation includes being an Approved Office
             for National Statistics (ONS) Researcher that enables me to
             access sexuality and victimisation data collected by the ONS
             in the UK that is restricted in its availability to those the
             ONS have trained and approved as suitable to work with this
             information because of its confidential and sensitive nature.
             This is relevant to the client's case because I am familiar
             with, and have worked with/published research that uses
             official crime victimisation and sexuality data, and issues
             related to official data on victimisation and sexuality are
             central to the client's case. Additionally, I am familiar with
             the challenges of accessing and using these sorts of data to
             understand how sexuality and victimisation are linked, and my
             suitability for these particular tasks is reflected in my ONS
             Approved Researcher status. I am also a Co - Opted Committee
             member of the British Psychological Society's Psychology of
             Sexualities Section, the Society's specialised subsystem that
             focuses on understanding the psychological experiences of
             sexuality and gender identity minorities. As Committee members
             we are asked to provide expert commentary on sexuality
             legislation, reports and human rights issues with national and
             international scope. Therefore, I am actively involved with my
             Professional Statutory Regulatory Body's engagement with LGBTQ
             experiences, wellbeing and welfare, all issues relevant to the
             client's case.  I lead, and am involved in, a number of cross
             - University projects exploring how sexuality, victimisation
             and wellbeing are linked, and supervise a number of doctoral
             students whose research focuses on sexuality, gender and
             victimisation. This includes one of the few research projects
             being run that focuses specifically on the experiences of LGB
             individuals in Saint Lucia, and this work is part of a broader
             research project on sexuality in Saint Lucia (see Couzens,
             Mahoney and Wilkinson, 2017). This is relevant to the client's
             case because of the scarcity of such research, and the diverse
             and complex sources of information and data on sexuality and
             victimisation that this work entails. Therefore, my expertise
             and experiences as a chartered psychologist and researcher,
             knowledge and skills in research governance and research
             ethics (see CV), role within the British Psychological
             Society, and specific research on sexuality and culture (with
             a focus on Saint Lucia) I am involved in provide me with
             expertise that qualify as relevant to the issues I have been
             asked to express an opinion on in relation to the client's
             case."

The summary of Dr Mahoney's report accurately reflects the remainder of the
report and her oral evidence.

             "There is substantial evidence demonstrating that homophobic
             victimisation is underreported in Saint Lucia. This reflects
             LGBT individuals' fear of the repercussions of making such
             reports because same - sex sexual behaviour is criminalised on
             the island. Critically, homophobic discrimination and
             victimisation are not recognised legally as crimes, and sexual
             and gender minorities have few/no legislative protections, in
             Saint Lucia. De facto official reports of homophobic
             victimisation cannot be made because they are not recognised
             by law. A range of human rights and media reports confirm
             homophobic discrimination and victimisation to be normative
             experiences for Saint Lucia's LGBT citizens whose safety and
             protection cannot be guaranteed. The lack of 'official'
             reports reflects these factors and not that such experiences
             are rare."

Dr Mahoney has referred to the appellant as a 'client' in her report.  This
is unfortunate; however, I am satisfied that she has approached her task
with the requisite degree of independence, reliability and objectivity.  As
regards knowledge of a country, it has been accepted that to be an expert
one does not necessarily have to live there or to visit regularly.   Dr
Mahoney was questioned closely by Mr McVeety. She answered his questions
directly and did not seek to exaggerate in any way.  Dr Mahoney's report
appropriately uses a variety of source materials to support her
conclusions.  These include raw data, local press, local and international
human rights reports, online and academic articles.  It was agreed at the
hearing that Dr Mahoney provides a helpful insight into the proper way to
approach the scarce information available regarding the treatment of gay
men in St Lucia.  She was very helpful in collating information that the
parties were unable to find.  This included the statistics for the offence
of buggery in St Lucia, referred to in more detail below.

When Dr Mahoney's oral evidence is considered alongside her report, the key
matters that emerge are set out below.

          i) St Lucia is a small island with a geographic area totalling
             616km and a population of some 178,000.  It is a parliamentary
             democracy.  The economy is tourism dependent (89% of GDP) and
             there are high rates of unemployment and crime.

         ii) St Lucia lacks many of the official reporting and monitoring
             structures, systems and processes that are normative in Europe
             and larger Caribbean islands such as Jamaica.  Official crime
             data is available but data on the experiences of victims of
             crime i.e. victimisation surveys are non-existent.

        iii) Same-sex sexual behaviour is a criminal offence in St Lucia.
             Homophobic discrimination and victimisation are not recognised
             legally as crimes, and even if reported would not be recorded
             as such because they are not recognised.

         iv) Historically and currently, homophobia and homophobic
             victimisation are normative experiences for gay men in St
             Lucia.   St Lucia is a deeply conservative, traditional and
             religious society in which there is widespread disapproval of
             homosexuality.  The fear of being disowned by family,
             discriminated against and stigmatised by society,
             "internalised homophobia", as well as fears of violence or
             threats of violence are relevant factors preventing many gay
             people from being openly gay in St Lucia.   This is reflective
             of the wider (particularly English-speaking) Caribbean region,
             where many sexual minorities conceal and suppress their sexual
             identity to prevent social exclusion and criminalisation.

          v) There is very limited peer reviewed academic research on
             homophobia in St Lucia.  The three peer reviewed papers that
             have been published including the academic article co-authored
             by Dr Mahoney, support the following: homophobic victimisation
             is a common experience for openly gay people but this is
             underreported because of a fear of the consequences of
             disclosing one's sexuality; within the Catholic dominated
             education system, gay students experience homophobic motivated
             verbal and physical abuse; gay men develop self-loathing and
             an aversion to other gay men because of "internalised
             homophobia" resulting from sociocultural and religious
             influences; sexual minorities who are "light-skinned" are
             likely to receive a greater degree of tolerance than those who
             are "dark skinned"; regional disparities exist in the level of
             socio-cultural tolerance toward sexual minorities, with the
             more developed north of St Lucia (with its attendant tourism
             and better health / employment / education opportunities)
             being more tolerant than the south.

         vi) Given the relevant legal framework, official reports of
             homophobic victimisation are difficult to make.  This must be
             seen in the context of a population in which there is a marked
             reluctance on the part of gay men to report a crime of
             violence against them out of fear that they will be
             stigmatised, abused or charged with a criminal offence
             themselves.  The lack of reported violence for reasons
             relating to a person's sexuality in the media is therefore not
             necessarily a reliable indicator of the absence of such
             violence.  The lack of official or other reports must be
             viewed in its proper context: there is a deep-rooted
             reluctance to report such incidents and there is an
             underplaying of homophobic incidents to protect St Lucia's
             tourist industry.

        vii) There is substantial evidence demonstrating that homophobic
             victimisation is underreported in Saint Lucia.  This is based
             in part on distrust of the police, fear of retaliation and a
             general reluctance to raise matters that may draw attention to
             a person's sexuality.

       viii) The statistics for the offence of buggery in St Lucia
             (http://stats.gov.lc/subjects/society/crime) demonstrates that
             it is inaccurate to suggest that the law criminalising
             homosexual sex is rarely used.  There has been a steady stream
             of crimes reported / accepted / detected for the offence of
             buggery from 2011 onwards.   This includes a 600% increase of
             buggery crimes reported between 2016 (4) to 2017 (24).

         ix) St Lucia's only prominent LGBT organisation 'United and
             Strong' is an activist non-governmental organisation with very
             limited resources.  It operates discreetly and does not
             publicise its operations.  It does not function as a support
             agency.  Individuals within United and Strong have however
             been openly critical of the government's approach to sexual
             minorities.

          x) In order to live in St Lucia safely, this appellant would have
             no alternative but to live discreetly.  Given the country's
             small size and the nature and extent of homophobic
             discrimination and victimisation across St Lucia, internal
             relocation from the appellant's home in the north-west of St
             Lucia elsewhere would not be safe or reasonable.

Legal framework and government / societal discrimination

In two responses to information requests dated 18 December 2017 and 2
November 2018, the respondent summarised his understanding of the country
background materials on how LGBT persons are treated in St Lucia.  The
respondent accepts that consensual same-sex activity is illegal.  The 2018
information request makes reference to the US State Department's Country
Report on Human Rights Practices for 2017, which says this:

             "Consensual same sex sexual activity is illegal under
             indecency statutes, and some same sex sexual activity between
             men is also illegal under anal intercourse laws.  Indecency
             statutes carry a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment,
             and anal intercourse carries a maximum penalty of ten years in
             prison.  No legislation protects persons from discrimination
             based on sexual orientation or gender identity.

             While the indecency statutes and anal intercourse laws were
             rarely enforced, there was widespread social discrimination
             against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex
             (LGBTI) persons in the deeply conservative society.  The few
             openly LGBTI persons faced daily verbal harassment.  Civil
             society groups received reports that LGBTI persons were denied
             access to rental homes or were forced to leave rental homes
             and were denied jobs or left jobs due to a hostile work
             environment.

             There were few reported incidents of violence or abuse during
             the year."

Section 132 of the Criminal Code No 9 of 2004 in St Lucia states that a
person is liable to up to ten years imprisonment if they commit an act of
gross indecency.  Section 133 defines buggery as "sexual intercourse per
anus by a male person with another male person".  By section 133(1) a
person who commits buggery commits an offence and is liable on conviction
on indictment for (a) life, if committed with force and without the consent
of the other person (b) ten years, in any other case.

It is not disputed that same-sex sexual activity is illegal in St Lucia and
consensual buggery is punishable by imprisonment. There is no anti-
discrimination legislation based on sexual orientation or gender identity.

The respondent's position is that in practice gay people are not arrested
and prosecuted for homosexual activities.  The US State Department refers
to these laws as being rarely enforced.  There is support for this in a
2018 Human Rights Watch (HRW) Report, Paradise Lost - the Plight of LGBT
people in the Eastern Caribbean.  This states:

             "no island actively pursues criminal investigations for
             breaking these laws, their mere existence intensifies a toxic
             homophobic culture that allows lesbian, gay, bisexual and
             transgender (LGBT) people to be bullied at school, that fuels
             their mistrust of police, and allows them to be alienated from
             - or even abused by - their families. Despite this, each
             island has a core group of LGBT activists leading the fight
             for equality.

             ...

             Like many islands, St. Lucia depends on tourism - its beaches
             are constantly included in "best honeymoon" articles. But
             while its tourism minister said in 2015 that the island
             welcomes visitors from the LGBT community, the country has no
             plans to change its gross indecency and buggery laws. For the
             country's Universal Periodic Review at the UN in 2015, St.
             Lucia rejected decriminalizing same-sex relationships and
             creating anti-discrimination laws."

Dr Mahoney's examination of the criminal statistics from the Central
Statistics Office of St Lucia reveal that there has been a steady flow in
crimes reported and detected for the offence of buggery.   The table
prepared by Ms Wilkins includes, inter alia, the following information.
For 2017: 24 crimes reported (refers to all crimes reported); 23 accepted
(refers to as matters that are reported, investigated and found not to be
false) and 7 detected (refers to matters that are investigated and person/s
are arrested and charged, or warning given).  For 2016: 4 crimes reported,
4 accepted and 2 detected. There is no other information available on the
nature of the crimes reported, accepted or detected.  It is therefore
unclear whether these are limited to buggery as defined by section
133(1)(a) i.e. without the consent of the other person or (b) i.e. merely
having sexual intercourse per anus between two consenting males.  Mr
McVeety submitted that it is curious that given the number of buggery
crimes recorded as detected in recent years, Dr Mahoney was unable to give
any example of the local press reporting such a crime.  When questioned
about this, Dr Mahoney emphasised that the absence of such reports is not
that surprising given the deeply conservative and religious society, and
the wish by the government and the majority of the population to render
sexual minorities invisible as well as a desire to avoid adverse publicity
for the tourism industry.  Dr Mahoney was also asked why United and Strong
had not publicised the cases of buggery, she explained that as a group they
had to be very careful about what they said.  In addition, they may not
have even known about them given the lack of publicity and the reluctance
of gay men generally in St Lucia to come forward or seek help.

The Canadian IRB report published on 26 April 2013, addressing the
treatment of sexual minorities in St Lucia does not specifically address
whether people have been arrested for consensual buggery.  However, an
older Canadian IRB publication dated 6 December 2005 referred to a police
source accepting that the criminal code dealing with buggery had been used
in recent years but that most homosexuals are "in the closet" and would not
openly come out as being gay.

St Lucia has not ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, which protects privacy, including private consensual acts between
adults.  In 2011 and 2015, St Lucia rejected recommendations of the UN
Human Rights Council to relax the criminalisation of same-sex behaviour and
was the only UN member in the Americas formally to oppose the inclusion of
sexual orientation and gender identity in a UN human rights non-
discrimination declaration.

The US State Department report for 2017 states that there was "widespread
societal discrimination" against LGBTI persons and "the few openly LGBTI
person faced daily verbal harassment".  Although the academic article draws
attention to two individuals who felt safer in the north of St Lucia where
they were able to identify as openly gay at times, they felt compelled to
conceal their sexual identity at work and when commuting for work purposes
had to undergo a form of identity shifting know as 'passing'.  I accept Dr
Mahoney's evidence that whilst there are some openly gay men in St Lucia,
including the two questioned for the academic article and an employee at
United and Strong, they are very few in number.  I accept Dr Mahoney's
evidence that the very few openly gay men in the north of St Lucia must
conceal their sexual identity at regular intervals in their daily life, for
reasons relating to a fear of persecution.

The HRW report describes the seven Eastern Caribbean islands as the most
homophobic group in the Caribbean with toxic homophobic cultures.  Academic
studies referred to by Dr Mahoney also refer to pervasive homophobia
expressed within families and in schools, work and in everyday life.  The
Rights in Exile Programme quoted by Dr Mahoney summarises the daily
discrimination that gay people face because of their sexuality.  This
includes two examples of St Lucians who reported homophobic victimisation
but were refused help by the police.

Widespread negative social attitudes towards homosexuality reflect and are
reinforced by the laws criminalising same-sex sexual relations and the
attitude of the government: in November 2017, two ministers publicly
engaged in homophobic and anti-LGBT rhetoric and the Minister in the Office
of the Prime Minister Sarah Flood-Beaubrun said that she opposed changes to
Saint Lucia's anti-LGBT laws, and that same-sex parents were not 'ideal
parents'.  This is despite United and Strong having visited her in June
2017 with information about the unacceptable nature of discrimination
targeting members of the LGBT community.  United and Strong have delivered
training to police and government officials but as Dr Mahoney notes, they
continue to espouse homophobic ideas.  The training provided to the police
has been very limited, but this has not prevented LGBT people having
suspicions about the organisation's independence and trustworthiness.

There are also reports of LGBT tourists experiencing homophobic motivated
victimisation in 'safe' contexts such as tourist resorts and overseas
university campuses.



Violence / threats of violence / underreporting

There are no statistics available on homophobic violence or victimisation
in St Lucia.  The official crime data on St Lucia does not specify whether
any of the crimes are motivated by homophobia and there is no data at all
on the experiences of the victims of crime.  Even in countries that
criminalise homophobic victimisation, official reports underestimate the
extent of such incidents.  The official data on St Lucia is unhelpful in
demonstrating the true extent of violent crimes against gay people.

However, several murders have been reportedly linked to homophobia: United
and Strong is quoted in the Canadian IRB report dated 11 June 2009 as
stating that the gay community faces "a daily reality of fear, stigma,
discrimination and persecution" and that no one was convicted for the
murders of two gay men in 2005 and 2006.  According to the 2013 Canadian
IRB report, United and Strong have reported that:

             "there are attacks against homosexuals that 'go unnoticed.'
             Abuses have taken place. We have had deaths of gay men that
             are still unsolved or unresolved...These were openly gay
             people and these cases were not cases where they were just
             killed. The killings were brutal, with multiple stab wounds
             and beatings. There have been gay people who have been beaten
             in the street. Society targets the highly effeminate guys and
             the butch looking women. Some have been raped. They get
             verbally abused on a daily basis. And what works against them
             is the fear of reporting these incidents. People are
             internalizing things, instead of seeking help."

In an article addressing the 43rd homicide victim in St Lucia in 2017,
Linus Constantine, St Lucia News Online describes the body of 18-year old
Marvin Anthony having been found with his throat slit and 56 stab wounds.
This article refers to wide speculation that Marvin was gay and his murder
looks like a hate crime.  The article then states:

             "This is not uncommon in St Lucia.  Over the last 10 years,
             several members of the LGBT community have met their deaths in
             similar fashion.  There were the deaths of Verne Romolus,
             Germaine Nestor, Marcellus Augustin and the death of Ethelbert
             'Romeo' Evelyn in Dennery.  They were all openly gay and they
             were all beaten and stabbed to death."

The appellant explained in his interview that he knew Linus Constantine
personally because they worked together, and there were rumours he was gay.


The Rights in Exile Programme report dated July 2016, referred to by Dr
Mahoney reported that the police do not properly investigate cases of
violence against gay people and alleged homophobic murders remain unsolved.
 In an online article dated 4 June 2018 describing the difficulties of
leading a gay life in St Lucia, reference was made to an older US State
Department report from 2008 which described at least two cases of violence
against homosexuals including one young man having been hung from a tree
because he was openly gay. The number of reported murders of those who were
openly gay or rumoured to be gay must be seen in the context of St Lucia's
very small population size.  The evidence that the police are reluctant to
properly investigate crimes of violence against gay men has been denied by
the government but is entirely consistent with the homophobia prevalent in
St Lucian society.

The St Lucian police have become overstretched and have struggled to cope
with a general increase in serious crime in the last few years.  In the
Canadian IRB report dated 20 July 2017, reference has been made to a news
website (St Lucia Times 1 July 2017), quoting the National Security
Minister as having said that St Lucia "is facing an unprecedented crime
wave" with 29 homicides already recorded in 2017.  This is linked to a
dramatic increase in gang related activity.   Various sources quoted in the
IRB report describe the police force as plagued by weaknesses in numbers,
morale and infrastructure.  Given the need to quell gang activities,
investigating crimes of violence against gay men, particularly given the
legal framework and the prevailing attitudes is most unlikely to be viewed
as a priority by the St Lucian police.  This lends support to the claim by
United and Strong that the police have not adequately investigated murders
allegedly motivated by homophobia.

The 2013 Canadian IRB report also records that several sources stating that
advocates for LGBT rights in St Lucia received death threats.  This report
also quoted a lawyer as saying that the police are very often mentioned as
perpetrating acts of violence against sexual minorities and that crimes are
therefore not reported because of fear of abuse by the police.

Dr Mahoney has explained that homophobic victimisation is underreported in
St Lucia because of a number of interrelated factors: (a) same sex
behaviour is criminalised; (b) homophobic discrimination and victimisation
are not recognised as crimes; (c) those who are gay fear prosecution and
abuse from the police; (d) United and Strong are in practice limited in
what they can do; (e) self-loathing, guilt and 'internalised homophobia'
deters reporting; (f) few people are willing to be open about their
sexuality in such a conservative society.  Dr Mahoney refers to two
instances where individuals reported homophobic victimisation to the police
but were refused help. United and Strong have stated:

             "the fact that the law [against same sex sexual activity] is
             there, there is no formal redress for homosexuals. It
             basically means that when you go to the police for something,
             it exposes you. Right now it is the police officers on their
             own deciding not to enforce this law. Homosexuals ask
             themselves, what if the police officers decide to [arrest] me
             because this law exists."

Human rights reports, including the US State Department's report for 2017,
refer to few reports of violent crimes against gay people.  I accept Dr
Mahoney's evidence that there is likely to be a significant degree of
underreporting of such crimes for a combination of reasons.  Her evidence
in this regard is consistent with the 2017 US State Department which notes
a reluctance to report incidents and a 2016 report from the Rights in Exile
Programme, in which it is said that many victims will not report crimes out
of the fear that they themselves will be prosecuted, while state agencies
in charge of investigations often identify crimes against LGTB persons as
crimes of passion or blame the victims' lifestyle for attacks.

In terms of reporting incidents to United and Strong, Dr Mahoney explained
that many LGBT activists believe that their headquarters was burnt down by
homophobic arsonists in 2011, even though the alleged cause was an
electrical fault, and its members are known as activists and "self-avowed
criminals". Dr Mahoney is therefore of the view that LGBT individuals in St
Lucia are likely to fear being "outed by association" if they align
themselves with this organisation. An individual is therefore likely to be
inhibited reporting issues to United and Strong.  United and Strong leaders
have said that LGBT individuals in St Lucia are so much in fear of being
found out that they are reluctant to even use the critical prevention,
education and health services that they need to protect themselves and
others. It also puts them off from testing for sexual infections, even, in
some cases if they are suffering from HIV or AIDS symptoms.  There is
therefore force in Ms Wilkins's submission to the effect that given that
LGBT individuals are reluctant to use ostensibly confidential medical
services even when their life might be at risk, they are also plausibly
reluctant to report, even anonymously, LGBT hate crimes.
Findings on the country background evidence

Having conducted a thorough assessment of all the country background
evidence, I have reached the following conclusions:

         xi) The evidence from cogent sources (US State Department and HRW)
             suggests that the indecency statutes and anal intercourse laws
             have been rarely enforced.  There is an absence of references
             to any such arrests and prosecutions in the local press but
             there are more anecdotal references to prosecutions a few
             years ago.  The picture that emerges from the official
             statistics on the criminal offence of buggery is unclear, but
             nonetheless concerning.  There remains a distinct possibility
             that some of the crimes of buggery that have been recorded
             relate to consensual acts. I accept Ms Mahoney's evidence that
             it is very challenging to find reliable official data in St
             Lucia.  In any event, the mere fact that criminalisation of
             same-sex sexual relations is in existence and is known to have
             been used in the past, adds an additional and aggravating
             dimension to the prevalent homophobic attitudes in society and
             the government.  However, the evidence is not sufficiently
             clear to support a finding that openly gay men face
             prosecution by the state, under sections 132 or 133(2) of the
             Criminal Code.

        xii) Whilst United and Strong has been an advocate of LGBT rights
             in St Lucia and the region, its role in assisting those who
             fear or have faced discrimination and violence for reasons
             relating to their sexuality is limited.  United and Strong has
             publicised the difficulties faced by LGBT people in St Lucia,
             but its role is limited to more general advocacy.  It is not a
             support agency able to offer meaningful support to LGBT people
             who have faced discrimination or violence.  There is a deep-
             seated reluctance on the part of gay men to seek help, support
             or protection either formally or informally in St Lucia.
             There is no formal complaint structure or mechanism for LGBT
             people in St Lucia.

       xiii) There are a very small number of openly gay men in St Lucia.
             They face daily harassment, verbal taunts and threats. They
             also face discrimination in obtaining accommodation and in
             employment. Historically and currently, homophobia and
             homophobic victimisation are normative experiences for gay men
             in St Lucia.   St Lucia is a deeply conservative, traditional
             and religious society in which there is widespread disapproval
             of homosexuality.  The fear of being disowned by family,
             stigmatised by society and "internalised homophobia", as well
             as fears of violence and the possibility of criminal
             prosecution, are all factors contributing to gay men not being
             openly gay in St Lucia.

        xiv) Levels of criminality and violence in St Lucia are very high
             overall.  The level of violence against those perceived to be
             gay is unclear.  This is a consequence of the government not
             recognising sexually motivated victimisation as a crime, the
             absence of official records and underreporting.  There are a
             variety of sources (for example, United and Strong and St
             Lucia News Online) providing unverified reports of men
             perceived to be gay having been killed in particularly violent
             circumstances for reasons relating to their sexuality.  I
             accept the evidence that over the last 10 years men perceived
             to be gay have been murdered in particularly violent
             circumstances, and there is no obvious explanation for this,
             other than their perceived sexuality.  This is very
             concerning.  The reported violent homophobic incidents may not
             be of sufficient frequency by themselves to amount to a
             consistent pattern of mistreatment, but the relatively small
             number must be seen in the light of the very small number of
             openly gay men and the very small population size.  When the
             violent incidents are combined with the laws criminalising
             same-sex relations and the discrimination in society, I accept
             there is a climate of significant fear and anxiety for gay men
             in St Lucia.

         xv) The evidence available supports an absence of a sufficiency of
             protection against violence toward men who are perceived to be
             gay.  The police force is over-stretched, and their record of
             investigating murders considered to be motivated by
             homophobia, is poor.  There is evidence that victims of
             threats of violence and violence motivated by homophobia are
             unwilling to seek protection from the police because they fear
             further abuse from the police and the state.  There is no
             entity in St Lucia, state or otherwise, in relation to which a
             complaint can be made for reasons relating to a person's
             homosexuality.  This must be seen in the context of a society
             where there is endemic discrimination against openly gay men.

        xvi) The few openly gay men in St Lucia face a daily diet of verbal
             abuse, threats of violence, harassment and discrimination in
             almost every sphere including education, employment,
             accommodation and within the family.  The discrimination faced
             by gay men can be properly described as frequent and
             protracted.    This discrimination occurs in a country which
             criminalises same-sex sexual relations and has demonstrated an
             inability or reluctance to fully investigate serious incidents
             of violence against men perceived to be gay.

       xvii) When all the evidence is considered cumulatively, openly gay
             men face a real risk of persecution on the entire island of St
             Lucia and the requisite high threshold is met.  To use the
             language of Article 9 of the Qualification Directive, the
             accumulation of various measures against men perceived to be
             gay in St Lucia, including violations of their human rights is
             sufficiently severe to affect openly gay men in a manner that
             constitutes persecution.  Although the general attitudes in
             the north of the island may be more tolerant than the south,
             this is entirely relative and there remains a real risk of
             persecution for openly gay men residing anywhere on the
             island.

      xviii) Not all St Lucian gay men are at risk of persecution.  The
             prevailing homophobia is so deep-rooted and pervasive, that
             there are instances of gay men having "internalised" it.  Some
             St Lucian gay men may live discreetly not because of a fear of
             persecution but because of social pressure or cultural and
             religious reasons.  It will therefore be necessary to
             carefully consider in each individual case whether a St Lucian
             gay man would choose to live discreetly and the reasons for
             this.

Conclusion

I conclude that there is a real risk of persecution for gay men who are
openly gay in St Lucia.  The respondent has accepted that this appellant
will act discreetly because of a fear of persecution.  It follows that the
appellant has been successful in establishing the sole issue raised in this
appeal: he has a well-founded fear of persecution in St Lucia.

Decision

I allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer                             22 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

