
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AJ (s 94B: Kiarie and Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00115 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Cohen, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Thomann, Counsel, instructed by the Government
Legal
     Department


(1) In the light of Kiarie and Byndloss v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
Department [2017] UKSC 42, the First-tier Tribunal should adopt  a  step-by-
step approach, in order to  determine  whether  an  appeal  certified  under
section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  can  be
determined without the appellant being  physically  present  in  the  United
Kingdom.

(2) The First-tier Tribunal should address the following questions:

    1. Has the appellant's removal pursuant to a  section  94B  certificate
    deprived the appellant of the ability to  secure  legal  representation
    and/or to give instructions and  receive  advice  from  United  Kingdom
    lawyers?


    2. If not, is the appellant's absence from the  United  Kingdom  likely
    materially to impair the production of expert  and  other  professional
    evidence in respect of the appellant, upon which  the  appellant  would
    otherwise have relied?


    3. If not, is it necessary to hear live evidence from the appellant?


    4. If so, can such evidence, in all the circumstances, be  given  in  a
    satisfactory manner by means of video-link?

(3) The First-tier Tribunal should not lightly come to the  conclusion  that
none of the issues covered by the first and second  questions  prevents  the
fair hearing of the appeal.

(4) Even if the first and second questions are  answered  in  the  negative,
the need for live evidence from the appellant is likely  to  be  present.  A
possible exception might be  where  the  respondent's  case  is  that,  even
taking a foreign offender  appellant's  case  at  its  highest,  as  regards
family relationships, remorse and risk of re-offending, the public  interest
is still such as to make deportation a proportionate interference  with  the
Article 8 rights of all concerned.

(5) If the First-tier Tribunal concludes that the appeal cannot be  lawfully
determined  unless  the  appellant  is  physically  present  in  the  United
Kingdom, it  should  give  a  direction  to  that  effect  and  adjourn  the
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND

 1. This case is concerned with the effect of the judgments of the  Supreme
    Court in R (Kiarie and Byndloss) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 42 on a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    made before the handing down of those judgments, in which the  Tribunal
    dismissed the human rights appeal of a criminal appellant who had  been
    deported from the United Kingdom, prior to the hearing of  his  appeal,
    pursuant  to  certification  by  the  respondent  section  94B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria,  born  in  December  1987.   His
    mother brought him to this country in 1989, when he was  aged  2.   The
    appellant and his mother arrived in possession of  leave  to  enter  as
    visitors.  The appellant's mother overstayed and so did  the  appellant
    (having, at the time, no choice in the matter).  The appellant's status
    was eventually regularised in 2009,  when  he  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain.

 3. On 25 November 2014, the appellant was convicted at Croydon Crown Court
    of child abduction and sentenced to eighteen months'  imprisonment.   A
    Sexual Offences Prevention Order was made for a  five-year  term.   The
    Sentencing Judge said:-

         "The victim in this case ... was  a  14  year  old  child.   It  is
         perfectly apparent from the  exchange  of  messages  that  she  was
         infatuated with you.  She spent at least one night at your flat and
         was then found by police hiding on the stairs outside your flat  at
         3 o' clock in the morning the following day.

         In my judgment you made little or no effort to assist the police in
         recovering the child and returning her to her parents.  There is no
         doubt in my mind that you are the one who is  responsible  for  her
         SIM card being down the toilet in your flat.   The  only  inference
         that I can draw from that is that you were afraid that data  on  it
         would incriminate you and I do not doubt that that is the case.

         ...  This is a serious offence. The  maximum  sentence  is  one  of
         seven years' imprisonment.   There  is,  it  is  fair  to  say,  no
         evidence of sexual contact between yourself  and  [the  child]  but
         there is no doubt in my mind that your motive  was  to  groom  this
         child for sexual activity in due course.

         You have been convicted on the clearest possible  evidence  by  the
         jury in my judgment and shown no remorse for your actions."

 4. On 6 January 2015, the appellant was notified that section 32 of the UK
    Borders Act 2007 required that  a  deportation  order  should  be  made
    against him, unless he could demonstrate that he fell within one of the
    exceptions set out in section 33 of that Act.  A notice  under  section
    120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was also served
    on the appellant at the same time.

 5. The appellant made submissions against deportation but they  failed  to
    persuade the respondent that the  appellant  fell  within  one  of  the
    section 33 exceptions.  Accordingly, on 3 March  2015,  the  respondent
    served a notice of deportation on the appellant.  At the same time, she
    certified the appellant's human rights claim under section 94B  of  the
    2002 Act.

 6. On 3 March 2015, the Upper Tribunal refused the appellant's application
    for permission to bring judicial review proceedings  to  challenge  the
    certification decision.  An application for permission to appeal to the
    Court of Appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 22 May 2015.   The
    appellant's renewed application to the Court of Appeal was subsequently
    dismissed.

 7. The appellant made further submissions to  the  respondent  on  3  July
    2015, which were rejected on 20 July 2015 as not amounting to  a  fresh
    asylum or human rights claim.

 8. On 28 July 2015, the appellant was deported to Nigeria.



B. THE HEARING BEFORE THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL AND THE JUDGE'S DECISION

 9. On 14 August 2015, the appellant  appealed,  from  outside  the  United
    Kingdom,  against  the  refusal  of  his  human  rights   claim.    The
    appellant's appeal was heard at Taylor House on 19 May 2017  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell.  Ms Mallick of Counsel appeared on behalf
    of the appellant.  She was instructed by Cleveland Law Limited.

10. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant's mother  and  father,
    and from Lotte Lewis-Smith, a representative of an organisation  called
    "Roots to Return".  This is a charity, set up to support those "who are
    pursuing out-of-country appeals once removed from the UK".  The  letter
    stated that the writer had "been in touch with [the appellant] and  his
    mother ... since he was removed in 2015 ...  We  have  mostly  been  in
    contact with  [mother]  who  has  been  assisting  her  son  to  gather
    evidence, employ a lawyer and get the appeal lodged".

11. The judge's decision recorded that the appellant was the  father  of  a
    girl born in the United Kingdom in June 2009.  It noted that the mother
    of the child did not attend the Tribunal to give evidence or provide  a
    statement in connection with the proceedings.  The judge observed  that
    the witnesses claimed the appellant had "a very close relationship with
    his daughter".  It was also stated that:

         "The appellant had been effectively destitute  and  homeless  since
         his  deportation  to  Nigeria  in  2015.   He  does  not  have  the
         appropriate documentation or experience of Nigeria and is  unlikely
         to  obtain  a  job  and  may  suffer  degrading  treatment   as   a
         consequence" (paragraphs 24 to 26)

    The  judge  further  noted  that  the  appellant  was  said   to   have
    "experienced theft of money and his  mobile  phone  on  more  than  one
    occasion".  The appellant's circumstances in Nigeria were  said  to  be
    "very compelling".

12. The judge's findings of fact began at paragraph 21 of the decision.  At
    paragraph 32, the judge found that there was  "no  statement  from  the
    appellant or any evidence that he has shown any contrition  or  remorse
    for the crime".  So as concerned the relationship between the appellant
    and the daughter, the judge found at paragraph 34 that there  had  been
    "no evidence  of  any  ongoing  contact"  between  the  two  since  the
    appellant was deported in July 2015.  Although noting the  difficulties
    of communicating between Nigeria and  the  United  Kingdom,  the  judge
    observed that the appellant "has a mobile  telephone  and  is  able  to
    communicate with his mother".  The judge cited evidence from the mother
    that she recorded messages from her son in Nigeria, which  were  played
    to his daughter, who appeared to respond well to them.

13. At paragraph 35, the judge found that there did not appear to have been
    ongoing contact between the  appellant  and  his  daughter  whilst  the
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom.  There was no  evidence  that
    the daughter was a British citizen: "In fact, I have almost no evidence
    that the child exists apart from the testimony of the witnesses".   The
    judge considered this was  particularly  significant,  given  that  the
    appellant had been given a section 120 notice "and  to  date  there  is
    still no evidence that this child exists or is  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom and is a  British  citizen  as  claimed  apart  from  the  oral
    testimony of the witnesses".  The judge, nevertheless, accepted for the
    purposes of the appeal that the child was British and had lived in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years.

14. At paragraph 36, the judge recorded that the daughter was  living  with
    her mother and that the appellant had never had sole responsibility for
    the child.  There were "no suggestions that the child is  suffering  in
    any way through the absence of the appellant from the United  Kingdom".



15. At paragraph 47, the judge held that there was "no  evidence  that  the
    child in the United Kingdom has suffered any adverse consequences as  a
    result of the appellant being deported".  The judge also found that:-

         "The failure of the child's mother to provide a statement or attend
         the hearing to give oral evidence does not assist the appellant  at
         all to show that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
         the child.  The failure of the appellant to provide a statement  to
         the Tribunal about his relationship with the child  also  does  not
         assist him."

16. At paragraph 54, the judge decided that, in the circumstances, it would
    be wrong to consider the appellant's immigration status in  the  United
    Kingdom had been "precarious".

17. At paragraph 55,  the  judge  began  an  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    position in Nigeria.  The appellant appeared to have been  assisted  by
    the "Centre for Youths Integrated Development (CYID) whose letter dated
    10 May 2017 appears at page 69 of the appellant's bundle".  This letter
    indicated that the CYID had come into contact with the  appellant  over
    eighteen months after his arrival in Nigeria.   The  letter  catalogued
    "some of the problems he had experienced".  The judge then said:-

         "There naturally is no other supporting evidence as  regards  this.
         It is claimed that the appellant is homeless and does not have  the
         funding or resources to provide accommodation to him."

    The judge observed that the appellant's mother said the  appellant  did
    not have appropriate documentation, an assertion which the judge  found
    "somewhat hard to understand".

18. The judge considered that the  appellant  had  been  "able  to  survive
    without the assistance of CYID for a significant period  of  time"  and
    that the CYID could "clearly point the appellant  towards  the  correct
    authorities to obtain ID documents if necessary".

19. At paragraph 58, the judge noted the contention  that  the  appellant's
    mother would be unable to cope  without  the  appellant  being  in  the
    United Kingdom.  According to  the  judge,  there  were,  however,  "no
    letters or supporting documents from social workers or other people  to
    show that the appellant's mother is 100% reliant on  the  appellant  or
    that  her  medical  conditions  require  her  to  have  any   form   of
    assistance".

20. At paragraph 67, we find the judge  was  "unaware  as  to  whether  the
    appellant had undertaken some courses whilst in prison".

21.  At paragraph 69, the judge noted that there had not been  produced  an
    OASys or probation report for the appellant and that:

         "he has not provided any statement of evidence.  I  do  not  accept
         that it would have been impossible for him to do so.  He could have
         dictated  a  statement  to  his  mother   as   she   has   recorded
         conversations with him and it could have been transcribed."

    The judge also did not know "the views of the appellant as regards  his
    past offending and the deportation apart from those they have given  to
    me through his own mother".

22. At paragraph 79, the judge concluded that the life of the appellant  in
    Nigeria "may be undesirable to him and may be difficult and challenging
    but it is impossible to say that it will be  worse  than  that  on  the
    evidence before me".  The judge considered that the appellant "has  not
    provided any information as regards the difficulties he is experiencing
    and is likely to experience in the future".

23. At paragraph 86,  the  judge  held  that  although  the  appellant  was
    "clearly experiencing some difficulty and hardship upon return ... they
    do not make his circumstances very compelling".

24. At paragraph 87, the judge noted that "the statutory provisions and the
    case law [make] it quite clear that the scales are heavily weighted  in
    favour of deportation.  I have to assess if there if there are any very
    compelling circumstances regarding the appellant".

25. The  judge  concluded  that  there  were  no  such  circumstances  and,
    accordingly, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

26. Following Kiarie and  Byndloss,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in July 2017.




C. THE JUDGMENTS IN KIARIE AND BYNDLOSS

27. As is now  well-known,  the  Supreme  Court  quashed  the  section  94B
    certificates in respect of Messrs Kiarie and Byndloss.  The  Court  did
    so on the basis that, in the circumstances  of  each  case,  an  appeal
    brought from outside the United Kingdom, against  the  refusal  of  the
    human rights claim, would be  a  breach  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
    Although the two cases involved the application of section 94B  in  its
    original form, whereby it applied only to those liable to  deportation,
    the Supreme Court noted that, with effect from 1 December 2016, section
    94B was extended, so as to enable the respondent to certify under  that
    section any human rights claim, whether or not the person concerned  is
    liable to deportation. In this regard, Lord Wilson said: "The  extended
    power does not fall to be considered in these appeals but our  decision
    today will  surely  impact  on  the  extent  of  its  lawful  exercise"
    (paragraph 9 of the judgments). The correctness of that observation was
    demonstrated in Ahsan and others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009: see paragraphs 90 to 92.

28. Under Part L of his judgment, Lord Wilson, speaking for the majority of
    the Court, set out "The effect of a certificate under  section  94B  in
    obstructing an appellant's ability to present  his  appeal"  (paragraph
    59):-

         "60. The first question is whether an appellant  is  likely  to  be
             legally represented before the tribunal at the hearing  of  an
             appeal brought  from  abroad.   Legal  aid  is  not  generally
             available to an appellant  who  contends  that  his  right  to
             remain in the UK arises out of Article 8: para 30, Schedule  1
             to the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of  Offenders  Act
             2012.  So, in order to obtain legal aid,  he  must  secure  an
             "exceptional case determination" under section 10 of that Act.
              Although an appeal brought from abroad  is  in  principle  as
             eligible for such a determination as an  appeal  brought  from
             within the UK, the determination cannot be made unless  either
             the absence of legal aid would breach his rights under Article
             8 or it might breach them and provision of it  is  appropriate
             in all the circumstances: section 10(3).  It suffices  to  say
             for present purposes  that  it  is  far  from  clear  that  an
             appellant relying on Article 8 would  be  granted  legal  aid.
             One can say only that, were he required to  bring  his  appeal
             from abroad, he might conceivably be represented on legal aid;
             that alternatively he might  conceivably  have  the  funds  to
             secure private legal  representation;  that  alternatively  he
             might conceivably be able to secure representation from one of
             the specialist bodies who  are  committed  to  providing  free
             legal assistance to immigrants (such as Bail  for  Immigration
             Detainees: see para 70 below); but that possibly, or, as  many
             might consider, probably, he would need to  represent  himself
             in the appeal.  Even if  an  appellant  abroad  secured  legal
             representation from one source or another, he and  his  lawyer
             would face formidable difficulties  in  giving  and  receiving
             instructions both prior to the hearing and in particular (as I
             will explain) during the hearing.  The issue for this court is
             not whether Article 8 requires a lawyer to be  made  available
             to represent an appellant  who  has  been  removed  abroad  in
             advance of his appeal but whether, irrespective of  whether  a
             lawyer would be available to represent him, Article 8 requires
             that he be not removed abroad in advance of it.

         61.  The next question is whether, if he is to stand any worthwhile
             chance of winning his appeal, an appellant needs to give  oral
             evidence to the tribunal and to respond to whatever  is  there
             said on behalf of the  Home  Secretary  and  by  the  tribunal
             itself.  By definition, he has a bad criminal record.  One  of
             his contentions will surely have to be that he is  a  reformed
             character.  To that  contention  the  tribunal  will  bring  a
             healthy scepticism to bear.  He needs to surmount it.  I  have
             grave doubts as to whether he can  ordinarily  do  so  without
             giving oral evidence to the tribunal.  In a witness  statement
             he may or may not be able to express  to  best  advantage  his
             resolution to  forsake  his  criminal  past.   In  any  event,
             however, I cannot imagine that, on its own, the statement will
             generally cut much ice with  the  tribunal.   Apart  from  the
             assistance that it might gain from  expert  evidence  on  that
             point (see para 74 below), the tribunal will want to hear  how
             he explains himself orally and, in particular,  will  want  to
             assess whether he can survive cross-examination in relation to
             it.  Another strand of his case is likely to be the quality of
             his relationship with others living in the UK,  in  particular
             with any child, partner or  other  family  member.   The  Home
             Secretary contends that, at least in this respect, it  is  the
             evidence of the adult family members which  will  most  assist
             the tribunal.  But I am unpersuaded  that  the  tribunal  will
             usually be able properly to  conduct  the  assessment  without
             oral evidence from the appellant whose relationships are under
             scrutiny; and the evidence of the  adult  family  members  may
             either leave gaps which  he  would  need  to  fill  or  betray
             perceived errors which he would seek to correct.

         62.  When the power to certify under section 94B was inserted  into
             the 2002  Act,  an  analogous  power  was  inserted  into  the
             Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (SI
             2006/1003) ("the 2006 Regulations"),  now  recently  replaced.
             Regulation 24AA(2) enabled the Home Secretary  to  add  to  an
             order  that  an  EEA  national  be  deported  from  the  UK  a
             certificate that his removal pending any appeal  on  his  part
             would not be unlawful under section 6 of the  1998  Act.   But
             regulation 24AA(4) enabled him to apply  "to  the  appropriate
             court or tribunal (whether by  means  of  judicial  review  or
             otherwise) for an interim order to suspend enforcement of  the
             removal  decision".   In  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department  v  Gheorghiu  [2016]  UKUT  24  (IAC),  the  Upper
             Tribunal (Blake J and UTJ Goldstein) observed at para 22 that,
             on an application for an order  to  suspend  enforcement,  the
             court or tribunal would take due account of four factors.  The
             fourth was

                  "that in cases where the  central  issue  is  whether  the
                  offender has sufficiently been rehabilitated  to  diminish
                  the risk to the public from his behaviour, the  experience
                  of immigration judges has been that hearing and seeing the
                  offender give live evidence and the  enhanced  ability  to
                  assess the sincerity of that evidence is an important part
                  of the fact-finding process ..."

             It is also worthwhile to note that, even if  an  EEA  national
             was removed from the UK in advance of his appeal, he had, save
             in exceptional circumstances, a right under regulation 29AA of
             the 2006 Regulations (reflective of Article 31(4) of Directive
             2004/58/EC) to require the Home Secretary  to  enable  him  to
             return temporarily to the UK in  order  to  give  evidence  in
             person to the tribunal.

         63.  The Home Secretary submits to this court that the fairness  of
             the hearing of an appeal  against  deportation  brought  by  a
             foreign criminal is highly unlikely to turn on the ability  of
             the appellant to give oral evidence; and  that  therefore  the
             determination of the issues raised in such an appeal is likely
             to require his live evidence  only  exceptionally.   No  doubt
             this submission reflects much of the thinking  which  led  the
             Home Secretary to propose the insertion of  section  94B  into
             the 2002 Act. I am,  however,  driven  to  conclude  that  the
             submission is unsound and that the suggested unlikelihood runs
             in the opposite  direction,  namely  that  in  many  cases  an
             arguable  appeal  against  deportation  is  unlikely   to   be
             effective unless there is a facility for the appellant to give
             live evidence to the tribunal.

         64.  But in any event, suggests the Home Secretary, there is, in
             each of two respects, a facility for an appellant in an appeal
             brought from abroad to give live evidence.


         65   The first suggested respect  was  the  subject  of  a  curious
             submission on the part of the Home Secretary to the  Court  of
             Appeal.  It was that from abroad  the  appellant  could  apply
             for, or that the tribunal could on its own initiative issue, a
             summons requiring his attendance as a witness at  the  hearing
             pursuant to rule 15(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
             Tribunal) (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  (SI
             2014/2604)  ("the  2014  Rules").   The   curiosity   of   the
             submission is that  such  a  summons  is  not  enforceable  in
             respect of a person outside the UK. Nevertheless the Court  of
             Appeal held that the issue of a summons would be a  legitimate
             way of putting pressure on the Home  Secretary  to  allow  the
             appellant to return to the UK to give oral  evidence.   Before
             this court the Home Secretary does not continue to contend for
             the  suitability  of  a  summons  under   rule   15(1).    She
             nevertheless suggests that the tribunal could,  by  direction,
             stress the desirability of the appellant's  attendance  before
             it and that, were she thereupon  to  fail  to  facilitate  his
             attendance, the appellant could seek judicial  review  of  the
             certificate  under  section  94B   and,   if   successful,   a
             consequential order  for  his  return  at  least  pending  the
             appeal.  But whether the tribunal could, or if so would,  give
             such a direction in the teeth of a subsisting  certificate  is
             doubtful; and in any event it seems entirely  impractical  for
             an appellant abroad  to  apply  first  for  the  unenforceable
             direction and then for  judicial  review  of  any  failure  to
             comply with it.

         66.  The second suggested respect has been the subject  of  lengthy
             and lively argument.  The suggestion is that the appellant can
             seek to persuade the tribunal  to  permit  him  to  give  live
             evidence from abroad by video link or, in particular nowadays,
             by Skype.


         67.  There is no doubt that, in the context of many appeals against
             immigration decisions, live  evidence  on  screen  is  not  as
             satisfactory as live evidence given in person from the witness
             box.  The recent decision of the Upper Tribunal  (McCloskey  P
             and UTJ Rintoul) in R (Mohibullah) v Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department [2016] UKUT 561 (IAC)  concerned  a  claim
             for judicial  review  of  the  Home  Secretary's  decision  to
             curtail a student's leave to remain in the UK on  the  grounds
             that he had obtained it  by  deception.   The  Upper  Tribunal
             quashed the decision but, in a footnote,  suggested  that  the
             facility for a statutory appeal would have been preferable  to
             the  mechanism  of  judicial  review  and  that  it  would  be
             preferable for any statutory appeal to be able to  be  brought
             from within the UK. It said:

                 "(90)  Experience  has  demonstrated  that  in  such  cases
                 detailed scrutiny of the demeanour and general presentation
                 of parties and witnesses is a highly important factor.   So
                 too is close quarters assessment of how the proceedings are
                 being conducted - for example, unscheduled requests for the
                 production of further documents, the response thereto,  the
                 conduct of all present in  the  courtroom,  the  taking  of
                 further instructions in the  heat  of  battle  and  related
                 matters.  These examples could be multiplied. I have  found
                 the mechanism  of  evidence  by  video  link  to  be  quite
                 unsatisfactory in other contexts, both civil and  criminal.
                 It  is  not  clear  whether  the  aforementioned  essential
                 judicial exercises could be conducted satisfactorily in  an
                 out of country appeal.  Furthermore, there would be a  loss
                 of judicial  control  and  supervision  of  events  in  the
                 distant, remote location,  with  associated  potential  for
                 misuse of the judicial process."

             Although the Home Secretary stresses that the  Upper  Tribunal
             was  addressing  the  determination  of  issues  relating   to
             deception, its reservations about the giving  of  evidence  by
             electronic link seem equally apt to appeals  under  Article  8
             against deportation orders.  Indeed one  might  add  that  the
             ability of a witness on screen  to  navigate  his  way  around
             bundles is also  often  problematic,  as  is  his  ability  to
             address cross-examination delivered to him  remotely,  perhaps
             by someone whom he cannot properly  see.   But,  although  the
             giving of evidence on screen is not optimum, it might well  be
             enough to render the appeal  effective  for  the  purposes  of
             Article 8, provided only that the appellant's  opportunity  to
             give evidence in that way was realistically available to him.

         68.  Inquiry into the realistic availability of giving evidence  on
             screen to the tribunal gets off to a questionable  start:  for
             in her report entitled "2016  UK  Judicial  Attitude  Survey",
             Professor Thomas, UCL Judicial Institute, records that 98%  of
             the judges  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  throughout  the  UK
             responded to her survey and that, of them, 66% rated  as  poor
             the standard of IT equipment used in the tribunal.

         69.  In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  Nare  [2011]
             UKUT 443 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal (Mr  CMG  Ockelton  VP,  UTJ
             Grubb  and  IJ  Holmes),  in  the  course  of  considering  an
             allegation that a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  too
             readily allowed a witness to give evidence by telephone,  gave
             guidance  as  to  how  the  tribunal   should   approach   any
             application  for  a  direction  that  evidence  be  given   by
             electronic link.  At that time the rules specifically provided
             for such a direction to be  given;  now,  by  rules  1(4)  and
             14(1)(e) of the 2014 Rules, provision for it is encompassed in
             the definition of a "hearing",  together  with  the  power  to
             direct "the manner in which any evidence or submissions are to
             be provided [including]  orally  at  a  hearing".   The  Upper
             Tribunal prefaced its guidance by observing at  para  17  that
             departure from the usual model of oral evidence given directly
             in the courtroom was likely to reduce the quality of  evidence
             and the ability both of the parties to  test  it  and  of  the
             judge to assess it.  Its guidance, given in para 21, included:

             (a)  that the application should be made and  determined  well
                  before the substantive hearing;

             (b)  that the application should not only explain  the  reason
                  for evidence to  be  given  on  screen  and  indicate  the
                  arrangements provisionally made at the  distant  site  but
                  also include an undertaking  to  be  responsible  for  any
                  expenses incurred;

             (c)  that, were the evidence to  be  given  from  abroad,  the
                  applicant should be able to inform the tribunal  that  the
                  foreign  state  raised  no  objection  to  the  giving  of
                  evidence to a UK tribunal from within its jurisdiction;

             (d)  that the  applicant  should  satisfy  the  tribunal  that
                  events at the distant site were, so  far  as  practicable,
                  within its observation  and  control,  that  the  evidence
                  would be given there in formal surroundings and be subject
                  to control by appropriate officials and that nothing could
                  happen off camera which might cast doubt on the  integrity
                  of the evidence; and

             (e)  that a British Embassy or High Commission might  be  able
                  to provide suitable facilities.

         70.  Bail  for  Immigration  Detainees  ("BID"),  a  charity  which
             provides a small minority of  those  facing  deportation  with
             free legal advice and even representation and which intervenes
             in the appeals before the court, provides a helpful example of
             how the tribunal seeks to implement the guidance given in  the
             Nare case.  In 2016 BID represented a Nigerian citizen in  his
             appeal against a deportation order by reference to his  rights
             under Article 8.  His claim had been certified  under  section
             94B so he had been  removed  to  Nigeria  in  advance  of  the
             appeal.  On his application, through BID, to give evidence  on
             the appeal from Nigeria  by  Skype,  the  tribunal  sought  to
             implement the guidance summarised at para 69(d) above  by  the
             following direction:

                  "The tribunal must be advised in advance of the hearing of
                  the arrangements made to  enable  the  appellant  to  give
                  evidence in a secure location, attended by a  local  agent
                  or representative instructed by the appellant's solicitors
                  and whose identity has at the time  of  such  advice  been
                  provided to the tribunal."

         71.  In the same order the tribunal also sought  to  implement  the
             guidance summarised at  para  69(b)  above  by  the  following
             direction:

                  "All necessary equipment and Skype link must  be  provided
                  and paid for by the appellant but must include:

                  (i)  Projection equipment

                  (ii)  Audio equipment

                  (iii)    Wi-fi link

                  to enable all present to see and hear the  appellant  give
                  evidence."

             As is apparent from this direction, the tribunal  requires  an
             applicant to pay for provision of the necessary equipment  not
             only at the distant end but also at the hearing centre itself.
              When, in a letter written in response to the  direction,  BID
             requested the tribunal to buy, install and  maintain  its  own
             equipment for the purpose of hearing evidence from abroad, one
             of its judges replied:

                  "Unfortunately, the  Tribunal  has  no  funds  to  provide
                  equipment or technical ability, hence  the  onus  in  that
                  regard  we  have  to  place  upon  appellants  and   their
                  representatives."

             In the event the appellant represented by BID was furnished by
             a friend with the equipment necessary for his use  in  Nigeria
             in giving evidence by Skype;  and,  since  the  friend  was  a
             lawyer, he was able and  willing  also  to  exercise  free  of
             charge the degree of control required by  the  tribunal.   But
             the appellant could not afford to purchase the  equipment  for
             use at the hearing centre; and so it was BID  which  bought  a
             laptop computer (�240), a projector (�252)  and  a  3G  mobile
             telephone contract (�33.97 per month), for use  there  at  the
             hearing of his appeal.

         72.  The researches of the solicitors for Mr Kiarie  indicate  that
             it would cost the equivalent of �240 per hour to rent a  video
             conference room for his use in Nairobi and  that  therefore  a
             rental for say seven hours, so as to enable counsel to conduct
             a pre-hearing conference with him as  well  as  to  cover  the
             probable length  of  the  hearing,  would  cost  �1,680.   The
             researches of the solicitors for Mr Byndloss indicate that the
             hourly cost of renting a video conference room for his use  in
             Kingston would be marginally less but they  estimate  that  it
             would be necessary to rent it for 11 hours in order  to  cover
             the probably lengthier hearing of his appeal.

         73.  It is already clear  however  that  the  cost  of  hiring  the
             necessary equipment for use at the distant end of any evidence
             given by video link or Skype is only part of the cost which an
             appellant must bear.  He must also bear the cost of  providing
             the equipment for use at the hearing centre and  he  may  well
             have to pay for the attendance beside him of someone able  and
             willing to exercise the degree  of  control  required  by  the
             tribunal.  Apart, however, from having  to  meet  the  overall
             costs of giving evidence in that  way,  an  appellant  has  to
             confront formidable  technical  and  logistical  difficulties.
             Powerful evidence is given by the appellants'  solicitors  and
             other legal specialists in the field to the effect that:

             (a)  it can be a slow  and  tortuous  process  to  obtain  the
                  consent of the foreign state for evidence to be given from
                  within its jurisdiction;

             (b)  it can be difficult to achieve compatibility between  the
                  system adopted at the distant end and the system installed
                  at the hearing centre, with the  result  that  a  bridging
                  service sometimes needs to be engaged and funded;

             (c)  it can be difficult to alight upon a time for the link to
                  begin and end which is both acceptable to the tribunal and
                  practicable at the distant end in the light  of  the  time
                  difference; and

             (d)  if, as is not uncommon, the link fails during the hearing
                  and cannot then and there be restored,  the  tribunal  can
                  prove reluctant to grant an adjournment to another date.

         74.  Apart from the difficulty surrounding his giving live evidence
             to the tribunal, an  appellant  deported  in  advance  of  the
             appeal  will  probably  face  insurmountable  difficulties  in
             obtaining the supporting professional evidence which, so  this
             court is told, can prove crucial in achieving its success.  In
             support of his claim to present no  significant  risk  of  re-
             offending, an appellant is likely to wish to  submit  evidence
             from his probation officer; but,  upon  his  deportation,  his
             probation  officer  will  have  closed  his  file   and   will
             apparently regard himself as no  longer  obliged  to  write  a
             report about him.   An  appellant  may  also  wish  to  submit
             evidence from a consultant forensic  psychiatrist  about  that
             level of risk. But the evidence in  these  proceedings  of  Dr
             Basu MRC Psych, Clinical Director at  Broadmoor  Hospital,  is
             that he has never sought to assess the risk posed by a  person
             visible to him only on screen and  that  any  such  assessment
             would have to be treated with considerable caution. In support
             of an appellant's likely claim to  have  a  close  and  active
             relationship with a child, partner or other family  member  in
             the UK, an appellant will not uncommonly adduce, as  in  these
             preliminary proceedings Mr Byndloss has already sought to  do,
             a report by an independent social worker  who,  so  he  hopes,
             will speak of the quality, and in particular  for  the  family
             the importance, of the relationship.  But a report compiled in
             the absence of the social worker's direct observation  of  the
             appellant  and  the  family  together  is  likely  to  be   of
             negligible value.

         75.  It was more than 30 years ago that, in the appellate committee
             which preceded the creation of this court, concern  was  first
             expressed about the value of an appeal which was  required  to
             be brought from abroad. In R (Khawaja) v  Secretary  of  State
             for  the  Home  Department  [1984]  AC  74  Lord   Fraser   of
             Tullybelton observed at pp 97-98:

                  "... in  spite  of  [a]  decision  ...  that  the  illegal
                  immigrant be removed from this country, it will  still  be
                  open to him to appeal under section 16 of [the  1971  Act]
                  to an adjudicator against the decision to remove him.  The
                  fact that he is not entitled to appeal so long as he is in
                  this country - section 16(2)  -  puts  him  at  a  serious
                  disadvantage, but I do not think it is  proper  to  regard
                  the  right  of  appeal  as  worthless.    At   least   the
                  possibility remains that there may be cases, rare perhaps,
                  where an appeal to the adjudicator might still succeed."

         76.  Today, however, this court is invested with responsibility for
             deciding whether two foreign criminals who,  by  reference  to
             Article 8, each have arguable appeals against the  deportation
             orders made against them and who have  rights  thereunder  for
             their appeals to be effective, would suffer a breach of  those
             rights if they were to be deported in advance of  the  hearing
             of the appeals.  I conclude that,  for  their  appeals  to  be
             effective, they  would  need  at  least  to  be  afforded  the
             opportunity  to  give  live  evidence.   They   would   almost
             certainly not be able to do so in person.  The question is: as
             a second best, would they be able to do  so  on  screen?   The
             evidence of  the  Home  Secretary  is  that  in  such  appeals
             applications to give evidence from abroad are very rare.  Why?
             Is it because an appellant has  no  interest  in  giving  oral
             evidence in support of his appeal?  I think not. It is because
             the financial and logistical barriers to his  giving  evidence
             on screen are almost insurmountable.  In this case  the  Court
             of Appeal has indorsed a practice in which, so it  seems,  the
             Home Secretary has, not always but  routinely,  exercised  her
             power under section 94B to certify claims of foreign criminals
             under Article 8.  But she has done so  in  the  absence  of  a
             Convention-compliant system for the conduct of an appeal  from
             abroad and, in particular, in the absence of any provision  by
             the Ministry of Justice of  such  facilities  at  the  hearing
             centre, and of some means by which  an  appellant  could  have
             access to such facilities abroad, as would together enable him
             to give  live  evidence  to  the  tribunal  and  otherwise  to
             participate in the hearing.

         77.  Between 28 July 2014 and 31 December 2016 the  Home  Secretary
             issued 1,175 certificates pursuant to section 94B in  relation
             to foreign criminals, all, therefore, with  arguable  appeals.
             Of those 1,175 persons, the vast majority were no  doubt  duly
             deported in advance of their appeals.  But by 31 December 2016
             only 72 of them had filed notice of appeal with  the  tribunal
             from abroad. It may well be that on 13 February 2017 a few  of
             those  appeals  remained  undetermined.   The  fact   remains,
             however, that, as of that date, not one of the 72 appeals  had
             succeeded.

         78.  It remains only to re-cast the  reasoning  expressed  in  this
             judgment within its proper context of a claim that deportation
             pursuant to the  two  certificates  under  section  94B  would
             breach  the  procedural  requirements  of  Article   8.    The
             appellants  undoubtedly  establish   that   the   certificates
             represent a potential interference  with  their  rights  under
             Article 8.  Deportation pursuant to them would interfere  with
             their rights to respect for  their  private  or  family  lives
             established in the UK and, in particular, with the  aspect  of
             their  rights  which  requires  that  their  challenge  to   a
             threatened breach of them should be effective. The burden then
             falls on the Home Secretary to establish that the interference
             is justified and, in particular,  that  it  is  proportionate:
             specifically, that deportation in advance of an appeal  has  a
             sufficiently  important  objective;  that  it  is   rationally
             connected to that objective; that nothing less intrusive  than
             deportation at that stage could accomplish it; and  that  such
             deportation strikes a fair balance between the rights  of  the
             appellants and the interests of the community: see R  (Aguilar
             Quila) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]
             UKSC 45, [2012] 1 AC 621, para  45.   The  alleged  objectives
             behind the power to certify a claim  under  section  94B  have
             been set out in section F above.   I  will  not  prolong  this
             judgment  by  addressing  whether  the  power  is   rationally
             connected to them and as to  whether  nothing  less  intrusive
             could accomplish them.  I therefore turn straight  to  address
             the fair balance required by Article 8 and I conclude for  the
             reasons given above that, while the appellants  have  in  fact
             established that the requisite balance is unfair,  the  proper
             analysis is that the Home Secretary has  failed  to  establish
             that it is fair."



D. THE 'KIARIE' QUESTIONS

29. These paragraphs of Lord Wilson's  judgment  make  it  plain  that,  in
    deciding whether an out-of-country appeal  against  the  refusal  of  a
    human rights claim is compatible with the  procedural  requirements  of
    Article 8, a number of fact-sensitive questions need to be addressed.

First question

30. The first question, addressed at  paragraph  60  of  the  judgment,  is
    whether the appellant will be  able  to  secure  legal  representation,
    which might have been available  had  the  appellant  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom,  and  whether  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  give
    instructions to his lawyer and receive advice  from  the  lawyer,  both
    prior to the hearing and during it.

Second question

31. The second question, addressed at paragraph  74  of  the  judgment,  is
    whether the appellant's absence from the United Kingdom, as a result of
    deportation or other removal pursuant to the section  94B  certificate,
    is  likely  to  present  "difficulties  in  obtaining  the   supporting
    professional evidence which ... can  prove  crucial  in  achieving  its
    success".  One example given was the likelihood of submitting  evidence
    from  a  criminal  appellant's  probation  officer;  "but,   upon   his
    deportation, his probation officer will have closed his file  and  will
    apparently regard himself as no longer obliged to write a report  about
    him".  Another potential problem would be where  the  appellant  wished
    "to submit evidence from a consultant forensic psychiatrist about  [the
    level  of  risk]"  posed  by  the  appellant.   In   cases   concerning
    relationships with a child, partner  or  other  family  member  in  the
    United Kingdom, an appellant "will not uncommonly adduce ...  a  report
    by an independent social worker  ...  but  a  report  compiled  in  the
    absence of a social worker's direct observation of  the  appellant  and
    the family together is likely to be of negligible value".

Third question

32. The third question  concerns  the  need  for  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant. Although in his judgment Lord Wilson dealt with  this  issue
    before turning to the two questions set out above, it seems to us  that
    in many if not most cases the First-tier Tribunal should address  those
    two questions first. This is because judicial time and effort spent  on
    determining the need for live evidence and the likely availability  and
    adequacy of a video link will be wasted if the answer to one or both of
    the first two questions means that the appellant needs in any event  to
    be in the United Kingdom in order for there to be a  procedurally  fair
    hearing of his appeal.

33. Paragraph 61 of Lord Wilson's judgment highlights the issues  regarding
    live evidence. It is in our view significant that Lord Wilson  did  not
    say that every appellant who is abroad as a result of removal  pursuant
    to section 94B must be given the opportunity to give live evidence.  In
    this regard, it needs to be remembered  that  entry  clearance  appeals
    have been a feature of the immigration jurisdiction since the appellate
    system was created and it has not hitherto been  considered  that  such
    appeals have, since the coming into force of the Human Rights Act  1998
    in 2000, been procedurally unfair because the appellant  is  unable  to
    give live evidence.

34. Be that as it may, it is clear that the Supreme  Court  in  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss clearly considered section 94B cases give rise to the need  to
    assess with care whether oral evidence from the appellant is  required.
    The Court's expectation was that, in most cases, the  appellant's  oral
    evidence would be necessary. Nevertheless, the question  remains  case-
    specific and will be for the First-tier Tribunal to decide.




Fourth question

35. The fourth and final question will be whether, if there is  a  need  to
    hear live evidence from the appellant, doing so by video-link  will  be
    satisfactory: see paragraphs 66 to 73 of the judgments. Lord Wilson was
    sceptical that  such  a  link  would  be  functionally  adequate.   His
    observations on that matter are, however, manifestly  not  findings  of
    law or irrefutable findings of fact. On the contrary, at paragraph 102,
    Lord Carnwath could "see no reason in principle why use of modern video
    facilities should not provide an  effective  means  of  providing  oral
    evidence and participation  from  abroad,  so  long  as  the  necessary
    facilities and resources are available".  Furthermore, as  others  have
    observed, hearing evidence by video-link is a growing feature of United
    Kingdom legal proceedings.




E. THE 'NIXON' CASES

36. Our view as to the appropriateness of  this  step-by-step  approach  is
    reinforced by R (Nixon and Another) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  3,  in  which  Hickinbottom  LJ  gave  a
    comprehensive and detailed reserved  judgment  refusing  permission  to
    appeal against a dismissal of judicial review applications  challenging
    section 94B  certificates  where  the  applicants  had  been  deported,
    following those refusals.

37. At paragraph 19, Hickinbottom LJ noted that:-

         "The First-tier Tribunal has set down a series of (currently) seven
         out-of-country appeals for hearing in the next three months, listed
         separately, but each case having to deal with the current  position
         with regard to (e.g.) the availability of video facilities and  the
         provision of facilities free of charge to enable  an  appellant  to
         provide instructions to his representative and participate in their
         appeals (including giving evidence by video-link) if they  wish  to
         do so,  in  various  countries  including  Jamaica.   Although  not
         formally  test  cases,  it  is  hoped  that  these  will  test  the
         effectiveness of appeals conducted from abroad, and heard in  those
         circumstances."

38. At paragraph 75 of the judgment, Hickinbottom LJ set out  a  series  of
    propositions,  derived  from  a  number  of   authorities   (including,
    importantly, Kiarie and Byndloss):-

         "(i) Where the Secretary of State rejects a human rights claim of a
             proposed deportee, an out-of-country appeal will not always be
             ineffective in protecting the human rights involved.   Whether
             it  will  be  effective  will  depend  upon  the   facts   and
             circumstances of the particular case.

         (ii) Where the Secretary of State precludes an  in-country  appeal,
             by (e.g.) certifying a human rights claim under  section  94B,
             that is not necessarily unlawful;  but  it  is  sufficient  to
             establish  a  potential   interference   with   the   proposed
             deportee's Article 8 rights, such that a burden is imposed  on
             the Secretary of State to establish that that interference  is
             justified and proportionate, and  that  removal  from  the  UK
             without waiting for an appeal to run its course strikes a fair
             balance between the adverse  effect  of  deportation  at  that
             stage on relevant  rights  under  Article  8  and  the  public
             interest.  In particular, the Secretary of State will need  to
             show that  an  out-of-country  appeal  will  be  effective  to
             protect the Article 8 rights in play.

         (iii)    Where an  individual  is  deported  on  the  basis  of  an
             unlawful certificate, the court has a discretion as to whether
             to make a mandatory order against the Secretary  of  State  to
             return him to the UK so that he  can  (amongst  other  things)
             conduct his appeal in-country.  That discretion is  wide,  and
             there is no  presumption  in  favour  of  return,  even  where
             certification is unlawful.  The  exercise  of  the  discretion
             will be fact-sensitive.  However, when assessing whether it is
             just and appropriate to make a mandatory order for return of a
             deportee, the  fact  that  that  person  has  been  unlawfully
             deprived of an in-country appeal to which he is entitled under
             statute is the starting point and a factor telling strongly in
             favour of ordering his return.

         (iv) It will be a highly material consideration if the  deportation
             was lawful or apparently lawful, in the sense that, even if  a
             human rights claim that a deportation order should not be made
             or maintained has been unlawfully  certified,  the  individual
             was deported on the basis of a deportation order that was  not
             bad on its face and was not, at the relevant time, the subject
             of any appeal; and/or an application for a stay on removal had
             been refused or  the  court  had  directed  that  any  further
             proceedings should not act as a bar to removal.  On the  other
             hand, it will also be material  if  the  individual  has  been
             removed in the face of a stay on removal, or even if there  is
             an active relevant appeal or  judicial  review  in  which  the
             issue of a stay on removal has not been tested.

         (v)  The extent to which the individual's appeal will be  adversely
             affected if he is not returned to the UK will also  be  highly
             relevant.  It will be adversely affected  if  it  is  assessed
             that, if he is restricted to bringing or maintaining an out-of-
             country appeal, that will be inadequate to protect the Article
             8 rights of the individual and his  relevant  family  members.
             The continuing absence of  the  individual  from  the  UK  may
             adversely affect his ability to present his appeal properly in
             a variety of ways, for example he may be  unable  properly  to
             instruct legal representatives; he may  be  unable  to  obtain
             effective professional expert evidence; he may  be  unable  to
             give evidence, either effectively or  at  all.  If  the  court
             assesses that, even if the exercise would  be  more  difficult
             than pursuing  his  appeal  in  the  UK,  the  deportee  could
             effectively pursue his appeal from abroad, that is  likely  to
             be finding of great weight and will often be determinative  in
             favour of exercising the court's  discretion  not  to  make  a
             mandatory order for return.  On the other hand, if  the  court
             assesses that he could not effectively pursue an  appeal  from
             abroad, then that may  well  be  determinative  in  favour  of
             exercising that discretion in favour  of  making  a  mandatory
             order for return.

         (vi) In  addition  to  these  procedural  matters,  the  deportee's
             continuing absence from the UK may be a breach of Article 8 in
             the sense that he is deprived from being with his family,  and
             they from being with him, pending the outcome of  the  appeal.
             Generally, such a breach will not be  irremediable.   However,
             in addition to that being a potential  substantive  breach  of
             Article 8, it may  result  in  his  Article  8  claim  in  the
             deportation case being undermined on a continuing basis, which
             may be a factor of some importance.  These matters too may  be
             relevant to the assessment of  whether  to  make  a  mandatory
             order for the deportee's return.

         (vii)    There is a public interest in deporting foreign  criminals
             - and  in  not  returning  foreign  criminals  who  have  been
             deported - although that may be a point of little weight where
             the relevant individual would have had the right to remain  in
             the UK during the course of his appeal but for  an  (unlawful)
             certificate.  There is also a public interest in public  money
             not being expended on arranging for returning  a  deportee  to
             this country to conduct an appeal which could  adequately  and
             fairly be conducted from abroad. "

    Applying those propositions to the facts of Mr Nixon,  Hickinbottom  LJ
    found as follows:-

         "80. There has been a finding of the tribunal that Mr Nixon and his
             wife did not have any significant  relationship,  nor  did  Mr
             Nixon play any significant  part  in  J-Kwon's  life,  in  the
             period 2006-10.  It  is  true  that  there  has  also  been  a
             subsequent finding that, by 2014, they had reconciled, and  Mr
             Nixon was playing an active part in his son's life; but  there
             is no evidence that he has seen his wife or son since  he  was
             imprisoned for the assault  on  the  former  in  August  2014.
             Indeed, the evidence does not suggest any  contact  after  the
             assault in April 2014.  Neither Mrs Nixon nor  J-Kwon  visited
             Mr Nixon in prison.  Mr Nixon was apparently  prohibited  from
             contacting his wife, at least during  the  period  he  was  on
             licence. There is no evidence  of  any  contact  between  them
             since his removal in September 2016.  The amount of contact he
             would have had had he been in the UK  since  that  date  is  a
             matter for conjecture - and a matter upon  which  I  will  not
             speculate - but, unfortunate as that situation  might  be,  it
             seems to me that any incremental harm to the welfare of J-Kwon
             and to the family life of Mr Nixon, Mrs Nixon and their son by
             Mr Nixon not being returned immediately would be negligible.

         81.  I am unimpressed by the submission that he is required in  the
             UK so that an independent social worker report can be prepared
             on the basis of observations of the relationships  working  in
             practice.  No attempts have apparently been made by  Mr  Nixon
             or his advisers to obtain reports prepared by  social  service
             in respect of their intervention in the  period  2013-14.   Mr
             Bedford submits, with some force, that the  crucial  issue  in
             the appeal will be whether there was a subsisting relationship
             between Mr Nixon and his wife, and between Mr  Nixon  and  his
             son, in the period 2014-16.  However,  no  independent  report
             was prepared, or apparently even considered, by  Mr  Nixon  or
             his legal advisers in the 18  months  between  the  challenged
             certification decision in March 2015 and  his  deportation  in
             September 2016.  There is no evidence that Mr Nixon  even  met
             his wife or son in that period.   There  are  records  of  the
             relationships at that time which  will  no  doubt  be  put  in
             evidence in the appeal; but it is  unlikely  that  any  expert
             report would be of assistance with regard to the relationships
             as they were then.  There is no evidence as to  what  contact,
             if any, there has been between Mr Nixon on the one  hand,  and
             his wife and son on the other, since his removal  to  Jamaica,
             15 months ago.  Even if Mr Nixon were to be returned now,  and
             even if he were allowed contact with his son, the relationship
             and any family life they would enjoy are likely to be slow  to
             form or reform, and would be almost entirely new.

         82.   Furthermore,  whilst  I  appreciate  the  burden   of   proof
             ultimately lies on the Secretary of State,  but  the  evidence
             that  an  out-of-country  appeal  will   be   ineffective   in
             protecting the Article 8 rights of Mr  Nixon  and  his  family
             members is currently weak.  There is no evidence that he is in
             any way constrained from instructing his  legal  team.   As  I
             have indicated, the  crucial  issue  in  the  appeal  will  be
             whether  there  was,  in  the  period  2014-16,  a  subsisting
             relationship between Mr Nixon and his  wife,  and  between  Mr
             Nixon and his son.  Mrs Nixon and J-Kwon will be able to  give
             live evidence at any appeal hearing, as they did before  Judge
             Pacey. Even if Mr Nixon is in Jamaica, the Secretary of  State
             says that video-link facilities will be made available to him,
             to enable him to give  evidence.   Video-link  facilities  are
             improving; and they are becoming common  in  many  courts  and
             tribunals, even where there are contested  evidential  issues.
             Although  Mr  Nixon's  credibility  may  be  in  issue,  I  am
             unpersuaded that a tribunal  will  be  unable  to  assess  his
             sincerity and credibility in respect of that narrow issue from
             taking his evidence on video-link."

39. At paragraph 87, Hickinbottom LJ decided that  Mr  Nixon's  application
    for permission to appeal in respect of certain of his grounds should be
    stayed until "after the First-tier Tribunal has determined  Mr  Nixon's
    appeal and any appeal from that determination  has  been  dealt  with".
    His reason for so deciding is important for present purposes.   It  was
    as follows:-

         "87. The First-tier Tribunal is, in my view, the  more  experienced
             and appropriate forum for the determination of factual  issues
             such as those that arise in this case, notably the  nature  of
             the relationship between Mr Nixon, and his wife and  son.   It
             is inherently better for that issue to be  considered  on  the
             basis of the facilities that are in fact  made  available  for
             this case, as opposed to the Administrative  Court  conducting
             the exercise hypothetically, on the basis of general  evidence
             provided by the Secretary of  State.   As  I  have  indicated,
             there is  reason  for  some  confidence  that  the  First-tier
             Tribunal will be in a position to conduct an effective appeal.
              Without falling into the heresy  identified  by  the  Supreme
             Court in Kiarie & Byndloss, it is nevertheless worthy of  note
             that the Tribunal will of course be  under  an  obligation  to
             ensure the  appeal  is  effective,  and  will  no  doubt  take
             appropriate steps to ensure that it is so.

         88.  If the appeal is effective to protect the relevant  Article  8
             rights, then there will be no substance left in  this  appeal.
             In the event that the appeal is not conducted so as to protect
             the relevant Article 8 rights effectively -  or  if  Mr  Nixon
             considers that to be the case - then he will be able to return
             to this court and press for permission to appeal or permission
             to proceed with the judicial review.  By that stage, the cases
             to which I have referred in paragraph 19 above, that have been
             set up for the First-tier Tribunal to deal with out-of-country
             appeals using video-link facilities etc, will also  have  been
             determined.   This  court  can  then  consider  permission  to
             appeal, if indeed matters requiring further  consideration  by
             this court remain."





F. DOES 'KIARIE' IMPACT ON THE JUDGE'S DECISION?

40. It is now possible to return to the facts of the present appeal and  to
    engage with the submissions of Counsel.

41. Mr Thomann, for the respondent, submitted that the decision  in  Kiarie
    and Byndloss cannot retrospectively affect  the  question  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in the present appeal did or did not  err  in
    law.  He compared the situation to that  in  Mulvenna  v  Secretary  of
    State for Communities and Local Government [2015]  EWHC  3494  (Admin),
    [2016] JPL 487.  In that case, the claimants sought to  challenge,  out
    of time, the Secretary of State's decision to  recover  their  planning
    appeals.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the  decisions  in
    question had been unlawful, viewed  in  the  light  of  the  subsequent
    decision of the High Court in the case of Moore and Coates v  Secretary
    of State for Communities and Local Government [2015] EWHC  44  (Admin).
    The High Court, however, rejected the application of the  claimants  to
    extend time for bringing judicial review  of  the  decisions  in  their
    cases.  In essence, the rationale was that time limits for  challenging
    decisions cannot be set aside merely because, at some point thereafter,
    a judicial decision casts doubt on the validity of those decisions.

42. We are unable to accept Mr Thomann's submission  on  this  issue.   The
    present case is not comparable with that in Mulvenna.   The  lawfulness
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is directly in issue in  the
    present appeal. The appellant did not need to  seek  any  extension  of
    time limits in order to challenge that decision.




G. THE 'KIARIE' QUESTIONS IN MORE DETAIL

43. We therefore need to return to the questions set out at  paragraphs  30
    to 35 above and address them in more detail, in a way that  we  believe
    will enable judges to apply them to the particular facts of a case.

First question

44. In the case of an appellant who is not legally represented, the  First-
    tier Tribunal will need to consider whether that state  of  affairs  is
    likely to be a direct result of the appellant's deportation pursuant to
    section 94B: paragraph 60 of Lord Wilson's judgment.  In the  light  of
    the burden on the respondent of showing that the  certification  system
    is, in a particular case, lawful, the First-tier  Tribunal  can  expect
    the respondent to provide appropriate information on this subject.   As
    far as this Tribunal is aware, legal aid is not available as  a  matter
    of course to foreign criminal appellants  who  are  seeking  to  resist
    deportation, regardless of circumstances. Accordingly,  in  such  cases
    the First-tier Tribunal will need to be wary of arguments  that  depend
    on the  alleged  consequences  of  section  94B  certification  on  the
    availability of legal aid.

45. Assuming that the appellant  is  legally  represented,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal will need to be satisfied that the appellant has been able  to
    provide adequate instructions to his  United  Kingdom  lawyers  and  to
    receive  advice  from  those  lawyers.   Given  the  state  of   modern
    communications, there is, in general, no reason  why  communication  by
    telephone and email should not be regarded  as  adequate,  particularly
    where the appellant's direct instructions can be supplemented by United
    Kingdom relatives or friends.

Second question

46. The First-tier Tribunal will  need  to  consider  whether  professional
    evidence, such as from psychiatrists and social workers,  is  genuinely
    needed in the particular case and, if so, whether its  availability  or
    quality is likely to be materially  affected  by  the  appellant  being
    outside the United Kingdom.  In this regard, we consider that  it  will
    not be sufficient for the appellant (or those representing him)  merely
    to  assert  that  such  evidence  is  needed   and   that   it   cannot
    satisfactorily be produced.  The Tribunal will  need  to  form  a  view
    whether, if the appellant had not been required to leave, such evidence
    would have been likely to have been forthcoming. If  so,  the  Tribunal
    will have to consider whether physical,  face-to-face  contact  between
    the appellant and the expert is required, in order for the expert to be
    able to produce a satisfactory report. The  professional  view  of  any
    proposed expert as to his  or  her  ability  to  proceed  without  such
    contact (eg by video link or Skype) will be particularly significant in
    this regard. As for reports from OASys, etc, the First-tier Tribunal is
    likely to want to see evidence that the appellant's legal  advisers  or
    relatives have tried to obtain relevant reports and been refused on the
    basis that the appellant is outside the United Kingdom.

47. An important issue for the First-tier Tribunal will be  the  stance  of
    the respondent as regards the matters to which we have  just  referred.
    If, for example, the respondent concedes that an appellant who has been
    deported as a result  of  criminal  activity  is  genuinely  remorseful
    and/or presents no significant risk of re-offending,  any  difficulties
    concerning the appellant's ability to  present  such  evidence  may  be
    rendered irrelevant.  See further paragraph 51 below.

48. So far as social worker reports are concerned, the First-tier  Tribunal
    will, again, need to be satisfied that there is, on the  facts  of  the
    particular case, a genuine need for such a report and that its  quality
    is likely to be materially affected by the social worker's inability to
    observe face-to-face contact between the appellant  and  the  child  or
    other family member concerned.

Points to bear in mind

49. It is important to stress  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  not
    lightly come to the conclusion  that  none  of  these  issues,  whether
    viewed individually or collectively, prevents the fair hearing  of  the
    appeal.   The  thrust  of  Lord  Wilson's  judgment  is   plain.    The
    difficulties  facing  a  person  in  bringing  an   appeal   in   these
    circumstances are, in many cases, likely to be  such  as  to  make  the
    proceedings Article 8 non-compliant.  In our view, however, bearing  in
    mind the judgment of Hickinbottom LJ in Nixon (albeit acknowledging  it
    is a  permission  decision),  the  questions  need  to  be  raised  and
    answered.

50. If the First-tier Tribunal comes to the conclusion that,  for  example,
    adequate instructions have not been able to be given to the appellant's
    legal  adviser,  then  the  availability  or  otherwise  of  video-link
    facilities for hearing the appellant give evidence will be  immaterial,
    unless  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concludes  that   any   deficiencies
    regarding instructions can  be  addressed  by  a  private  consultation
    between the appellant and his legal  adviser,  using  such  facilities,
    before the hearing begins.

Third question

51. The third question is whether, in all the circumstances,  hearing  live
    evidence from the appellant is necessary.  As  we  have  observed,  the
    effect of Lord Wilson's judgment is that in many if not  most  cases  a
    fair hearing cannot take place unless the appellant is heard in person.
    The First-tier Tribunal will need to consider  whether  there  are  any
    disputed findings of fact. If there are not, then live evidence may not
    be necessary. Lord Wilson's judgment, however,  makes  it  clear  that,
    even if hard-edged facts are not in dispute, a judicial fact-finder  in
    this area may nevertheless be properly swayed by seeing and hearing the
    appellant. For this reason, we consider that, in section 94B cases, the
    need for live evidence is likely to be present.  A  possible  exception
    might be where the respondent's stance is that, even if the appellant's
    case is taken at its highest, so far as family  relationships,  remorse
    and risk of re-offending are concerned, the public  interest  is  still
    such  as  to  make  the   appellant's   deportation   a   proportionate
    interference with the  Article  8  rights  of  all  concerned.  It  is,
    perhaps, more difficult to see how the respondent could  adopt  such  a
    stance where the appellant  is  not  a  foreign  criminal,  unless  his
    immigration history is particularly problematic.

Fourth question

52. If this point is reached, the issue will be whether the respondent  can
    demonstrate that a satisfactory video-link facility can be  established
    (at the respondent's expense), between a  suitable  place  outside  the
    United Kingdom, which is reasonably convenient to  the  appellant,  and
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  centre  and  that,   in   all   the
    circumstances, evidence given by means of such a link is a satisfactory
    alternative to physical face-to-face evidence, albeit that it will  not
    be its equivalent.



H. ADDRESSING THE QUESTIONS IN THE PRESENT CASE

53. In the present case, how does  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  impact  upon  the
    lawfulness of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge?   Adopting
    the approach we have outlined, we proceed as follows.




The first question

54. So far as funding is concerned, there is no issue.  The appellant  has,
    at all material times, had legal representation.   That  representation
    did not cease upon his deportation.  He was represented  by  solicitors
    and Counsel  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    criticisms advanced by the appellant of his former representatives  are
    entirely unsubstantiated.  There  is  no  evidence  that  his  previous
    representatives have been approached in order to give their side of the
    story.  There is, on the facts, nothing to show  that  the  appellant's
    deportation materially affected his  ability  to  have  solicitors  and
    Counsel mount a case on  his  behalf.   The  appellant's  mother  makes
    reference to the  appellant  having  telephone  conversation  with  his
    former advisers, albeit that these occurred only when she visited their
    offices.

55. At this point, we need to deal with  an  application  made  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  by  the
    appellant's present solicitors, whereby they sought to adduce a witness
    statement from the appellant and a further witness statement  from  his
    mother. These concerned, amongst other things, alleged difficulties  in
    instructing the appellant's advisers, given his  presence  in  Nigeria.
    Mr  Thomann  opposed  the  application.   He  said  that  the  evidence
    contained in those statements could  and  should  have  been  submitted
    earlier.

56. We agree. Despite Miss Cohen's submissions, we see no  reason  why  the
    evidence contained in the statements should not have been  put  forward
    earlier.  Insofar as the failure is sought to be laid at  the  door  of
    the former legal advisers, the submission falls foul of the judgment of
    the Court of Appeal E & R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] EWCA Civ 72.

57. In all the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal judge did not err  in
    law in proceeding on the basis that the  appellant's  absence  had  not
    materially impacted on his ability to secure legal  representation  and
    instruct his lawyers.

The second question

58. Strikingly, the appellant has at no point sought to express remorse for
    the crime for which for he was imprisoned for eighteen months and which
    led to his deportation.  So far as re-offending is concerned, we  agree
    with Mr Thomann that the appellant had the opportunity during the  five
    months that he was in the United Kingdom after being given  the  notice
    of deportation decision to obtain OASys reports and  any  other  report
    that might be relevant in this regard.  In the long  period  since  his
    deportation, there is no evidence that any  effort  has  been  made  to
    obtain such information.   There is, even now, no indication that  such
    information is being sought or that  there  is  a  stated  need  for  a
    psychiatrist or similar expert to give evidence for the appellant.

59. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made entirely  valid  findings  that  the
    appellant had  had  limited  contact  with  his  daughter,  before  his
    deportation.  The judge took no issue with the evidence put forward  by
    the appellant' mother regarding the indirect contact, in  the  form  of
    what appear to be voicemail messages, which had occurred since.

60. The judge regarded it as a significant fact that no  attempt  had  been
    made to seek evidence from the  mother  of  the  appellant's  daughter.
    That was, we find, highly pertinent and is entirely unaffected  by  the
    fact that the appellant was outside the United Kingdom.  There was also
    no suggestion that the report of any  social  worker  was  regarded  as
    relevant in this regard  by  the  appellant's  representatives  or  his
    witnesses.

The third and fourth questions

61. The issue, accordingly, comes down to the third and  fourth  questions:
    whether, in the light of Kiarie and Byndloss, the judge acted fairly in
    proceeding with  the  hearing,  without  examining  the  need  for  the
    appellant to give live evidence and,  if  so,  whether  there  was  the
    possibility of the appellant being able to give such evidence by video-
    link from Nigeria.

62.  It is, of course, no criticism of the judge  that  he  was  unable  to
    address these questions by reference to the  judgments  in  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss, which had not been delivered.  We  do,  however,  agree  with
    Miss Cohen that Kiarie and Byndloss,  properly  interpreted,  compelled
    the judge to address the matters we have set out above.

63. For the reasons we have given, no material error was committed  by  the
    judge   in   respect   of   the    questions    relating    to    legal
    representations/instructions  and  obtaining  supporting   professional
    evidence.  Even  if  he  had  specifically  addressed  the  first   two
    questions, he would not, on the facts, have acted any  differently.  We
    do, however, find that the judge erred in law in  going  ahead  without
    considering the need to hear oral evidence from the appellant.

64. A key matter at issue in the case was the position of the appellant  in
    Nigeria.  The judge heard oral evidence about this and had  before  him
    written evidence from the organisation  that  had  been  assisting  the
    appellant.  There is no doubt that the appellant's position in Nigeria,
    as disclosed by that evidence, was problematic.  The judge came to  the
    conclusion that the evidence did not make the appellant's circumstances
    "very compelling".  If, however, the judge had been able  to  hear  and
    see the appellant give evidence on this issue, his conclusion may  well
    have been different.

65. Accordingly, although  we  emphasise  that  the  judge  is  not  to  be
    criticised, he materially erred in law.  As a result, the determination
    falls to be set aside.  In  the  circumstances,  the  only  appropriate
    course, given the failure to accord the appellant a fair hearing, is to
    remit the matter to be re-decided by the First-tier Tribunal.

66. In doing so, the Tribunal will need  to  consider  all  the  up-to-date
    evidence.  That may include the evidence which was the subject  of  the
    rule 15(2A)  application.   As  in  the  Nixon  cases,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal - if it reaches the fourth question - will need  to  determine
    whether a hearing of the appellant by video-link with  Lagos  would  be
    feasible and of sufficient quality.

    I. DIRECTIONS OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

67. The issue arises as to what should happen if the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    on remittal,  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  nothing  short  of  the
    appellant's physical presence in the United Kingdom is  needed,  before
    an Article 8 compliant hearing of his appeal in that Tribunal can  take
    place.  We note what Lord Wilson said at paragraph  65  of  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss (see above).  In considering the respondent's submission  that
    the Tribunal could  "by  direction,  stress  the  desirability  of  the
    appellant's attendance before it", Lord Wilson observed that "it  seems
    entirely impracticable for an appellant abroad to apply first  for  the
    unenforceable direction and then for judicial review of any failure  to
    comply with it".

68. It must, however, be remembered that the appeals in Kiarie and Byndloss
    concerned judicial reviews of section 94B certificates.  In the present
    case, as matters stand, the section 94B certificate in respect  of  the
    appellant has not been successfully challenged.  Accordingly, it  seems
    to us that it will indeed be necessary for the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    proceed as suggested by the respondent at paragraph 65  of  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss if, on remittal, the Tribunal concludes that a  fair  hearing,
    compatible with Article 8, cannot take place unless  the  appellant  is
    able to return to the United Kingdom.

69. Both in the present case and in any other appeal where the section  94B
    certificate has not been quashed, if  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  a
    result of adopting the step-by-step approach, concludes that the appeal
    cannot lawfully be determined unless the appellant  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the Tribunal should  give  a  direction  to  that  effect  and
    adjourn the  proceedings,  to  enable  the  respondent  to  secure  the
    appellant's return.


J. DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
We set that decision aside and remit the matter  to  be  re-decided  by  the
First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                           Signed                     Dated: 26 February
                           2018




                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber
