

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

R (on the application of Mansoor) v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department (Balajigari - effect of judge's decision) [2020] UKUT 00126
(IAC)


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            14 February 2020


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                ADIL MANSOOR
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms A Jones, instructed by Farani Taylor Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


The process required by the Court of Appeal in  Balajigari  may  be  carried
out by the  Tribunal  in  effect  applying  that  guidance,  such  that  the
Secretary of State's failure to do so is rendered immaterial.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE allen: The applicant has applied for judicial review of the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 13  March  2019  refusing  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  Permission was granted on the papers by  Judge  Frances  on  1
    November 2019.


1.   The decision under challenge has to be seen against the  background  of
    an earlier decision of Judge Norton-Taylor, at that time a Judge of the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  applicant  (as  I  shall  refer   to   him
    throughout) had appealed  against  the  decision  of  26  January  2018
    refusing a human rights claim which was made through the  route  of  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain, itself based upon  a  claim
    of ten years' continuous lawful residence.

2.   Though the Secretary of State  had  accepted  that  the  applicant  had
    acquired ten years' continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom,
    it was asserted that he had acted dishonestly when stating  his  income
    in respect of two previous applications, the first made on 14  December
    2010 and the second on 15 July 2013.  It was said  that  the  applicant
    had either significantly overstated his earnings to the  respondent  in
    order to satisfy the relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules  at
    the time, or that he had underestimated his earnings to HMRC  in  order
    to avoid  the  appropriate  tax  liability.   On  either  view  it  was
    contended on behalf of the respondent that he had acted dishonestly  or
    his conduct was such that it was undesirable for him to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   Having considered the evidence carefully, the judge concluded that  the
    respondent had shown that the applicant had knowingly  and  dishonestly
    provided inaccurate figures to HMRC in  respect  of  both  of  the  tax
    returns in question.  Among  other  things  he  noted  the  absence  of
    evidence from the applicant's accountant  and  the  fact  that  in  his
    witness statement he appeared to be  blaming  the  accountant  for  the
    original errors, whereas in the oral evidence he appeared to be  saying
    that the error was in fact his own.  In the judge's view there had been
    a shift in position which did not assist the applicant's case and  also
    he  emphasised  the  absence  of  any  evidence  whatsoever  from   the
    accountant, for which no sensible explanation had been provided.

4.   At paragraph 54 of his decision the judge went  on  to  remind  himself
    that the ground of refusal relied on by the respondent  was  of  course
    discretionary.  He considered the discretion and, absent the  situation
    of  the  applicant's  son,  to  which  he  returned  subsequently  when
    considering Article 8 outside the Rules, he saw no  basis  to  exercise
    discretion in the applicant's favour.  On the judge's findings  he  had
    been dishonest on two separate occasions in the past and there were  no
    sufficiently strong mitigating factors in his case.

5.   However, in his consideration of the situation outside the  Rules,  the
    judge noted that  the  applicant's  wife  and  son  were  both  British
    citizens, that it was in the son's best  interests  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and  that,  bearing  in  mind  the  respondent's  policy
    (Family Migration: Appendix FM section 1.0b), published on 22  February
    2018, he concluded that it would be unreasonable to expect the child to
    leave the United Kingdom and as a consequence the  applicant  succeeded
    in his appeal.

6.   As a consequence of this decision, the  respondent  made  the  decision
    under challenge.  In the decision letter, having noted that the  appeal
    had been allowed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  the
    applicant's genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  children
    (there was a reference to this being under Appendix  FM,  but  that  is
    clearly wrong given that the  decision  was  one  reached  outside  the
    Rules), the respondent said that  the  applicant  had  been  granted  a
    period of thirty months' limited leave to remain  under  paragraphs  R-
    LTRPT.1.1.(a),  (b)  and  (d)  of  Appendix  FM,  which  included   the
    exceptions paragraph EX.1.(a).

7.   The applicant's challenge to this decision is based on  the  contention
    that he should have been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
    grounds were drafted by Ms Jones  who  has  also  provided  a  skeleton
    argument and oral submissions before me today.

8.   The first point made in the grounds of challenge is with regard to  the
    implications for this case of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673.  The point is made that  this  decision
    postdates the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and it  is  contended
    that the judge did not undertake the required  two  stage  process  and
    therefore did not consider whether the discretionary  ground  was  made
    out for refusal because of paragraph 322(5) in light of all  the  other
    circumstances of the case.  It is argued that  in  circumstances  where
    the Tribunal had concluded that it was not undesirable  to  permit  the
    applicant to remain having regard to his relationship with his  British
    citizen child, it was inappropriate to grant discretionary leave  under
    the ten year route rather than indefinite leave  to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was contended that the respondent was obliged to
    consider, but did not consider, the discretionary ground for refusal of
    indefinite leave to remain in light of all  the  circumstances  of  the
    case.   In  the  circumstances,  it  is  argued,  it   was   Wednesbury
    unreasonable to grant discretionary leave rather than indefinite  leave
    to remain.  In addition it is argued that the respondent had failed  to
    consider the passage of time since the different declarations were made
    as well as the applicant's family circumstances  and  the  implications
    for them of having to make a number of extension applications over  the
    next ten years and another application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    at the end of that process.  It is argued that the deception should  be
    regarded as being analogous to being spent in cases arising  under  the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act.

9.   The point is also made that in the Summary Grounds  of  Defence  of  30
    July 2019 the respondent had specifically asked for the instant case to
    be included within an order made by Lane J on 14 June 2019 staying  the
    cohort of Balajigari related cases.  Reference is made to the Secretary
    of State's submissions in Balajigari and other  cases,  dated  23  July
    2019, in which it is said,  inter  alia,  that  the  outcome  for  each
    applicant will therefore be  the  same  as  if  each  had  successfully
    pursued his judicial review claim to a  conclusion:  the  Secretary  of
    State would have been under the usual duty to remake  the  decision  in
    question in accordance with the applicable law and policy at  the  time
    of the new decision.  It was said therefore that the Secretary of State
    submitted that the process would render all of  these  judicial  review
    claims academic and invited the applicants to agree to  withdraw  them.
    The  Secretary  of  State  would  correspond  individually  with   each
    applicant or their legal representatives to complete the administrative
    tasks necessary to give effect to this.

10.  In her grant of permission in this case Judge Frances  noted  what  had
    been said in the Acknowledgement of Service and the consequent stay  of
    the application, but crucially however the respondent had not confirmed
    that she would withdraw and reconsider the decision in  this  case  and
    following Balajigari the grounds were arguable.

11.  On this point therefore it is argued in the grounds by Ms Jones in  her
    skeleton and in oral submissions that the Secretary of State had made a
    specific direct promise to the applicant that his judicial  review  was
    academic, would be settled and a new decision made,  and  that  he  had
    relied upon those assurances to his detriment.  As a consequence it was
    argued that it was not reasonable now for the  Secretary  of  State  to
    proceed on the basis that this was not a cohort case.

12.  In his skeleton argument and oral submissions  Mr  Malik  set  out  the
    factual background and the legislative framework, none of which  is  in
    dispute.

13.  Mr Malik argued  that  the  applicant  had  had  every  opportunity  to
    challenge the First-tier Tribunal's finding of dishonesty  despite  the
    fact that the appeal had been allowed, citing  what  was  said  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Anwar [2017] EWCA Civ 2134 at paragraphs 14  to  18.
    The respondent had carefully considered the findings made by the First-
    tier Tribunal, and it was unsurprising  that  in  the  light  of  those
    findings the applicant had been granted limited leave to remain  rather
    than indefinite leave to remain.

14.  Mr Malik also placed reliance on Alladin [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1334  where
    among other things it was said that it was a matter for  the  Secretary
    of State to decide whether to exercise her discretion to grant leave to
    remain and if so for how long.  Also it had been  said  in  MS  (India)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1190 that the refusal of indefinite leave to remain  as
    such did not engage Article 8.  As a consequence, it was argued,  there
    was no merit in the applicant's reliance on his long residence, Article
    8 and his wife and children.  All  those  matters  had  been  carefully
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal and by the Secretary of State.

15.  As  regards  Balajigari,  there  was  nothing  in  that  judgment  that
    assisted the applicant.  Mr Malik quoted from what  had  been  said  by
    Underhill LJ at paragraph 39 as follows:

     "There will, though no doubt only exceptionally,  be  cases  where  the
         interests of children or others, or serious problems about  removal
         to their country of origin, mean that it would be wrong  to  refuse
         leave to remain (though not necessarily indefinite leave to remain)
         to migrants whose presence is undesirable."

16.  As regards what  had  been  said  in  Balajigari  about  the  issue  of
    procedural fairness and the need to indicate clearly to  the  applicant
    that the Secretary of State has a suspicion of dishonesty and give  him
    an opportunity to respond, the applicant had had a fair opportunity  to
    respond to the notice to provide evidence including  oral  evidence  in
    response to the Secretary of State's allegation  and  he  had  provided
    oral evidence and an explanation of his conduct and they were found not
    to be credible and he had been found to be dishonest.

17.  It was further argued that the fact that the judicial review claim  was
    previously stayed was of no material  significance  and  the  applicant
    could not be granted relief simply on that basis.  It was  argued  that
    it could not be sensibly suggested that the stay of the judicial review
    claim following Balajigari meant that the Upper Tribunal  should  quash
    the Secretary of State's decision.

18.  The point made by Mr Malik was that even if, contrary  to  his  further
    submissions, it was found that the  Secretary  of  State  had  made  an
    error, the claim should be dismissed and that it was highly likely that
    the outcome  for  the  applicant  would  not  have  been  substantially
    different if the conduct complained of had not occurred.  Reliance  was
    placed on section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts Act 1981.

19.  By way of reply Ms  Jones  argued  that  there  had  been  an  absolute
    statement that this was a Balajigari case and this point had been  made
    in a document sent to the Upper Tribunal.  The documentation  had  been
    clear that this was a Balajigari case and would follow  the  course  of
    action set out in the letter of 23 July 2019 that the outcome for  each
    applicant would be the same.  The Secretary of State  had  changed  her
    mind.  It was not a case where section 31(2A) would apply,  bearing  in
    mind the factors such as the discretionary nature of paragraph  322(5),
    the fact of British children, the  six  years  further  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the conduct found to be dishonest and the grant of  leave
    and the two-stage  process  that  should  have  been  undertaken  under
    Balajigari.  The applicant  had  been  fourteen  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom and now had two British children as well as a British wife  and
    there were also the respondent's section 55 duties, so it could not  be
    said that the  same  decision  would  necessarily  be  reached  if  the
    decision was properly arrived at.

20.  I reserved my decision.

The Law

21.  The relevant legal provisions are as follows.

22.  The power to grant leave to enter or remain arises under  section  3(1)
    of the Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971 Act"), which provides:

"Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a person is not a
British citizen;

(a)  he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave to do so in
accordance with the provisions of, or made under, this Act;

(b)  he may be given leave to enter the United Kingdom (or, when already
there, leave to remain in the United Kingdom) either for a limited or for
an indefinite period."

23.  The Immigration Rules set out the way in which the Secretary of State
would exercise his power under section 3(1) of the 1971 Act.  The
Immigration Rules are made by the Secretary of State and approved by
Parliament under section 3(2) of the 1971 Act.

24.  Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules provides:

"The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to remain
on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are that:

(i)(a)   he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the
United Kingdom.

(ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why it would
be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain on the ground
of long residence, taking into account his:

(a)  age; and

(b)  strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

(c)  personal history, including character, conduct, associations and
employment record; and

(d)  domestic circumstances; and

(e)  compassionate circumstances; and

(f)  any representations received on the person's behalf; and

(iii)    the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
for refusal.

(iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the English
language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom, in
accordance with Appendix KoLL.

(v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws
except that any period of overstaying of 28 days or less will be
disregarded, as will any period of overstaying between periods of entry
clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28 days and any
period of application made within that 28 day period."

25.  Paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules provides:

"Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or remain
in the United Kingdom should normally be refused.

...

(5)  the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in the
United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including convictions which do
not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character or associations or the fact
that he represents a threat to national security."

26.  Paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules provides:

"(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application for entry clearance
or leave to enter or remain made under this Appendix, or an application for
leave to remain which has otherwise been considered under this Appendix,
does not otherwise meet the requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the
Rules, the decision-maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-
paragraph (2) apply.

(2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
consider, on the basis of the information provided by the applicant,
whether there are exceptional circumstances which would render refusal of
entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a breach of Article 8 of the
European Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal would result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner, a
relevant child or another family member whose Article 8 rights it is
evident from that information would be affected by a decision to refuse the
application.

(3) Where the exceptional circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2)
above apply, the applicant will be granted entry clearance or leave to
enter or remain under, as appropriate, paragraph D-ECP.1.2., D-LTRP.1.2., D-
ECC.1.1., D-LTRC.1.1., D-ECPT.1.2., D-LTRPT.1.2., D-ECDR.1.1. or D-
ECDR.1.2.

(4) This paragraph does not apply in the context of applications made under
section BPILR or DVILR."

27.  Paragraph D-LTRPT.1.2 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules,
referred in Paragraph GEN 3.2(3) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules,
provides:

"D-LTRP.1.2.  If the applicant meets the requirements in paragraph R-
LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (d) for limited leave to remain as a partner, or
paragraph GEN.3.1.(2) or GEN.3.2.(3) applies to an applicant for leave to
remain as a partner, the applicant will be granted leave to remain for a
period not exceeding 30 months and subject to a condition of no recourse to
public funds unless the decision-maker considers, with reference to
paragraph GEN.1.11A., that the applicant should not be subject to such a
condition, and they will be eligible to apply for settlement after a
continuous period of at least 120 months in the UK with such leave, with
limited leave to remain as a partner granted under paragraph D-LTRP.1.1.,
or in the UK with leave to enter granted on the basis of entry clearance as
a partner granted under paragraph D-ECP1.1. or D-ECP.1.2. (excluding in all
cases any period of leave to enter or limited leave to remain as a
fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner); or, if paragraph E-LTRP.1.11.
applies, the applicant will be granted limited leave for a period not
exceeding 6 months and subject to a condition of no recourse to public
funds and a prohibition on employment."

Discussion

28.  I have set out above the history of and background to this  case.   The
    essence of the decision in Balajigari is to be  found  in  the  summary
    paragraph, paragraph 221 of the decision.   The  main  reason  why  the
    Secretary of State's approach in refusing the applications for leave to
    remain in those cases on paragraph 322(5) grounds  was  legally  flawed
    was because he proceeded directly from finding that  the  discrepancies
    occurred to a decision that they would  result  in  dishonesty  without
    giving applicants an opportunity to proffer  an  innocent  explanation.
    The further point was made that the Secretary of  State  had  also  not
    addressed further questions  of  whether  the  dishonesty  in  question
    rendered  the  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the   United   Kingdom
    undesirable  or  whether  there  were  other  factors  outweighing  the
    presumption  if  they  were  removed,  or  giving  the  applicants  the
    opportunity to raise any matters relevant to those  questions.   Though
    such cases would be exceptional, the step could not simply be  ignored.
    It was considered that that  unlawfulness  could  be  avoided  for  the
    future by the Secretary of State  adopting  a  "minded  to"  procedure,
    thereby informing the applicants of her concerns and  giving  them  the
    opportunity to show cause why indefinite leave to remain should not  be
    refused by offering an innocent explanation of the discrepancies (which
    would need to be particularised and  documented  so  far  as  possible)
    and/or drawing attention to matters relevant to the "undesirability" or
    "discretion" issues.

29.  The point was further made at paragraph 222 in  Balajigari  that  those
    defects need not lead to a paragraph 322(5) refusal  being  quashed  if
    the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that they were  immaterial,  i.e.  that
    the result would have been the same even if  the  applicants  had  been
    given an opportunity to explain the discrepancies.

30.  This case is of course not a classic Balajigari case in the sense  that
    there has been an appeal, albeit prior to Balajigari being decided,  at
    which the applicant was given the opportunity to provide  explanations.
    One can see, although it is a matter of only tangential relevance as it
    was not relied on by either party before me, from paragraph  8  of  the
    judge's decision that a tax questionnaire had  been  completed  by  the
    applicant in response to further enquiries by the respondent  into  the
    application for indefinite leave to remain.

31.   Be  that  as  it  may,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  gave  careful
    consideration to the explanations provided by the applicant  and  found
    them to be entirely unsatisfactory, such that  he  concluded  that  the
    respondent had shown  that  the  applicant  before  him  knowingly  and
    dishonestly provided inaccurate figures to HMRC in respect of  both  of
    the tax returns in question, but if in fact  the  figures  provided  to
    HMRC were accurate it must follow that  the  figures  set  out  in  the
    applications were inaccurate and by a very large degree and he  had  no
    credible evidence as to why such an error could have occurred.

32.  As noted above, the judge also went on to  consider  the  discretionary
    element of the  ground  of  refusal,  and  saw  no  basis  to  exercise
    discretion in the applicant's favour.  On the judge's findings  he  had
    been dishonest on two separate occasions in the past and there were  no
    sufficiently strong mitigating factors in his case.

33.  It is clear in my view therefore  that  the  process  required  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Balajigari has been carried out in this  case.   The
    applicant had every opportunity to put before  the  judge  explanations
    for the discrepancies and signally failed to do so.

34.  It was as a consequence of that decision that  the  respondent  decided
    to grant limited leave to remain only rather than indefinite  leave  to
    remain, and in this regard one must refer back of course  to  paragraph
    276B(ii) and paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules.   Contrary  to
    what is argued in the applicant's skeleton, I consider  the  judge  did
    undertake the required two-stage process.  He carefully considered  the
    exercise of his discretion and saw no reason  to  exercise  it  in  the
    applicant's favour.   I  see  nothing  in  the  point  in  the  grounds
    concerning the contradictory reasons for  the  decision  given  by  the
    respondent.  It is clear that the appeal had been allowed on the  basis
    of Article 8 outside the Rules, as made  clear  in  the  letter  of  11
    February 2019.  There is no materiality  whatsoever  to  the  error  in
    stating that the appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  on  the
    basis of Appendix FM.

35.  Nor do I see any basis for saying that it was  Wednesbury  unreasonable
    to grant discretionary leave rather than indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    In light of the finding of dishonesty by the judge, it would have  been
    surprising  if  the  respondent  had  decided  nevertheless  to   grant
    indefinite leave to remain, bearing in mind the terms in particular  of
    paragraph 276B(ii).

36.  Nor do  I  see  any  merit  in  the  argument  concerning  the  initial
    inclusion of this case in the Balajigari cohort and what  was  said  in
    the Acknowledgement of Service and in the accompanying submissions.  It
    was fully open to the respondent to decide ultimately that this was not
    a case that would fall to be treated like the Balajigari cases  because
    of its particular facts and there having been a finding of fraud by the
    judge.  There is no public law unlawfulness in the respondent's  change
    of position in this regard.  It was open to the  respondent  to  change
    her mind and decide to determine the matter in the  way  in  which  she
    did.

37.  In case the above conclusions are wrong, I agree  with  Mr  Malik  that
    this is a case where section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts  Act  applies.
    The outcome  for  the  applicant  would  not  have  been  substantially
    different even if there were any error  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  I note the points made by Ms Jones in this regard.  The time
    when the dishonesty took place, the  applicant's  family  circumstances
    and time in the United Kingdom, the fact that his wife and children are
    British and the respondent's section 55 duties are  all  relevant,  but
    none of  those  matters  in  my  view  whether  taken  individually  or
    cumulatively are such that they could conceivably lead the Secretary of
    State to come to any different decision other than to grant the limited
    leave that was granted in this case.

38.  No error of law in  the  decision  or  the  process  adopted  has  been
    identified by the applicant, and as a consequence this application  for
    judicial review is refused.~~~~0~~~~


