
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

BH (policies/information: SoS's duties) Iraq [2020] UKUT 00189 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Parliament House, Edinburgh          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 March 2020                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                                LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)

                                   Between

                                     BH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr K. Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G. McIver, instructed by the Government Legal
Department

         (a)  The Secretary of State has a duty to reach decisions that are
         in accordance with her policies in the immigration field.  Where
         there appears to be a policy that is not otherwise apparent and
         which may throw doubt on the Secretary of State's case before the
         tribunal, she is under a duty to make a relevant policy known to
         the Tribunal, whether or not the policy is published and so
         available in the public domain.  Despite their expertise, judges in
         the Immigration and Asylum Chambers cannot reasonably be expected
         to possess comprehensive knowledge of each and every policy of the
         Secretary of State in the immigration field.


         (b)  In protection appeals (and probably in other kinds of
         immigration appeals), the Secretary of State has a duty not to
         mislead, which requires her to draw attention to documents etc
         under her control or in the possession of another government
         department, which are not in the public domain, and which she knows
         or ought to know undermine or qualify her case.


         (c)  There is a clear distinction between information and policy:
         the fact that country information is contained in a COI (country of
         origin) document published by the Secretary of State does not,
         without more, make that information subject to the duty in sub-
         paragraph (a) above.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A.   THE APPELLANT AND HIS APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

1.   The appellant, born in 1977, is a citizen of Iraq.  He says he left
that country in November 2007, travelling to Turkey, before moving on to
the United Kingdom, where he arrived on 26 November 2007 and claimed asylum
the same day.  The respondent refused that claim and the appellant
unsuccessfully appealed to an immigration judge of the Asylum and
Immigration Tribunal.  Over the intervening years, the appellant made a
number of further submissions, with the aim of obtaining a fresh right of
appeal, in the event of their rejection by the respondent.  Eventually, the
submissions made in June 2018 were treated by the respondent as a fresh
claim, the refusal of which led to the appellant's appeal being heard by
First-tier Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison in Glasgow on 12 September
2018.

2.   Despite the fact that the Immigration Judge who dismissed the
appellant's original appeal in 2009 had doubts as to whether he originated
from Mosul, the present First-tier Tribunal Judge appears, like the
respondent, to have accepted that the appellant's home area was Mosul.
Since it was common ground that, at the relevant time, the appellant could
not be expected to return to Mosul, the focus of attention was on whether
the appellant, as a Kurd, could relocate to the Kurdish Zone in Northern
Iraq (IKR); alternatively, whether he could relocate to Baghdad.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge had regard (as he was required to do) to
the Upper Tribunal's country guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
relocation) Iraq (CG) [2018] UKUT 00212, promulgated on 26 June 2018. At
paragraph 13 of his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded the
respondent's Presenting Officer as telling him that, contrary to the
position in AAH, there were now direct flights to the IKR from the United
Kingdom.  The judge, nevertheless, concluded that it was "safer to proceed
on the undertaking given by the Secretary of State that individuals such as
the appellant will be returned to Baghdad".  As a result, at paragraph 14,
the First-tier Tribunal Judge identified the question at the heart of the
appeal as: "Can the appellant return to Baghdad and thereafter proceed
onward to the IKR"?

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the appellant's assertion that
he had no male relatives who could assist his mother or sister to obtain a
CSID, if such an identity document were needed.  The judge also found that
the appellant had spent time in the IKR before coming to the United
Kingdom.  This accorded with the findings of the earlier judge.  The First-
tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant's employment and accommodation
prospects were "not as bleak as described in AAH, even allowing for the
passage of time.  In addition he will have access to the grant under the
Voluntary Returns Scheme" (paragraph 15).

5.   On the totality of the evidence, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
concluded, at paragraph 16, that if the appellant were returned to Iraq,
there was "no real risk of serious harm in terms of the humanitarian
protection provisions".  At paragraph 19, the judge made the same findings
in respect of Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR. So far as Article 8 was
concerned, the judge had regard to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
Immigration Rules.  This provides that, in order to demonstrate an Article
8 right to remain by reference to private life, a person over the age of 18
who has lived continuously in the UK for less than twenty years, needs to
show that "there would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's
integration into the country to which he would have to go if required to
leave the UK".  The First-tier Tribunal Judge held that the appellant could
not satisfy this requirement, on the facts the judge had found:  "Although
it is likely that he will return to the IKR the appellant could also go to
an area where he could avail himself of the protection of" certain Sheiks,
with whom the appellant had had past interactions.  The First-tier Tribunal
Judge had also earlier noted the fact that the appellant had spent time in
the IKR and that he was "young and healthy".

6.   In the light of these conclusions, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.


B.   CHALLENGES TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL'S DECISION

7.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.  The grounds regrettably misrepresented the judge's
decision.  They contended that, at paragraph 13, the judge had found that
it would be "too harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad on
anything other than a transitory basis".  That is not what the First-tier
Tribunal Judge said.  In paragraph 13, the judge made it plain that he was
referring to the appellant's "home area of Mosul" in finding that "it would
be too harsh to expect him to relocate there on anything other than a
transitory basis".

8.   The grounds of application also contended that the First-tier Tribunal
Judge had failed to find how long the appellant would have to reside in
Baghdad; that the appellant would be relocating as an IDP to the IKR; and
that there were no reasons given for the finding that the appellant could
not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

9.   None of these grounds found favour with First-tier Tribunal Judge
Feeney, who refused permission to appeal on 6 March 2019.

10.  The appellant then applied to the Upper Tribunal for permission to
appeal. The grounds of application were drafted by Mr Caskie.  They took a
very different approach to the grounds put to the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  Ground 2 of the new grounds reads as follows:-

"2.  It was the responsibility of the Home Office Presenting Officer to
lodge any relevant policy document with the judge.  At the date of the
hearing the most up-to-date information in respect of the KRG [ie. The IKR]
was contained in the Secretary of State's Humanitarian Protection Country
Report of November 2018.  It is within the context of that report that the
guidance in AAH requires to be considered.  The judge failed to do so and
in so failing erred in law".

12.  The document to which the grounds refer is misdescribed. What is meant
is the "Country Policy and Information Note Iraq: Security and humanitarian
situation Version 5.0 November 2018".  The grounds were also wrong in
asserting that this document was the most up-to-date information available
at the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  That
hearing took place on 12 September 2018, weeks before Version 5.0 appeared.

13.  The new grounds then embarked upon a detailed exegesis of the Country
Policy and Information Note.  Amongst other things, they observed that in a
table at paragraph 3.1.2, the population of the IKR was estimated at around
5,300,000.  This was said to compare with an estimate of approximately
4,000,000 in March 2017.  From this, it was submitted that there would be
"a significant obstacle to the appellant's integration".

14.  The new grounds did not find favour with Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?
who, on 10 April 2019, refused permission to appeal.  She said:-

"The grounds are not made out. The judge cannot be criticised for failing
to make findings on evidence that was not before him.  Had the appellant's
representatives considered that the HO country report was relevant for
their client's case, it was open to them to have submitted it as evidence.
The judge reached sustainable findings. No arguable error of law has been
identified".

C    JUDICIAL REVIEW OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL'S REFUSAL OF PERMISSION TO
APPEAL

15.  The appellant petitioned the Court of Session for judicial review of
the refusal by the Upper Tribunal to grant permission to appeal.  The
appellant's petition contained the following:-

"8.  The grounds accurately record that evidence that could have been
before the judge of the FtT in deciding the appeal was not before him.  The
UT advert to the appellant's representative's ability to have adduced that
evidence.  It is said that the judge cannot be criticised for failing to
make findings on evidence that was not before him.

9.   The Secretary of State has a website containing in excess of 10,000
separate 'pages' of material relevant to immigration in the United Kingdom.
 The word 'pages' is enclosed in inverted commas because many of the
Secretary of State's web pages would themselves be hundreds or thousands of
pages long if printed in a normal font size.  Only one person is expected
to have a comprehensive knowledge of that material being the Secretary of
State himself (sic).

10.  For that reason it has been held that it is the responsibility of the
Respondent, who has a comprehensive knowledge of the Secretary of State's
policies, to draw a relevant policy to the attention of the FtT (UB (Sri
Lanka) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85). The respondent failed to comply with
that duty when this matter was before the FtT.

...

12.  That the basis of challenge was rejected by the Upper Tribunal because
the appellant's representative had the opportunity to lodge the relevant
document.  In failing to recognise that the obligation was upon the
Secretary of State's representative to lodge a potentially relevant
document and not on the petitioner, the Upper Tribunal reversed the onus
and concluded the petitioner did not have an arguable ground of appeal
because of that error.  The UT therefore acted in an irrational manner.

13.  ...  The UT had an obligation to determine whether the petitioner had
a fair hearing.  Notwithstanding that there were elements of a fair hearing
the failure of the respondent to produce documentation to the FtT he was
obliged to produce meant that there was a fundamental or complete failure
by the UT to ensure that the petitioner had a fair hearing. In so failing
the UT erred in law.

...

16.  An important point of principle arises. It has been determined in UB
(Sri Lanka) (supra) that the obligation is upon the Secretary of State to
produce relevant policy documentation to the FtT.

17.  The hearing of the appeal in the present case took place in late
September 2019.  The document relied upon by the petitioner in relation to
the up-to-date situation in Iraq is the latest in a long line of equivalent
documentation published by the Secretary of State.  The document produced
in November 2019 and referred to in the grounds of appeal could not have
been produced at the hearing that took place in September 2019 before the
FtT as it had not by then been published by the Secretary of State, albeit
the similar earlier version could have been. Nonetheless the obligation
remained upon the Secretary of State to draw relevant policy and factual
information to the attention of the FtT Judge notwithstanding that the
hearing before the Tribunal had finished albeit that the FtT proceedings
had not been concluded as no determination had been issued.  The extent to
which the Secretary of State is (sic) an ongoing obligation to draw
relevant matters to the attention of the FtT is an important point of
principle or practice.

..."

16.  The Interlocutor of the Lord Ordinary reduced the Upper Tribunal's
decision to refuse permission on the basis it was arguable that the First-
tier Tribunal "follows an unfair procedure if it makes a decision without
sight of a policy of the Home Secretary's that: (i) is in force at the date
of its decision but was not in force at the date of its hearing; (ii) is
relevant to the issues before it; and (iii) might realistically affect the
outcome: cf. UB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2017] EWCA Civ 85 at ��1, 16 - 22 and 25 - 26".  It was further said to be
arguable that the "policy is relevant to the question whether the
petitioner could reasonably be expected to stay in the IKR or Baghdad" and
that the policy "might realistically have affected the outcome" of the
appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.  All this meant that it was "arguable
that the FtT erred in law by following an unfair procedure". Following the
reduction of the decision, the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal.


D.   THE HEARING ON 9 MARCH 2020

17.  At the hearing on 9 March 2020, Mr Forrest sought and obtained the
Upper Tribunal's permission under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce the "Home Office Country Policy and
Information Note Iraq: security and humanitarian situation, Version 4.0
(March 17)", which was in existence at the date of the hearing before the
First-tier Tribunal Judge in September 2018. Interestingly, Mr Forrest's
written application under rule 15(2A) explained that it was not lodged
before the First-tier Tribunal "because it was not thought material to the
issues before the Tribunal at that time".  He drew particular attention to
pages 17 to 56 of this document.  These contain factual information, drawn
from a variety of named sources, concerning the humanitarian situation in
Iraq, largely from late 2016.  Mr Forrest nevertheless characterised this
material as the respondent's "policy", submitting that the failure on the
part of the respondent, at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, to
adduce this policy meant the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have the
relevant facts before him.

18.  For the respondent, Mr McIver concentrated on the issue which the
Court of Session decided was arguable; namely, whether the First-tier
Tribunal Judge's decision was vitiated by unfairness because it did not
take into account the Home Office Country Policy and Information Note
Version 5.0.  The key aspect of the November 2018 document, Mr McIver
submitted, was that it took into account the Upper Tribunal's country
guidance case of AAH.  This contained comprehensive findings on the issues
relevant to the appellant's appeal; namely, the appellant's ability to
relocate internally to Baghdad or the IKR.  The decision of the First-tier
Tribunal Judge made plain that the judge had taken account of this country
guidance.

19.  In reply, Mr Forrest submitted that UB (Sri Lanka) should be extended
to cover the position where a policy of the respondent emerged after the
hearing but before the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had been
promulgated.


E.   UB (SRI LANKA) v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT [2017]
EWCA Civ 85

20.  As we have seen, the appellant's case for overturning the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge rests upon the authority of the Court of
Appeal of England and Wales in UB (Sri Lanka), in which the only reasoned
judgment was given by Irwin LJ. He described the issue as follows:-

"1.  In this case the Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He has made an
asylum claim based on his previous involvement with the Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Eelam ['LTTE'] whilst in Sri Lanka, his participation in pro-LTTE
demonstrations in the United Kingdom and his claimed membership of the
Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam ['TGTE'].  His appeal turns on a
single ground. Policy guidance issued by the Home Office on 28 August 2014
was not brought to the attention of either the First-tier Tribunal ['FTT']
or of the Upper Tribunal ['UT'].  The Appellant seeks permission to adduce
the material now, and submits that since the material was issued by the
Respondent, it was the responsibility of the Respondent to ensure that it
was drawn to the attention of the Tribunals concerned, that the guidance
was material to the decision and that its non-disclosure gave rise to
procedural unfairness.  As a consequence, the Appellant seeks an order
quashing the decision".

21.  UB's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he feared
persecution, if returned to Sri Lanka, due to his previous involvement with
the LTTE and to the fact that since he had come to live in the United
Kingdom he had participated in various demonstrations against the Sri
Lankan government. "Critically, he provided evidence to the Tribunal that
he had involvement with the TGTE" (paragraph 2).

22.  The First-tier Tribunal dealt with UB's claim, applying the relevant
country guidance of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
[2013] UKUT 00319.  However:-

"10. Neither the FTT nor the UT were referred to Home Office policy
guidance dated 28 August 2014, entitled 'Tamil Separatism'. The guidance is
described as:

'Guidance to Home Office decision makers on handling claims made by
nationals/residents of ... Sri Lanka.  This includes whether claims are
likely to justify the granting of asylum, humanitarian protection, or
discretionary leave ... Decision makers must consider claims on an
individual basis, taking into account the case specific facts and all
relevant evidence, including: the guidance contained with this document;
the available COI, any applicable caselaw; and the Home Office casework
guidance in relation to relevant policies.'

11.  We were asked to admit this fresh material and agreed to do so de bene
esse.

12.  Annexed to the guidance is the text of two letters from the British
High Commission in Sri Lanka. This material is authoritative and clearly
intended to be read with the guidance. The first letter is dated 16 April
2014:


'Proscribed Terrorist Groups


On 1 April 2014, the government of Sri Lanka announced the designation of
16 Tamil Diaspora organisations and 424 individuals under the UN Security
Council resolution 1373 on counter-terrorism.  The order was issued by the
Secretary of Defence.  The government asserts that this action has been
taken to stop attempts to revive the LTTE.  The BHC [i.e. British High
Commission] has asked the government of Sri Lanka to provide evidence to
support this decision.


Among the organisations proscribed are the Transnational Government of
Tamil Eelam (TGTE) and the UK-based Global Tamil Forum (GTF) and British
Tamil Forum (BTF).  When making the announcement on 1 April, Brigadier
Ruwan Wanigasooriya said that individuals belonging to these organisations
would face arrest under anti-terrorism laws ... [T]o date, there have been
no known arrests based on membership of one of the newly proscribed
groups.'

13.  The later letter is dated 25 July 2014 and the relevant text reads:

'The spokesperson from the DIE stated that returnees may be questioned on
arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID.  They may be questioned about
what they have been doing whilst out of Sri Lanka, including whether they
have been involved with one of the Tamil Diaspora groups.  He said that it
was normal practice for returnees to be asked about their activities in the
country they were returning from.

The spokesperson from the SIS said that people being 'deported' will always
be questioned about their overseas activities, including whether they have
been involved with one of the proscribed organisations.  He said that
members of the organisations are not banned from returning to Sri Lanka,
they are allowed to return, but will be questioned on arrival and may be
detained.'

14.  Essentially the appeal before this Court turns on the failure of the
Respondent to bring this fresh guidance, post-dating the decision in GJ, to
the attention of either the First-tier or Upper Tribunal. It is accepted
that the guidance was published on the Home Office website before the
hearings took place.  It is accepted that the Appellant's representatives
could themselves have brought this material to the attention of the FTT."

23.  Irwin LJ held that there was "the clearest obligation on the Secretary
of State to serve relevant material and ensure it was before the Tribunals
at both levels".  He made reference to the judgment of Keene LJ in AA
(Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ
12, to which we shall turn in due course.  He also noted the judgment of
Lord Wilson in the Supreme Court case of Mandalia v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2015] UKSC 59, to which we shall also turn.

24.  At paragraph 18, Irwin LJ held that it was necessary to distinguish
"whether such policy or guidance should be regarded as material to a case
in anticipation, before factual findings have crystallised, from whether it
is material to the decision actually reached: in other words whether,
viewed in retrospect, the guidance might realistically have affected the
outcome".  On the facts of UB's case, Irwin LJ considered that "this
guidance was clearly material and clearly should have been served in
advance". It was plain from the respondent's decision letter that the
appellant "had claimed membership of the TGTE".  The decision took the
stance that the appellant had not shown that he was a member of the TGTE.
Nevertheless, the "possible implications of membership, as affected by the
letters annexed to the policy guidance, meant this material clearly should
have been served" (paragraph 20).

25.  At paragraph 21, Irwin LJ deprecated "any suggestion that this
obligation of service is displaced or diminished by the availability of the
material online" and that Counsel for the Secretary of State was "right to
decline such an argument".  Apart from the fact that the clear obligation
on the respondent derived from authority, "many appellants in immigration
and asylum cases are unrepresented.  In a number of cases where there is
legal representation, the quality of representation is less than optimal"
(paragraph 21).

26.  At paragraph 22, Irwin LJ sounded this note of caution:-

"22. The obligation is clear but must not be taken beyond the proper
bounds.  There is no obligation on the Secretary of State to serve policy
or guidance which is not in truth relevant to the issues in hand, and
complaints as to alleged failures of disclosure of material which is truly
peripheral or irrelevant should readily be rejected."

27.  Furthermore, it was not enough to show that the material should have
been served.  It also had to be shown that the material might have affected
the outcome of the appeal.  Here, Irwin LJ noted that UB's case for saying
he would be at real risk on return to Sri Lanka did not turn merely on him
showing that he was actually a member of the TGTE, but also that his
membership would be detected on arrival in Sri Lanka.  In this regard,
Irwin LJ noted the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant's
sur place activities, even if observed or recorded, were of a low-level
nature and not likely to carry risks. Nor would these activities
demonstrate membership of the TGTE.  Nevertheless, although he had
"hesitated before reaching my conclusion on this issue", Irwin LJ found
that "I cannot quite preclude the possibility that these letters might
affect the outcome, and thus that they are 'material' to the decision in
that sense". UB's appeal was, accordingly, allowed.


F.   AA (AFGHANISTAN) v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT [2007]
EWCA Civ 12

28.  At paragraph 16 of his judgment, Irwin LJ set out a passage from the
judgment of Keene LJ in AA (Afghanistan).  For our purposes, two policies
which affected AA were extant at the date of the hearing of his appeal
before the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  The first was a policy
contained in a Home Office Guidance Note on Afghanistan dated February
2003, which read:-

"Unaccompanied asylum-seeking children who have no claim to stay in the UK
and who would, had they been adults have been refused outright, should
continue to be dealt with under UASC [unaccompanied asylum-seeking
children] policy and given ELR [exceptional leave to remain] to age 18 or
for four years for those under 14, unless there are adequate reception
arrangements in place."

29.  Although the AIT was referred to that policy, it was not referred to a
Policy Framework Document of March 2005. This made plain that the test of
whether there were "adequate reception arrangements in place" was not, as
the AIT believed, whether it was "reasonably likely" that such arrangements
would be made for the appellant in Afghanistan, were he to return there.
Rather, the Policy Framework Document explained that the test was whether
the Secretary of State was "satisfied that such arrangements had been
made". A further policy, to the same substantive effect, was contained in
an APU Notice 2/2003.

30.  At paragraph 13, Keene LJ had this to say about the matter:-

"None of these documents were cited to the Adjudicator or the AIT. But Mr
Gill, in my view rightly, submits that there is a duty on the Secretary of
State at such an appeal hearing to put relevant policy material before such
a Tribunal to avoid it being misled".

31.  The Adjudicator and the AIT were also not informed about a further
policy of the Secretary of State, which was that an unaccompanied minor
seeking asylum should not be interviewed, other than in exceptional
circumstances, and even then only by a specially trained officer and in the
presence of a responsible adult.  That did not happen in the case of AA:-

"27. Consequently, submits Mr Gill, since no-one suggests that there were
exceptional circumstances here, the asylum interview should not have taken
place and the adjudicator when assessing credibility should not have taken
account of the answers given by the appellant at it.  The attention of the
adjudicator should have been drawn by the Secretary of State's
representative to the policy on interviewing unaccompanied minors, so as to
avoid him being misled: see R v. Special Adjudicator, ex parte Kerrouche
[1997] Imm AR 610.

28.  As a matter of law, that is right.  The Secretary of State should draw
relevant parts of his policy to the adjudicator's attention.  Merely
because those policy documents are publicly available in print or on a
website is not enough: where issues of risk of persecution are involved, a
decision to return a person or not to his country of origin should not
depend on the diligence of that person's representatives.  Of course, at
the hearing before the adjudicator the Secretary of State's presenting
officer was contending that the appellant was not a minor.  But he was
aware that the contrary was being asserted by the appellant and therefore
that the adjudicator might make such a finding.  Issues of risk of
persecution might therefore have to be dealt with on that factual basis".

32.  The Court in AA (Afghanistan) went on to consider the materiality of
the failure by the Secretary of State to disclose the relevant policies.
That issue, however, need not concern us.

G.   R v SPECIAL ADJUDICATOR, EX PARTE KERROUCHE [1997] Imm AR 610

33.  In paragraph 27 of AA (Afghanistan), reference was made to R v Special
Adjudicator, ex parte Kerrouche [1997] Imm AR 610.  The applicant in that
case was a citizen of Algeria, whom the Secretary of State proposed to
return to France, on the basis that France was a "safe third country",
which would apply the principles of the Refugee Convention in deciding
whether the applicant should be returned to Algeria.

34.  The Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The
judgment of Lord Woolf MR is of particular importance for what it says
about the duty of disclosure. Although dealing with certification, as we
shall see it is established that the Kerrouche duty, as it has come to be
called, applies in what are now protection appeals:-

"The disclosure issue

Mr Nicol accepts that the Secretary of State is under no general duty to
give discovery of all the material on which he concludes a country is a
safe third country.  He does so because of the decision of the House of
Lords in Abdi and Gawe v Secretary of State for the Home Department [1996]
Imm AR 288.  Lord Slynn of Hadley gave a dissenting speech in that case
pointing out that it was the practice of the Secretary of State to provide
Special Adjudicators with a bundle of documents limited to those which
support the Secretary of State's decision.  They do not include documents
which may support the appellant's contention.  In giving his opinion, with
which the majority of the House of Lords agreed, Lord Lloyd of Berwick
recognised the arguments in favour of disclosure were strong.  However he
came to the conclusion that the arguments the other way were stronger. He
pointed out that:

'We are concerned with the procedural question whether the substantive
hearing should take place here or in a third country.  The longer the delay
between the arrival of the appellant in the United Kingdom and his return
to a safe country the less likely it is that that country will be willing
to undertake the substantive hearings....  So if the procedure... is to be
effective at all it must be fast'.

Lord Lloyd went on to say that if courts were to supplement the
requirements of the Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 1993 to require
disclosure, there would be a risk of frustrating 'the evident legislative
purpose' that 'without foundation' appeals should be considered with all
due speed.

While Lord Lloyd's approach must be the starting point for the
consideration of this issue, there are limits to the approach which he
indicated in that case.  The decision would not justify the Secretary of
State knowingly misleading the Special Adjudicator.  The obligation of the
Secretary of State cannot be put higher than that he must not knowingly
mislead.  Before the Secretary of State could be said to be in that
position, he must either know or ought to have known that the material
which it is said he should have disclosed materially detracts from that on
which he has relied".

35.  The "Kerrouche" duty of disclosure was emphasised by the Upper
Tribunal in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT
0059; paragraphs 36 to 38: Blake J; see also Nimo (appeals: duty of
disclosure) [2020] UKUT 88: paragraphs 20 to 23.  What the Upper Tribunal
said in CM about the duty was approved by the Court of Appeal (per Laws LJ)
in [2013] EWCA Civ 1303:

         "22. The Upper Tribunal decision in the present case was founded on
             the approach taken in R v  SSHD  ex parte  Kerrouche  (No  1)
             [1997] Imm AR 610.  At paragraph 38 they  cited  Lord  Woolf's
             judgment in that case:


                  "While Lord Lloyd's approach must be  the  starting  point
                  for the consideration of this issue [that is, Lord Lloyd's
                  speech in Abdi]  there  are  limits  to  the  approach  he
                  indicated in that case. The decision would not justify the
                  Secretary  of  State  knowingly  misleading  the   Special
                  Adjudicator. The obligation  of  the  Secretary  of  State
                  cannot be put higher  than  that  he  must  not  knowingly
                  mislead. Before the Secretary of State could be said to be
                  in that position, he must know or ought to have known that
                  the material which it is said  he  should  have  disclosed
                  materially detracts from that on which he has relied."


         23.  This reasoning was applied in R(Cindo) v IAT [2002] EWHC Admin
             246.  The Upper Tribunal cited  that  case  at  paragraph  39,
             observing:
                  "This observation was applied in R(Cindo)  v  IAT...  This
                  was a judicial review of a substantive  asylum  appeal  on
                  the grounds of non-disclosure. Maurice Kay J (as he  then
                  was) quoted the passage in Kerrouche  and  emphasised  the
                  words 'ought to have known' and said:
                  '10. The words I have emphasised point to the inclusion of
                      constructive knowledge. This was taken  up  by  Simon
                      Brown L.J. in  Konan  v  SSHD  (CA,  20  March  2000,
                      BAILII: [2000] EWCA Civ 3041), who also observed that
                      (para 24):
                  '.....the Secretary of State's obligation in a full asylum
                  appeal like this may well be higher  than  in  cases  like
                  Kerrouche and .... Abdi and  Gawe,  cases  concerned  with
                  safe third country appeals.'
                  11.  Taking a broad view of the authorities,  they  appear
                      to illuminate these principles: (1) there is  a  duty
                      on the part of the Secretary of State  not  knowingly
                      to mislead in  the  material  he  places  before  the
                      Adjudicator or the IAT; (2) 'knowingly' embraces that
                      which he ought to have known; (3) a  breach  of  that
                      duty may found judicial  review  on  the  basis  that
                      either (a) the  decision  was  reached  on  a  'wrong
                      factual basis' (see Wade  &  Forsyth,  Administrative
                      Law, 8th Ed. Pp.283-284); or (b) the proceedings were
                      tainted with unfairness.'"
         24.  Then at paragraphs 45 to 46 the Upper Tribunal said this:
                  "45. In  our  judgment,  in  asylum  appeals  and  Country
                      Guidance cases, the duty not to  mislead  provides  a
                      sound basis for evaluation of country material. Where
                      the respondent relies on absence of material risk  by
                      reference to Country of  Origin  Information  Service
                      (COIS)  reports,  UKBA  Operational  Guidance   Notes
                      (OGN), or responses to the evidence  of  others,  she
                      cannot make assertions that she  knows  or  ought  to
                      know  are  qualified  by  other  material  under  her
                      control or in the possession  of  another  government
                      department.
                  46.  We  anticipate  that  UKBA  assessments  of  risk  in
                      foreign countries  will  frequently  be  informed  by
                      information emanating from the UK diplomatic  mission
                      in the region or other data in the possession of  the
                      Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office.  In  the  case  of
                      Zimbabwe we know that this has been substantially the
                      case for some time. The UKBA relied substantially  on
                      the expertise  of  the  British  High  Commission  in
                      preparing the fact-finding mission and the evaluation
                      of political circumstances. We would expect the  UKBA
                      to  ask  for  and  be  informed  about  any  reliable
                      material that might qualify a  published  assessment.
                      We would expect COIS reports to be updated  regularly
                      and kept under review. Where new  material  comes  to
                      light an OGN can be issued promptly, even  if  it  is
                      not itself  a  source  of  independent  evidence.  We
                      observe that it was on the basis  of  an  OGN  as  to
                      enhanced risk of non-Arab Darfuris in  Khartoum  that
                      the AIT was able to promptly  vary  previous  Country
                      Guidance  in  AA  (Non-Arab   Darfuris-   relocation)
                      (Sudan) CG [2009] UKAIT 0056."


             25.  In my judgment this approach based on the Kerrouche line
             of reasoning is correct..."


H.   MANDALIA v SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT [2015] UKSC 59

36.  In UB (Sri Lanka), Irwin LJ made reference to the judgment of Lord
Wilson in Mandalia.  The appellant in that case made a points-based
application for leave as a student.  He supplied bank statements disclosing
that he had held at least �5,400 for a consecutive period of 22 days,
ending no earlier than a month prior to the date of his application.  The
requirement under the Immigration Rules, however, was for him to have held
at least such a sum for a consecutive period of 28 days, ending no earlier
than a month prior to the application.  The Supreme Court held that the
Secretary of State acted unlawfully in refusing the application, without
first having invited Mr Mandalia to supply a further bank statement or
statements which showed that he had also held at least that sum throughout
the six preceding days.

37.  The reason for this conclusion was that on 17 June 2011, the Secretary
of State had issued a policy known as "PBS Process Instruction: Evidential
Flexibility", subsequently published on the UK Border Agency's website,
which would, if followed, have given the appellant the opportunity to
provide the missing evidence.

38.  At paragraph 19 of his judgment, Lord Wilson considered it:-

"...unfortunate that no reference had been made to the process instruction
before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Mandalia could not be expected to have
been aware of it.  But, irrespective of whether the specialist judge might
reasonably be expected himself to have been aware of it, the Home Office
Presenting Officer clearly failed to discharge his duty to draw it to the
tribunal's attention as policy of the agency which was at least arguably
relevant to Mr Mandalia's appeal: see AA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 12 at para 13".

39.  At paragraph 29, Lord Wilson explained that, in a case such as Mr
Mandalia's, who was "unaware of the policy until after the determination
adverse to them was made", the legal effect of the policy did not depend
upon the doctrine of legitimate expectation. Rather:-

"29. ... the applicant's right to the determination of his application in
accordance with policy is now generally taken to flow from a principle, no
doubt related to the doctrine of legitimate expectation but free-standing,
which was best articulated by Laws LJ in R (Nadarajah) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, as follows:

'68  ... Where a public authority has issued a promise or adopted a
practice which represents how it proposes to act in a given area, the law
will require the promise or practice to be honoured unless there is good
reason not to do so. What is the principle behind this proposition?  It is
not far to seek.  It is said to be grounded in fairness, and no doubt in
general terms that is so.  I would prefer to express it rather more broadly
as a requirement of good administration, by which public bodies ought to
deal straightforwardly and consistently with the public.'

30.  Thus, in R (Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
(JUSTICE intervening) [2011] UKSC 12 ... (in which this court reversed the
decision of the Court of Appeal reported as R (WL) (Congo) but without
doubting the observation in para 58 for which I have cited the decision in
para 29 above), Lord Dyson said simply:

'35. The individual has a basic public law right to have his or her case
considered under whatever policy the executive sees fit to adopt provided
that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of the discretion conferred by
the statute.'"


    I.   DISCUSSION


    (a)  Policies and country information

40.  In order to understand the consequences of what Keene LJ said at
paragraph 13 of AA (Afghanistan) about the respondent's duty "to put
relevant policy material before ... a Tribunal to avoid it being misled" -
and its approval by Lord Wilson in paragraph 19 of Mandalia - it is
important to appreciate the difference between, on the one hand, policies
of the respondent in the immigration field and, on the other, purely
informational material concerning the situation in the particular country
from which an individual has come to the United Kingdom in order to seek
international protection.  The distinction is important; but its existence
has been somewhat obscured in the cases.


(b)  The Secretary of State's duties concerning policies

41.  A policy of the respondent is, by its nature, a conscious decision on
her part to treat those falling within a particular category in a certain
way, absent reasons to act differently. Since it is for the respondent to
determine whether to formulate a policy and, if so, to set its terms, there
can be no question of the respondent not actually knowing about the policy,
let alone that she ought to know about it.  It is her policy.  That is
important because it provides the rationale for the statements in the cases
that it is irrelevant whether the respondent's policy was publicly
available online.  By not drawing the tribunal's attention to a relevant
policy, the respondent could be said to have breached her "Kerrouche" duty
not to mislead. As can be seen from Mandalia, however, the basis of the
respondent's duty is broader and, as we shall endeavour to explain,
different; namely, to decide cases in accordance with relevant policies.

42.  Whether the respondent breaches her duty to reach decisions that are
in accordance with her policies will, of course, be fact and context-
specific.  This will particularly be the position where the respondent's
assessment of the facts is such as, in her view, to make the policy
immaterial.  The respondent's own view of this matter will not, however,
necessarily absolve her from the duty of drawing the policy's existence to
the attention of an appellate Tribunal.   Nevertheless, one can readily see
that, in some cases, any connection between the policy and the range of
factual conclusions that could be drawn by a Tribunal may be so tenuous as
to make it unrealistic to impose any such duty on the respondent.

43.  There is nothing in the case law to which our attention has been drawn
that places a legal duty on a judge in the Immigration and Asylum Chambers
of the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal to possess a comprehensive
knowledge of each and every policy of the respondent in the immigration
field.  Despite their expertise, no such judge can be reasonably expected
to possess that knowledge.  The same can, of course, be said of a Home
Office Presenting Officer or advocate instructed by the respondent.  The
difference, however, is that the Presenting Officer or advocate merely
represents the respondent, who for the reasons we have given, has knowledge
of the policy and a duty to reach decisions by reference to it.


(c)  The nature of the Secretary of State's Country Information and Policy
Notes

44.  The present appellant's case is predicated on the basis that, because
the Country Policy and Information Note Iraq: Security and humanitarian
situation (Version 5.0) November 2018 has the word "policy" in its title,
each and every piece of the plethora of factual information, drawn from
various sources, contained in the "Country Information" part of the
document, is material which the respondent had a duty to draw to the
attention of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, before the latter completed his
written decision; and that, because this did not happen, the judge
committed (albeit without any fault on his part) procedural unfairness,
such as to vitiate his decision.

45.  The November 2018 Note begins with a preface, which contains a
statement of the Note's purpose.  This is to provide "country of origin
information (COI) and analysis of COI for use by Home Office decision
makers handling particular types of protection and human rights claims...
It is not intended to be an exhaustive survey of a particular subject or
theme."  The preface states that the note is split into two main sections:
(1) analysis and assessment of COI and other evidence; and (2) COI.

46.  Unlike the March 2017 Country Policy and Information Note, the preface
does not describe the note as providing "policy guidance".  Nowhere in the
2018 Note is there any reference to Home Office policy.  The assessment
section begins with a number of generalised and entirely uncontentious
statements of how to apply relevant protection law and principles.  There
is then an overview, in entirely factual terms, of the humanitarian
situation, before one finds, at 2.3.18, the view that "the humanitarian
situation is serious, but, according to the UN, no longer one of the most
complex and challenging humanitarian emergencies".  At 2.3.19, it is stated
that "in general, the humanitarian situation is not so severe that a person
is likely to face a breach of Articles 15(a) and (b) of the Qualification
Directive/Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, requiring a grant of Humanitarian
Protection ...  However, decision makers must consider each case on its
merits".  There are also said to be cases where a combination of
circumstances means that a person will face a breach of a relevant
provision of the Qualification Directive/ECHR on return.  Factors for
decision makers to consider are set out.

47.  Under the heading "Security situation", reference is made to the
country guidance cases of the Upper Tribunal on Iraq, as well as relevant
Court of Appeal judgments.  At 2.3.35, it is stated that "there are strong
grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart from AA's assessment that
any areas of Iraq engage the high threshold of Article 15(c)."  The passage
goes on to say that this does not mean the security situation is no longer
serious.  Furthermore, at paragraph 2.3.36, even though there are no longer
generalised Article 15(c) risks, decision makers are told to consider
whether a person has circumstances that might nevertheless place them at
such risk.

48.  Under the heading "Internal relocation" reference is made to AAH.
Several of the country guidance findings of AAH are then referenced.

49.  Finally in this section, decision makers are referred to guidance on
certification under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002.

50.  The remainder of the note comprises country information. Each piece of
information is referenced as to its source.  The sources are, so far as we
are aware, all published ones. They do not include materials directly
generated by the respondent or by any other arm of the UK government.  We
have already noted that Mr Caskie's grounds of appeal, on behalf of the
appellant, make reference to various pieces of information contained in
this part of the note.  We have already recorded what is said about the
population of the IKR.  Mr Caskie's submission that the increase in
population "of itself represents a significant obstacle to the appellant's
integration" is entirely his interpolation.  None of the sources cited in
the Note purports to make that point. The same is true of other statistical
information in the Note, prayed in aid by Mr Caskie.

51.  Although the March 2017 Country Policy and Information Note states in
its preface that the note provides "policy guidance", there is, on
analysis, no more of a "policy" element in this Note than in the one which
followed it in November 2018.  In neither case is there anything remotely
resembling the kind of policy with which the Court of Appeal was concerned
in AA (Afghanistan) or with which the Supreme Court was concerned in
Mandalia.  In any event, the present appellant does not complain about any
alleged failure of the respondent to follow a policy articulated in the
Note.  He is concerned with the alleged failure of the respondent to draw
the country information to the attention of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


(d)  The "Kerrouche" duty of disclosure

52.  Although, as we have seen, it has been prayed in aid in case law
concerning policies, the true significance of the "Kerrouche" duty not to
mislead lies in its relationship with the law of disclosure. "Kerrouche"
and the House of Lords case of Abdi and Gawe, upon which it drew, concerned
the unsuccessful attempt to import into asylum proceedings the principles
of disclosure in civil litigation whereby a party can, in particular, be
required to disclose to another party documents in the former's possession
upon which he relies or which adversely affect his case.  From this,
"Kerrouche" has fashioned the narrow but nevertheless important duty not to
mislead. Its origins in the law of disclosure mean that the duty involves
informing the other party about documents etc that the respondent knows (or
ought to know) she has in her possession or control, which the other party
does not have; or to which the other party does not otherwise have access.
It does not extend to documents that are in the public domain. So much is,
in our view, plain from the judgment of Laws LJ in CM (paragraph 35 above).


(e)  The true scope of UB (Sri Lanka)

53.  We now need to return to UB (Sri Lanka). As we have seen, the Court of
Appeal was concerned with the Sri Lanka "policy guidance and conjoined
Country of Origin Information ['COI'], published on the Home Office website
on 28 August 2014 and entitled 'Tamil Separatism'" (paragraph 3 of the
judgment).

54.  The significant information, described by Irwin LJ as being annexed to
the Guidance, comprised two letters from the British High Commission in Sri
Lanka.  Irwin LJ described this material as "authoritative" (paragraph 12).
The first High Commission letter referred to one of the organisations
proscribed by the Sri Lankan government as the TGTE.  The second letter
referred to a spokesperson for the Sri Lankan authorities as stating that
returnees may be questioned on arrival about whether they had been involved
with one or more Tamil Diaspora groups and that it was normal practice for
returnees to be asked about their activities in the country from which they
were returning.

55.  The fact that this information came from the British High Commission
was plainly regarded by the Court of Appeal as significant.  The
information clearly and specifically related to the TGTE.  It suggested on
its face that someone who had been a member of the TGTE could, as such,
face serious problems on return to Sri Lanka.

56.  On one view, therefore, the material in question fell within the
category, identified in Kerrouche, of material that detracted from the
Secretary of State's case and, conversely, supported the appellant's case.
It was, however, in the public domain.  The respondent had put it there, by
placing it on her website.  If we are correct about our analysis of the
true ambit of the "Kerrouche" duty, this meant that the duty did not apply.
 What, then, led the Court of Appeal to conclude as it did?  The answer
lies in the fact that, by choosing to place the government's own private
communications from its High Commission on the website, the respondent had
decided to treat them as authoritative and make them part of her policy on
assessing claims to international protection made by Sri Lankan nationals.
As aspects of her policy, it became the respondent's duty - as explained by
the Supreme Court in Mandalia - to draw them to the attention of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge, even though the appellant could have done so.

57.  We have seen above that the information in the Iraq COI, relied upon
by Mr Caskie, does not have the requisite policy element.  Any contention
that the respondent must take a policy decision to include each and every
piece of country information in the COI, is met by the fact that the
gathering of information from published sources is an exercise in collation
(albeit one requiring skill and elements of judgment).  In other words, the
presence of the British High Commission letters in the Sri Lanka COI came
about because the respondent's decision to release them was driven by the
policy considerations described in paragraph 56 above.

58.  That this must be the correct interpretation of UB (Sri Lanka) is
reinforced by a consideration of the frankly remarkable consequences for
protection appeals, if the present appellant is right.

59.  Section 107(3)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
provides that Practice Directions may require the First-tier Tribunal or
the Upper Tribunal to treat a specified decision of the Upper Tribunal as
authoritative in respect of a particular matter. Practice Direction 12.2
provides as follows:-

"12.2    A reported determination of the Tribunal ... bearing the letters
'CG' shall be treated as an authoritative finding on the country guidance
issue identified in the determination, based upon the evidence before the
members of the Tribunal ... that determine the appeal.  As a result, unless
it has been expressly superseded or replaced by any later 'CG'
determination, or is inconsistent with other authority that is binding on
the Tribunal, such a country guidance case is authoritative in any
subsequent appeal, so far as that appeal:

(a)  relates to the country guidance issue in question; and
(b)  depends upon the same or similar evidence".

60.  As we have already seen, the First-tier Tribunal Judge followed the
country guidance in AAH, as it bore upon the appellant's case.  The country
information collated in the March 2017 Country Policy and Information Note
pre-dated the Upper Tribunal's analysis and findings in AAH.  The November
2018 Country Policy and Information Note, on the other hand, paid full
regard to the country guidance in AAH.  None of the country information
material cited in the November Note even begins to disclose a matter which
could be said to have required the First-tier Tribunal Judge to depart from
the country guidance in AAH, in favour of the appellant.

61.  An acceptance of the appellant's interpretation of UB (Sri Lanka)
would render it difficult or, indeed, impossible for the First-tier
Tribunal to decide protection appeals; at least, in respect of countries
such as Iraq, where country conditions can be complex and dynamic.  The
mere fact that the respondent's country of origin information officials are
involved in the ongoing exercise of compiling country information from
external sources would, according to the appellant, mean that no judge
could safely write a decision, based upon the evidence put before them,
because further information about that country might have been acquired by
the respondent just before or even after that hearing.  The respondent
would have a duty to draw this material to the attention of the Tribunal,
even if the appellant could do so.  Despite what Irwin LJ said at paragraph
22 of UB (Sri Lanka) (see paragraphs 26 and 27 above), onward challenges
would routinely involve belated factual examinations of the material, in
order to determine whether any of it might have made a difference to the
outcome of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision. Indeed, as can be seen
from the following paragraphs, that is what we have had to do in the
present case.


(f)  The appellant's reliance on the COIs

62.  As we have already explained, the country information part of the Note
is an overview, taken from third party sources whose reporting dates are
given in footnotes.  Mr Caskie's grounds disclose nothing of any material
significance.  They involve the laborious accretion of statistical details,
in an attempt to build a picture of the KRG that is at variance with what
the First-tier Tribunal Judge found.

63.  Not only is Mr Caskie's attempt conceptually incapable of
demonstrating any legal error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge;
it is, on its own terms, inaccurate.  The assertion that the population of
the IKR has grown by 30% over a period of less than two years is, in fact,
not borne out by a comparison of the table at 4.1.2 of the March 2017
Country Policy and Information Note with the table at 3.1.2 of the November
2018 Note.  The former table gives figures for "Population (2009
estimate)". The latter table purports to be a "population projection
calculated according to numbering and listing results 2009".  Be that as it
may, the populations of  each of the governorates in Iraq (excluding the
IKR) are also, in the main, larger in the second table than in the first.

 64. An examination of the remainder of the grounds exposes similar issues.
 For example, paragraph 8 refers to paragraph 6.2.1 of the November 2018
document as indicating an internally displaced population of 1,500,000 in
Iraq, as at February 2018.  However, the March 2017 Country Policy and
Information Note states that, as at December 2016, there were 3,100,000
currently displaced persons in Iraq; a far higher figure.  In terms of
numbers, therefore (which is what Mr Caskie relies on), the position has,
in fact, markedly improved.

65.  All this is, in effect, acknowledged in paragraph 17 of the
appellant's petition to the Court of Session, which describes the November
2019 note as "similar" to the "earlier version" of March 2017.

66.  Accordingly, even if we were wrong in our interpretation of UB (Sri
Lanka), the appellant fails in any event.  We are, however, fully satisfied
for the reasons we have given that our interpretation is correct.

67.  It may be helpful to summarise our conclusions on the relevant legal
principles:

         (a)  The respondent has a duty to reach decisions that are in
         accordance with her policies in the immigration field.  Where there
         appears to be a policy that is not otherwise apparent and which may
         throw doubt on the respondent's case before the tribunal, she is
         under a duty to make a relevant policy known to the Tribunal,
         whether or not the policy is published and so available in the
         public domain.  Despite their expertise, judges in the Immigration
         and Asylum Chambers cannot reasonably be expected to possess
         comprehensive knowledge of each and every policy of the respondent
         in the immigration field.


         (b)  In protection appeals (and probably in other kinds of
         immigration appeal), the respondent has a duty not to mislead, by
         failing to draw attention to documents etc under her control or in
         the possession of another government department, which are not in
         the public domain, and which she knows or ought to know undermine
         or qualify her case.


         (c)  The fact that country information is contained in a COI does
         not, without more, make that information subject to the duty in sub-
         paragraph (a) above.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain an error on
a point of law.  The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber
