
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Cokaj (paras A398-399D: 'foreign criminal': procedure) Albania [2020] UKUT
00187 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2019 and 31 January    |On 27 Apr 2020                       |
|2020                                 |                                     |
|                                     |[Addendum inserted 19 July 2021]     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                Selami Cokaj
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Naik QC and Ms H. Foot, instructed by Archer
                    Maher Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Gullick, instructed by the Government Legal
Department


1. Paragraph A398 of the immigration rules governs  each  of  the  rules  in
Part 13 that follows it. The  expression  'foreign  criminal'  in  paragraph
A398 is to be construed by reference to the definition  of  that  expression
in section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002:  OLO
and Others (para 398 -  'foreign  criminal')  [2016]  UKUT  00056  affirmed;
Andell (foreign criminal - para 398) [2018] UKUT 00198 not followed.

2. A foreign national who has been convicted outside the United  Kingdom  of
an offence is not, by reason of that conviction, a  'foreign  criminal'  for
the purposes of paragraphs A398-399D of the rules.

3. In the absence of a material change in circumstances or prior  misleading
of the Tribunal, it will  be  a  very  rare  case  in  which  the  important
considerations of finality and proper  use  of  the  appeals  procedure  are
displaced in favour of revisiting and varying or revoking  an  interlocutory
order: Gardner-Shaw (UK) Ltd v HMRC [2018] UKUT 419 followed.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


A.  THE APPELLANT'S HISTORY

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania, who was born there in 1973.  On
26 October 1994, the appellant was convicted of murder by the District
Court in Tropoje, Albania and sentenced to fifteen years' imprisonment.  He
says he was able to leave prison in 1997, during the unrest then prevalent
in Albania.

2.   Also in 1997, the appellant entered the United Kingdom unlawfully.  He
claimed asylum on 30 September 1997, using a false identity (VG) and
falsely claiming to be from Kosovo.  The appellant withdrew that
application but made another one, using the same false details, in December
1998.  That application was refused by the respondent in January 2000.  The
appellant, however, remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom.  Around this
time, he was convicted in absentia in Albania of an offence of armed
robbery, for which he was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment.

3.   In April 2003, the appellant made an application for leave to remain.
Once again, he used the same false identity and nationality.  The
respondent refused that application in June 2003.

4.   The appellant's wife and young son arrived in the United Kingdom in
December 1998, with the assistance of people smugglers.  The wife was told
by the appellant to tell the respondent that she was from Kosovo and to use
a false identity. She did so.

5.   On 6 February 2004, the appellant applied for indefinite leave to
remain, once again using the false identity and nationality.  The
application extended to the appellant's wife and son.  The respondent
granted the application on 14 January 2005.

6.   In 2006, the Republic of Albania requested the extradition of the
appellant.  It did so in the appellant's true identity and nationality.
The appellant challenged that decision before a Senior District Judge, who
ordered the appellant's extradition.  The appellant appealed to a
Divisional Court which, on 15 February 2007, dismissed his appeal ([2007]
EWHC 238 (Admin)).  The challenge in the Divisional Court involved the
appellant's conviction in absentia for armed robbery.  The Albanian Court
of Appeal had merged the appellant's sentences for murder and armed robbery
into a single sentence of twenty years' imprisonment.  Since, however, the
appellant had been convicted and sentenced for the armed robbery in
absentia, the Senior District Judge had ordered the appellant's discharge
in respect of the robbery conviction because the appellant was not entitled
to a retrial.  The issue before the Divisional Court was whether the
appellant's extradition in respect of the murder conviction should be
ordered, when he was subject to a single "merged" sentence of imprisonment.
 The Divisional Court considered assurances given by the Albanian Ministry
of Justice and concluded that the appellant would not, if extradited, be
required to serve more than his sentence in respect of the murder
conviction.

7.   Following the conclusion of the Divisional Court proceedings, the
appellant, on 23 April 2007, made a further application for asylum.  Once
again, he did so using the false identity and nationality.  The appellant
claimed that, despite his identification in the extradition proceedings, he
was, in truth, VG from Kosovo.

8.   The respondent refused the appellant's claim on 10 February 2009.  The
appellant appealed to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, which dismissed
his appeal in July 2009.  By November 2009, the appellant had become appeal
rights exhausted.  On 11 December 2009, the appellant was extradited to
Albania to serve the remainder of his sentence for murder.

9.     In 2010, the Supreme Court of Albania set aside the appellant's
conviction for armed robbery.  The Supreme Court found that there had been
procedural irregularities in respect of the robbery conviction;
specifically, that the appellant's signature on a special power of
attorney, by which his defence lawyer had been appointed, was a forgery.
The judgment of the Supreme Court recognised that the forgery led "to a
violation of a very important right of the convict, that of a fair trial".
The possibility of a review was expressly envisaged, the Supreme Court
noted, in Article 4, paragraph 2 of Protocol No. 7 of the ECHR. The
appellant was released from prison in Albania in June 2011 because of
limitation provisions applying under Albanian law in relation to the
appellant's prison sentence for the 1994 murder.

10.  The appellant says that he left Albania in February 2012 and re-
entered the United Kingdom clandestinely by lorry.

11.  Whilst the appellant was contesting his extradition in the United
Kingdom, his wife applied for citizenship.  She was told by the respondent
that she needed to prove she was Kosovan; and to prove her identity.  The
appellant's wife thereupon withdrew her application.  In 2014, however, she
applied again, this time as an Albanian citizen, along with her eldest son.
 The respondent refused the wife's application but allowed the application
of her son.

12.  On 18 December 2015, the appellant applied for indefinite leave to
remain, this time using his true identity and nationality.  On 9 February
2017, the respondent made a decision that the appellant should be deported
from the United Kingdom.  The solicitors who were representing the
appellant at the time provided reasons why he should not be deported,
stating that the appellant's children would remain in the United Kingdom if
he were returned to Albania.

B.  THE APPEAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

13.  The challenge to deportation was treated by the respondent as a
protection and human rights claim made by the appellant.  On 19 December
2017, these claims were refused by the respondent.  The appellant appealed.
 On 24 August 2018, the appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Law, with the appellant being represented by leading and junior
Counsel.  The appellant's appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal
on 4 September 2018.

14.  In his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the
appellant claimed international protection on the basis that he said a
blood feud existed between him and the family of his murder victim in
Albania.  The appellant's human rights claim was based upon his private and
family life in the United Kingdom; in particular, with his wife and six
British citizen children.  Five of his children were born in the United
Kingdom in 2000, 2003, 2007, 2011 and 2015 respectively.

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellant said that he
had been attacked by the victim.  The judge noted, however, that the
appellant had said he "pleaded guilty to the charge of murder" and that "he
says he was not represented" (paragraph 27).  Having regard to the judgment
of the Divisional Court (misdescribed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as
the Court of Appeal), the judge was "not satisfied that the appellant's
conviction for murder was a miscarriage of justice".

16.  At paragraph 32, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that, after
considering the evidence, he was not satisfied that the blood feud existed.
 No-one had been killed since the alleged blood feud was supposed to have
started in 1994 with the killing of the victim by the appellant.  The judge
found that the appellant was not afraid of a revenge attack, when he was
able to leave prison in 1997, because he went home and stayed there for
several months.  Despite the appellant's claim that he had nowhere else to
go, the judge found that he could have relocated internally to another part
of Albania if he really did have a subjective fear of the victim's family
(paragraphs 34 to 36).  The credibility of the appellant's case was
"seriously undermined" according to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, by
reason of the fact that the appellant did not raise the issue of a blood
feud until the section 120 notice was served in February 2017.  The
appellant said that this was because he felt safe in the UK; but he also
said no day went by without him thinking that this could be his last day
and that he may be killed in the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal
Judge regarded that statement as inconsistent with his claim to feel safe
in the United Kingdom.

17.  At paragraph 38, the judge found that the appellant's credibility was
"further undermined, equally seriously, by his use of deception".  The
judge referred to the repeated use of a false name and nationality, based
on an entirely different scenario; namely, that the appellant would be at
risk from Serbs in Kosovo.  The judge noted that the appellant had also
admitted instructing his wife to make her own application in a false
identity.

18.  Overall, therefore, the judge concluded that the appellant's claim to
be at risk of serious harm as a result of a blood feud, if returned to
Albania, was not credible.  The judge then went on to consider the Article
8 claim based on private and family life.  The judge concluded that there
were "no very compelling circumstances over and above those described in
paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules, despite considering
cumulatively all that has been said on his behalf on the effect on his
family and the possible effect on his health" (paragraph 68).

C.  EARLIER PROCEEDINGS IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

19.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the First-
tier Tribunal.  The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 23
April 2019.

20.  Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt dismissed the appellant' s appeal against
First-tier Tribunal Judge Law's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal
against the refusal by the respondent of the appellant's protection claim
and such part of the appellant's human rights claim as concerned an alleged
fear of serious harm in Albania on account of the alleged blood feud.
However, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt allowed the appellant's appeal in
respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.  She set aside that part of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge Law's decision.  She recorded that the Article 8
decision in respect of the appellant should be re-made in the Upper
Tribunal.

21.  Before Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt, the appellant had been represented
by the same leading and junior Counsel who had appeared on his behalf in
the First-tier Tribunal.  On 19 June 2019, however, when the matter came
before Lord Boyd of Duncansby and Upper Tribunal Judge Craig, the appellant
was represented by Ms Naik QC and Ms Foot.  Ms Naik submitted to the Upper
Tribunal that the appellant said he was acting in self-defence and was
unrepresented at the time when he pleaded guilty to the murder in Albania.
She submitted that it was, accordingly, necessary for the Upper Tribunal to
consider the safety of the Albanian murder conviction.  She persuaded the
Upper Tribunal that the case should be adjourned "to obtain expert evidence
on the Albanian justice system at the time of the original conviction so
that the issue of the safety of the conviction can be put before the
Tribunal and deliberated upon" (paragraph 5 of Lord Boyd's Note of
Hearing).  Lord Boyd's note stated that the Upper Tribunal "cannot see" how
it could trial "the circumstances in which the killing occurred" in 1994.
However, "the safety of the conviction may arise from the state of the
Albanian judicial system at the time where somebody who says he was
unrepresented and was minded to plead guilty ended up pleading guilty to
murder in circumstances which had they occurred in this country may very
well not have occurred"(paragraph 7 of the note).

D. PRESENT PROCEEDINGS IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

(a) Reports

22.  The matter was, accordingly, adjourned.  In September 2019, Professor
Daci, an Albanian attorney, produced an "Expert Opinion" on the case of the
appellant.  One of the appellant's questions for Professor Daci was the
following:-

"The state of the criminal justice system in 1994 at the time [the
appellant] was convicted of murder, please address any issues of
corruption, lack of resources, etc., amongst the police, prosecution
authorities, and judiciary, in [the appellant's] district of Tropoje in
particular and/or more widely in Albania".

23.  Professor Daci said, in response to this question, that in 1994
Albania had a clear inquisitorial procedural system with a right to a fair
trial but that the implementation of this in practice was "not effective"
and "illusory".  Professor Daci thought that it was "possible" that the
judges who tried the appellant's case in 1994 might have become judges
solely by attending a six-month course.  He noted that he had "seen the
Supreme Court judgment in this case, but it does not include the names of
the first instance judges".

24.  Professor Daci was also asked whether there was an automatic right to
legal representation in a case such as murder.  Professor Daci said that
the Criminal Procedure Code provided for automatic legal representation but
it was not "routine practice at that time".

25.  A further matter on which Professor Daci was asked to opine was this:-

"The plausibility of [the appellant's] account of events, including being
told to plead guilty to a murder charge in the absence of legal
representation".

26.  Professor Daci said that being told to plead guilty was a phenomenon
still present in Albania.  It was a tactic of the police to resolve the
case with a confession.  The use of ill-treatment, including the use of
force or the threat of force during the investigation of serious crimes
such as murder, "was a standard practice until few years ago".  Therefore,
he presumed that coercion or other ill-treatment "could have been used
against [the appellant] during the investigation and that pleading guilty
in this context might have been the best option suggested to him".

27.  The reference to obtaining a confession through ill-treatment requires
to be considered in the context of a witness statement of the appellant,
signed on 14 November 2019, in which he described in considerable detail a
named police officer torturing him by beating and burning his hand with
cigarettes, in order to persuade the appellant to plead guilty to murder,
on the basis that he would not receive a conviction of more than eight
years' imprisonment, with the result that he would in practice be free
within three years.

28.  On 13 November 2019, Dr Labeeb Ahmed produced a psychiatric report on
the appellant.  Dr Ahmed was instructed to report on the appellant's
current mental health and whether this was "consistent with his account of
torture whilst in police detention in Albania".  The report noted that the
appellant told Dr Ahmed that his mood had been "low since he was attacked
in 1994" and that he had "fear of attack from the family of [the victim]",
which led him to be hypervigilant.  He would "constantly [look] at the
window at home to make sure his family is safe" and that "at times at
night, his body gets tense".  He reported "repeated disturbing memories and
thoughts related to the attack from [the victim] and the torture from
police in Albania.  He constantly relives the torture he went through and
gets upsets (sic) when he is reminded of it".

29.  Dr Ahmed found that the appellant "is suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder and mixed anxiety and depressive disorder", with flashbacks
and nightmares "which are related specifically to the torture during
interrogation by police and the attack by [the victim] in Albania.  He
constantly relives the torture he went through and gets upsets (sic) when
he is reminded of it".  Professor Ahmed considered that returning the
appellant to Albania "is likely to worsen his symptoms and due to risk of
harm from [the victim's] family members and due to separation from his wife
and six children".

30.  Dr Antonia Young, an anthropologist and country expert, produced a
report in November 2019.  Her conclusion was that she "can understand that
[the appellant] does fear reprisal from the [victim's] family, despite
finding that this blood feud is no longer active".  Dr Young found the
appellant's "account to be plausible, including his being told to plead
guilty to a murder charge in the absence of legal representation.  The
advice was given at an early stage of Albania's sudden change from strict
communism to its development of democracy".  She considered that, if
returned, the appellant's life "would be placed at great risk" from blood
feud aggressors, criminals and trafficking gangs "noting his vulnerability,
as a family man attempting to avoid further aggression not only to himself
but also to his family".

(b) The record of the District Court of Tropoje

31.  Although Professor Daci was, it seems, aware in September 2019 about
the appellant's claim to have been tortured in police custody in Albania in
1994, and forced to confess, his September 2019 Opinion was, clearly,
written without reference to a document that has been in the possession of
the appellant, and his various advisers, for many years.  This is a record
of the District Court of Tropoje's decision dated 26 October 1994, with
certified English translation.  This document was produced in connection
with the extradition proceedings.  It has been in the possession of the
appellant's current solicitors since they were instructed in 2017.  It has
also been in the respondent's possession, in connection with the
appellant's claim to international protection, since 2009.

32.  The document records the names of three judges as having been present
at the appellant's murder trial.  It also records the appellant having a
defence lawyer, one Pranvera Doci.  The document records the defence lawyer
as requesting the offence to be redefined as "that of intentional serious
injury"; and as additionally requesting the court "to consider [the
appellant's] family status and his relatively young age and his low
intellectual level".

33.  The document records in detail the facts surrounding the offence.  In
essence, the appellant's car broke down at night.  He was shown to the
house of a mechanic, the victim, who agreed to repair the car.  The
victim's wife was a few metres behind the victim and the appellant, as they
made their way to the car.  There was then a struggle, during which the
appellant "pretends that the victim attempted to take something out of
[his] belt and for self-defence he took the knife and stabbed [the
victim]".  The victim's wife said that the victim did not have any knives
with him at the moment of the fight.  The court found that the appellant's
claims during the hearing and the claims of the defence lawyer "having to
do with a serious intentional injury and counteraction to the actions of
the victim, were not certified during the hearing and as regards the
illegal possession of weapons, the defendant pretends that he did not know
that carrying a knife inflicts criminal liability, which does not exclude
him from the criminal liability".  The court convicted the appellant of
"the criminal offence of intentional murder".  It had regard to various
mitigating factors, including his relatively young age and low educational
level as well as "his family status".  The court sentenced the appellant to
fifteen years' imprisonment.  The decision ended by recording that the
appellant had a right of complaint to the Court of Appeals of Tirana.

34.  The belated disclosure to the Upper Tribunal, in these proceedings, of
the District Court of Tropoje's decision of October 1994 is dealt with by
the appellant in his 14 November 2019 witness statement, as follows:-

"34. I did not have any form of legal representation during the police
investigation, I also did not have any representation at my hearing at the
District Court of Tropoje on 26 October 1994, when I was convicted of
murder.

35.  I have read the judgment of the District Court of Tropoje from 26
October 1994 for the first time recently.

I believe this document has been in my case files but I have never engaged
with it until recently because the issue of my conviction in 1994 has never
been a key part of my case until now.  I am deeply concerned by its
contents and I believe that the judgment is fabricated.  However, given the
way I was treated during the investigation I am not surprised.

36.  I would like to mention that it is very hard for me to believe that
anybody could believe that there was any justice in the content of the
District Court of Tropoje decision dated 26 October 1994.  Nobody, not the
prosecution, not the judge or any investigating officer, asked or enquired
about the reason for the murder of [the victim].  I was forced in to saying
that I killed him when I did not.  The prosecutor and judge were not
interested during the court or investigation process to raise this
important issue.

37.  The judgment states that I was represented at court by Pranvera Doci.
This is completely false.  I have never met her and do not know who she is.
 At no point have I been allowed to discuss my case with her or any other
legal representative.  At no point was I even asked if I wanted a lawyer.

...

39.  The duration of my court hearing lasted no more than two hours from my
recollection.  I was asked to confirm my identity and I gave my account of
what happened.  I was in a small hearing room, standing between two police
officers and the judge was in front of me.  The prosecutor Musa Mulkurti
was also in the court room as was the brother of [the victim].

40.  I am in no doubt that the whole process and the court decision itself
has been manipulated and fabricated.  As I have outlined above I made a
confession under duress after being subjected to torture, inhumane,
degrading and barbaric treatment".

(c)  Procedural issues

35.  The September 2019 report of Professor Daci, the appellant's witness
statement of November 2019 (together with that of his wife), the reports of
Dr Young and Dr Ahmed and the District Court of Tropoje decision of 26
October 1994 were filed on 19 November 2019.  That was four days after the
expiry of the deadline set by the Upper Tribunal in its directions (giving
effect to a consent order of 31 October 2019).

36.  The adjourned hearing in the Upper Tribunal was listed for 9 December
2019.  On that day, Ms Naik sought to adduce two further reports.  One of
these was a report of Dr Andres Izquierdo-Martin, dated 29 November 2019,
concerning scars on the appellant's body.  The other report was a so-called
supplementary report of Professor Daci.  The "scarring report" had been
filed and served some seven days before the hearing.  Although the report
had been filed in breach of the directions, having heard Ms Naik's
explanation, the Upper Tribunal was satisfied - notwithstanding the
objections of Mr Gullick on behalf of the respondent - that it would be
appropriate for the report to be admitted.

37.  The new report of Professor Daci, in which he for the first time was
asked to address the District Court of Tropoje decision of October 1994,
was supplied to the Upper Tribunal only at the hearing (having been sent by
email the previous Saturday).  Mr Gullick had not seen it beforehand.

38.  As the Upper Tribunal stated on 9 December, the alleged need for this
report stemmed from significant failures on the part of the appellant and
the appellant's advisers.  As we have already noted, the document had been
in the possession of the appellant's advisers for a great deal of time.
The appellant himself should have been aware of it and have drawn it to his
present advisers' attention much earlier than he did.  The present
solicitors had, in any event, had it since 2017.

39.  Having heard the parties' submissions, we concluded that to admit this
egregiously late document would not be in the interests of the overriding
objective.  On the contrary, it would send entirely the wrong message to
those who come before the Upper Tribunal, whether as appellants or
respondents, that directions regarding service count for little or nothing.
 Ms Naik submitted that, if the report was not to be admitted, there could
well be submissions made by the appellant in respect of it to the
respondent, after the conclusion of these proceedings, in order for the
report to be considered in the context of a fresh claim under paragraph 353
of the Immigration Rules.  The fact that such a procedure exists is not,
however, in our view to be regarded as dispensing with the need for proper
procedures to be followed in appellate proceedings (R (Tapalda) v Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 84, paragraph 67 (Singh
LJ)).  On the contrary, in all the circumstances of this case, the point
had come when the overriding objective, as it applies to these proceedings,
required the Tribunal to proceed, even if that meant submissions pursuant
to paragraph 353 might subsequently be made in respect of the new report.

40.  The hearing on 9 December could not be completed in the allotted time
and an adjourned hearing was arranged for 31 January 2020.  On 13 December
2019, the appellant's solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal to request
that its ruling made on 9 December regarding the new report from Professor
Daci should be re-visited.  The request was resisted by the respondent.  Mr
Gullick submitted that the fact the hearing had had to be adjourned to 31
January to allow time for final submissions was not a material change in
circumstances, such as to make it appropriate to re-open the decision the
Tribunal had made on 9 December.  The supplementary report was not
concerned with new events relevant to the appellant's alleged fear of harm
in Albania, such as a change in country conditions, which it was accepted
could be the subject of a successful application.  On the contrary, as the
solicitors' letter of 13 December quite properly acknowledged, Professor
Daci's new report is intended to address matters that had long been within
the knowledge of the appellant (and his advisers), and which should have
been disclosed far earlier.

41.  The Tribunal refused the application. If it were needed, support for
this stance is to be found in the judgment of the Tax and Chancery Chamber
of the Upper Tribunal in Gardner-Shaw (UK) Ltd v HMRC [2018] UKUT 419.  In
that case, the Upper Tribunal held at paragraph 13 that where there is no
material change of circumstances and no prior misleading of the court "it
will be a rare case and something unusual that could lead to the important
considerations of finality and the proper use of the appeals procedure
being displaced in favour of revisiting and varying or revoking an
interlocutory order".  The TCC's finding on this issue was upheld by the
Court of Appeal: [2019] EWCA Civ 841.

E.   EVIDENCE OF APPELLANT

42.  The appellant gave oral evidence.  He did so by reference to his
November 2019 witness statement and to his earlier statement of 2018
(undated and unsigned in the appellant's bundle).  In this earlier
statement, the appellant stated that he was acting in self-defence and that
he was stabbed and hit over the head with a metal object by the person
whose life he took.  Despite saying that he acted in self-defence, the
appellant also stated that he was unable to "stress enough how sorry and
remorseful I am for what happened".  The reason he had lied to the
respondent about his identity and nationality was because "I continued to
fear the family of the man I killed".  The statement describes being in a
state of constant fear in the United Kingdom from those who had wished to
take blood vengeance against him.

43.  There is nothing in the first witness statement of the appellant about
him being tortured in police custody in 1994.  The earlier statement
describes how he had "already provided full details of" the killing and
that the details "are also fully documented within the papers advanced in
the bundle to be lodged by my solicitors and the decision of the court in
relation to my extradition".

44.  In oral evidence, the appellant said that there was only a single
judge at his 1994 trial and there was no lawyer present on his behalf.  The
appellant had been unable to walk at the hearing and had to be held, as a
result of his torture.  The appellant was asked why he had not referred to
the ill-treatment in detention in his earlier statement; and to the fact
that he had been legally represented; and that that he did not have a fair
trial and had been forced to plead guilty.  The appellant said that "I
mentioned this all the time".  He was not sure why it was not mentioned in
the statement, "this is the truth.  I don't know why I did not mention it".

45.  The appellant was asked when, in the United Kingdom, he first
discussed legal issues around his plea of guilty to murder.  The appellant
said he did not quite remember.  Eventually, the appellant said that every
time he had been asked about the 1994 offence "I mentioned this", by which
he meant that he "just told the story, told them what happened,
chronologically".

46.  In cross-examination, the appellant was asked about a report prepared
in 2018 by a psychologist.  In this report, the appellant said he
remembered returning home after the attack on him, and his reaction to it,
and reporting the matter to the police.  Later, in court, the appellant had
said that he killed a man in self-defence.

47.  The appellant also told the psychologist that "he would never lose his
temper or confront anyone, however provocative they might be".  The
psychologist regarded these responses as "very much consistent with [the]
image of the quiet, family man he appeared to be throughout the course of
the interview.  There was absolutely no evidence from his responses that
[the appellant] has a temper or is liable to react aggressively".

48.  The appellant was asked about the letter from Dr Nikfekr, a consultant
neurologist, also to be found in the appellant's bundle, in which the
doctor recorded the appellant as describing himself as follows:-

"The mainstay of the symptoms is when he is stressed out and is under
pressure he starts to 'lose control' ... he loses his temper and can become
quite anxious".

49.  The appellant said that all this happened in the United Kingdom.  He
had gone to see this doctor about migraines.  That was what he meant by
losing control.  It was put to the appellant that what he had said to the
psychologist about not losing his temper was in order to assist the
appellant's efforts not to be deported.  The appellant said that it was
true.

50.  Asked why he had not told the psychologist about the police ill-
treatment, the appellant said, "I answered all the questions that other
people have asked me".

51.  It was put to the appellant that, in 2017, his solicitors had said on
his behalf that there was a trial and he had raised self-defence at it.
Also, in the detailed submissions of previous leading Counsel, there was no
reference to pressure or being told to plead guilty.  If he had pleaded
guilty, it was strange that he had told the First-tier Tribunal that he did
not expect to be convicted.  The appellant said he did not remember the
details but he had told his story.

52.  It was put to the appellant that in his latest witness statement he
had said that he had not raised the matter of the District Court judgment
because it was not a key part of his case.  It had, however, been raised as
grounds of appeal in 2018.  The appellant said that he had "answered all
the questions put to me".

53.  It was put to the appellant that he had been aware when he came to the
United Kingdom there was a conflict in Kosovo and that he had asserted he
was a Kosovan because that gave him a better chance of claiming asylum in
the United Kingdom.  The appellant denied this.  He had given false details
because he was fearful of being harmed.  Asked if he accepted that he had
lied to the court during his extradition proceedings, the appellant
accepted he had.  He had also lied to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.
He lied when, in his false identity, he denied knowing the victim of his
crime.  The appellant said that he accepted all this and he was trying to
hide from the murder.

54.  The appellant said that no family members had been present in court at
the appellant's murder trial.  They might have been outside.  His wife was
at home.

F.  EVIDENCE OF APPELLANT'S WIFE

55.  The appellant's wife gave evidence.  She adopted her two witness
statements.  In her first statement of 9 August 2018, she described not
being able to attend the October 1994 trial of her husband for murder
because she was young, scared and upset.  She came from an educated family,
as did her husband.  The appellant had been "genuinely sorry and regretful
of what he had done".  He "did plead guilty at the first opportunity and
never attempted to hide from what he had done".  He was also "young at the
time when this incident happened".  The witness said that she had "never
tried to defend what my husband did and it is not my intention to do so
now".  She only went to see him twice whilst he was in prison because she
was "still very angry with him".

56.  When she arrived in the United Kingdom, she was told by the appellant
to say that she was GG from Kosovo.  She described her various applications
to the respondent, which had been based on falsehoods, before the one in
2014, when she said that she was Albanian and applied with her son.  She
accepted that she had "not been honest with the Home Office".  She spoke
fluent English.  She spoke to her children in English and they spoke
amongst themselves in that language.  She said that the appellant "has not
committed any crimes in this country and he has only a single conviction
for murder in Albania".

57.  The statement continued by saying that the appellant "cannot go out of
the house freely.  He cannot enjoy normally (sic) family pursuit - like
taking the children on holiday, to the park, to school, anywhere.  He is
constantly afraid for the safety of our family".  For the safety of their
children "I have to take them to school every day to ensure that they are
okay".

58.  In her statement of 14 November 2019, she said that "the police kept
changing their story - they said it was a fight, then they said that
[appellant] was with friends.  At this point I knew the statement of events
given by the police was fabricated. If I had even suspected that he had
killed anyone, I would have and easily could have left him when we were
only married for 6 months, however this was not the case".

59.  Cross-examined, the appellant's wife said that the eldest children did
not help at home.  She was asked about visiting her husband in prison in
Albania where, in her latest statement, she said that her husband's face
had had significant bruising.  She was asked why she had not said that in
her statement to the First-tier Tribunal.  She replied this was probably
because she was not asked and therefore she did not say.  The appellant had
"never wanted to speak about the ill-treatment of the police".  She re-
iterated that she had not been asked about his ill-treatment before.  She
did not think it was important to mention that she had seen him in a state
of distress.

G.  EVIDENCE OF APPELLANT'S CHILDREN

60.  The appellant's eldest son gave evidence.  He adopted his witness
statement of 9 August 2018.  He said that if his father was deported, it
would be another ordeal for the family to deal with.  It would also involve
risk for the appellant and the rest of the family "because of the ongoing
blood feud in Albania".

61.  In oral evidence, the witness said that he spoke Albanian at home.
The family conversed in Albanian and English.  Asked in cross-examination
if, now that he was an adult, he could provide support to his mother if the
appellant was deported, the witness said that he could.  However, "it would
ruin a lot of things".  He took his brothers to school and bought them
things.  They looked up to him.

62.  The witness said that the children looked on the appellant as a role
model, "he takes them to school".

63.  Statements from other children of the appellant were relied upon but
they were not called to give oral evidence.

64.  One of the sons, AC, said that "every day when I was in school and
school finished I would look at everyone's dad and say where my dad but
only seen my mum all the time and it make upset a lot (sic)". Another
child, MdC made a statement, however, in which he says "my life with my dad
is very pleasant, he takes me to school and picks me up because my mum is
really tired and her arm hurts.  He takes me shops when I want to and buys
me what I want ... and takes me everywhere I ask him to".  If the appellant
were deported, MC would have to "walk to school which is far and I would
not be able to go to my clubs or not even have money to buy the stuff
needed for school ...".

H.  DISCUSSION

(a)   The position where the only criminal conviction relied on occurred
outside the United Kingdom

65.  In re-making the decision on whether the appellant's deportation to
Albania would involve a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR, it is necessary,
first, to identify the approach to be followed where, as in the present
case, the only criminal conviction relied upon by the respondent is
conviction by a court or Tribunal outside the United Kingdom.

66.  Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides
that a court or Tribunal, which is determining whether a decision made
under the Immigration Acts would be a disproportionate interference with
Article 8 rights, is to have regard to the considerations listed in section
117B and, in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
considerations listed in section 117C (section 117A).  Section 117D(2)
defines a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of Part 5A as follows:-

"(2) In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -

(a)  who is not a British citizen,

(b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

(c)  who -

(i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months,

(ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or

(iii)    is a persistent offender".

67.  Since a person in the position of the appellant, whose criminal
conviction took place outside the United Kingdom, cannot satisfy section
117D(2)(b), it is common ground that the considerations in section 117C
cannot, in terms, apply to him.

68.  Paragraphs A398 to 399D of the Immigration Rules relate to
"Deportation and Article 8".  A398 provides:-

"A398.   These Rules apply where:

(a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his deportation
would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of
the Human Rights Convention;

(b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against him to
be revoked".

69.  There is no doubt that the appellant, in these proceedings, is
claiming that his deportation would be a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.
Is he, however, a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of the relevant
Immigration Rules?

70.  In Andell (foreign criminal - para 398) [2018] UKUT 198 Upper Tribunal
Judge Coker held that the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules
include not only foreign criminals as defined in Part 5A of the 2002 Act
but also other individuals who, in the respondent's view, are liable to
deportation because of their criminality and/or offending behaviour.  In
OLO and Others (para 398 - "foreign criminal") [2016] UKUT 00056, Upper
Tribunal Judge Kopieczek held that the expression "foreign criminal" in the
Immigration Rules fell to be construed consistently with the definition in
Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  Although Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek was
concerned with whether a person who had been convicted of a criminal
offence in the United Kingdom fell within the definition, his conclusion,
if correct, must mean that the present appellant, who has only been
convicted abroad, likewise cannot be a "foreign criminal" for the purposes
of the Rules.

71.  As a matter of legislative interpretation, we agree with Upper
Tribunal Judge Kopieczek's conclusion in OLO.  Although Upper Tribunal
Judge Coker considered the expression "a person" in paragraph 398 enabled
that paragraph and those following it, to apply to any "foreigner" who is
also a "criminal", there is, we find, no escaping the conclusion that
paragraph A398 governs each of the Rules that follows; and that its use of
precisely the same expression - "foreign criminal" - as is found defined in
section 117D of the 2002 Act inexorably means that the expression is to be
construed in accordance with that statutory definition and does not carry
the wider meaning described by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker.

72.  For the respondent, Mr Gullick did not seek to support the conclusion
in Andell. The effect of OLO, on the other hand, is reflected in the
respondent's published policy "Criminality: Article 8 ECHR cases" (online
from 14 May 2019).  There we find the following:-

"Deportation on the basis of convictions abroad

Where deportation is pursued solely on the basis of one or more overseas
convictions, the person liable to deportation will not meet the definition
of a foreign criminal set out at section 117D(1) of the 2002 Act and will
not fall within any of the criminality thresholds at paragraph 398 of the
Immigration Rules.  This means the claim will be considered outside the
Immigration Rules, but the Rules must be used as a guide, because they
reflect Parliament's view of the balance to be struck between an
individual's right to private and family life and the public interest".

73.  Rightly in our view, Mr Gullick points to the following matter as
supportive of the position described in the respondent's policy.  If a
person applies for entry clearance to the United Kingdom, they must
overcome what is set out in section S-EC (suitability - entry clearance) of
Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  S-EC.1.4 provides that an applicant
will be refused entry clearance if:-

"The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive to the public good
because they have:

(a)  been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of at least 4 years; or

(b)  been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than 4 years, unless
a period of 10 years has passed since the end of the sentence; or

(c)  been convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of less than 12 months, unless a period of 5 years
has passed since the end of the sentence.

Where this paragraph applies, unless refusal would be contrary to the Human
Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of
Refugees, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
interest in maintaining refusal will be outweighed by compelling factors".

74.   S-EC.1.4 is subject to the exception in GEN.3.2(2) of Appendix FM.
This provides that the application will, nevertheless, be granted where:-

"... there are exceptional circumstances which would render refusal of
entry clearance ... a breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on
Human Rights, because such refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh
consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child or another
family member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that information
would be affected by a decision to refuse the application".

75.  S-EC.1.4 fell to be considered by the Court of Appeal in MW (United
States of America) & Ors v Entry Clearance Officer [2016] EWCA Civ 1273.

76.  The Court in MW had the advantage of being able to take into account
the judgments of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60, which were handed down after the
hearing in MW but which elicited written submissions from Counsel in MW.

77.  The Court of Appeal had this to say:-

"32. .... the Appellant goes on to submit that there is an equal weight to
be attached to the public interest in refusal of entry under these
provisions, to that which arises under paragraphs 398 to 399A in the
context of deportation.  The Respondent rejects this, on two grounds.
Firstly, as a matter of construction, paragraph S-EC.1.4 simply does not
operate in the same way as paragraphs 398 to 399A.  Secondly, the public
interest in deportation as expressed in the Rules arises through the will
of Parliament, since it is rooted in primary statute (the 2007 Act),
whereas the public interest in refusing entry clearance arises from
executive policy, meaning that less weight attaches to it.

33.  Further, the Respondent argues that there is good sense in the
distinction between the two formulations.  Parliament can be taken to
understand the significance of a twelve month, or alternatively four year,
prison sentence passed in the United Kingdom.  Such sentences will be a
signifier of serious offending.  Sentencing practice and the criminal law
abroad is very much more variable.  Not infrequently, criminal liability
and significant sentences may be imposed for matters which do not even
constitute criminal conduct in the United Kingdom.

...

35.  We are not moved by the argument advanced by Ms Revill for the
Respondent based on the 'source' of S-EC.1.4.  The provisions were laid
before Parliament, subject to negative resolution.  Once the question no
longer arises as to whether they operate as a constraint on judicial
consideration of Convention rights, it seems to us unnecessary to examine
further whether S-EC.1.4 bears quite the authority of other provisions
based on primary statute.  The provisions do represent an authoritative
statement of public policy, broadly consistent with the 2007 Act and the
'new rules', and as such must be considered carefully (and expressly) by a
Court or Tribunal considering a case to which they apply.

...

37.  In our view the intention behind S-EC.1.4 was to emphasise the public
interest in maintaining refusal.  The intended meaning was that compelling
factors will usually be required to outweigh the public interest in
maintaining refusal.  That is consistent with the approach in deportation
cases.  In MF (Nigeria), this Court emphasised that, in considering the
deportation of foreign criminals where the provisions of paragraphs 399 and
399A do not apply, then 'very compelling reasons will be required to
outweigh the public interest in deportation' (paragraph 43).  We consider
that the policy here must carry similar weight, and the emphasis marked by
the phrase 'very compelling reasons' is appropriate.  It would be
surprising if the policy in regard to those living abroad but seeking to
enter the United Kingdom were to be more liberal than the policy affecting
those already resident here".

78.  The Court, however, was alive to the fact that issues may arise in
respect of a foreign conviction and sentence that would not be present in
the case of criminal proceedings in the United Kingdom:-

"39. However, we accept that there may be important distinctions in the
application of the policy, as Ms Revill has argued.  In a deportation case,
the UK conviction and sentence arise within a familiar legal system, and
can be taken to be reliable indicators of the severity of the criminality,
and thus the degree of public interest in deportation.  In cases of
application for entry, the same does not apply in all cases.  The
illustration arose in argument that, in a number of countries, homosexual
acts lawful here are regarded as criminal and can be visited with
imprisonment for four years or longer.  Such circumstances might well be
relevant to a Convention or asylum claim.

40.  Mr Waite accepted this point, and took us to a document published in
April 2016 by UK Visas and Immigration for the guidance of Home Office
Staff, the relevant part of which reads:

'Convictions outside of the UK

You must only take account of the sentence imposed and not seek to identify
what are the comparable offences in the UK.

However, a person may have a sentence for an act which would not constitute
a criminal offence in UK, for example, homosexuality or proselytising (to
convert someone from one religious faith to another).  Such an offence
should be treated as an exception.'

41.  It follows that where a foreign conviction is based on an act which
would not be criminal in the United Kingdom, Home Office guidance
recognises that it would be inappropriate to apply the policy laid down.  A
similar question may arise where a severe foreign sentence is passed in
respect of an act which would constitute a criminal offence in this
country, but where the sentence is wholly disproportionate to any sentence
which might be imposed here: an illustration might be a minor public order
offence committed in a country with an oppressive regime.  That question
does not arise in this case, but the point emphasises the need for care in
the application of the policy when considering the facts".

(b) Overall approach

79.  We turn to analyse the appellant's Article 8 case by reference to the
relevant legal principles.  Those just described concern the approach to be
taken to the appellant's criminal conviction in Albania for murder, which,
unless it can be countered by Ms Naik and Ms Foot, represents a powerful
public interest reason for deportation. Besides this, the factors
potentially weighing on the respondent's side of the proportionality
balance to be undertaken in pursuance of Article 8(2) include the general
importance of ensuring that the principles of immigration control are not
undermined.  Here, the appellant's general immigration history will be
relevant.

80.  In determining the factors weighing on the appellant's side of the
balance, the best interests of the appellant's minor children must be a
primary consideration; and we treat them as such.  The interests of the
appellant's adult children will also be of relevance, as will those of the
appellant's wife.

(c) The murder conviction

81.  We shall deal first with the murder conviction.  Ms Naik submits that,
as a general proposition, foreign convictions do not easily transpose into
the UK's "consistent and transparent system, whereby the Sentencing
Guideline Council determines the sentence range based on aggravating and
mitigating factors.  The range and sentencing lengths within this system
can reasonably be taken to reflect more or less serious offending, and the
Rules (which, for example, have a threshold of twelve months and a further
threshold of four years)".  This submission reflects what the Court of
Appeal said at paragraph 39 of MW.  It does not, however, take the
appellant's case anywhere.  Leaving aside the issue of whether the murder
conviction was unsafe (to which we shall next turn), on the facts found by
the District Court, the appellant's conviction of murder is entirely
unobjectionable.  He had deliberately, and without provocation, stabbed a
man to death.  The sentence that he received cannot, on any rational view,
be said to be disproportionate.

82.  The appellant's contention that he is remorseful for the killing is,
like so much of the rest of his evidence, incoherent at best.  Despite past
written expressions of remorse, in his witness statements, the appellant's
present stance is that he did nothing wrong.  He acted in self-defence.  He
is the victim of a miscarriage of justice.

83.  Accordingly, leaving aside the safety of the conviction, the
appellant's conduct means that he falls squarely within the ambit of S-
EC.1.4.  It would, as Mr Gullick submitted, be abhorrent for the appellant
to gain any advantage over those seeking entry clearance, who have
committed similar offences, by reason of the fact that his presence in the
United Kingdom arises only because he entered unlawfully.

84.  The appellant's ability to defeat what would otherwise be the
consequences of his conviction for murder therefore depends upon him
persuading us that his conviction by the District Court is unsound.

85.  Taking the evidence as a whole, including the reports which we have
described, we are in no doubt that the appellant's belated attempt to
attack the basis of his conviction for murder is wholly bogus.  It is
totally unbelievable that, if there were any truth in the claims, the
appellant would not have raised them in the context of the extradition
proceedings in 2006/2007.  It would have been open to the appellant to
attempt to resist extradition under section 87(1) of the Extradition Act
2003 on the basis that there had been a violation of his Article 6 ECHR
rights at his murder trial: Foster-Taylor v Prosecutor General's Office of
Florence [2019] EWHC 2938 (Admin), paragraphs 18 and 81; Dean v Lord
Advocate [2015] HCJAC 52 at paragraphs 20 - 48.

86.  The appellant was wholly unable to explain why the matter had not been
raised earlier.  He was reduced to saying that he had mentioned it to his
legal advisers.  It is, however, wholly unbelievable that the various sets
of professional advisers who have represented the appellant over many years
would have failed to act upon such information.  That is true not only in
relation to the extradition proceedings but also in relation to the
deportation proceedings in the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal and the
First-tier Tribunal.

87.  The appellant's latest account, involving being tortured by the police
and forced to plead guilty at a trial before a single judge, where he was
without legal representation, also has to be assessed against the
background that the appellant has been fundamentally and persistently
dishonest in his dealings with the respondent, over a significant period of
time.  He has, as his immigration history shows, repeatedly made claims
involving a false identity and nationality.  His only stated justification
for this serious dishonesty is that he was attempting to flee a blood feud.
 That, however, has been rejected by the First-tier Tribunal as lacking
credibility and that part of the Tribunal's decision stands.  It is
particularly noteworthy that, even after the commencement of the
extradition proceedings, brought against the appellant in his true name and
nationality, he made a further claim for international protection, using
the false name and identity.

88.  We have, as we have said, reached our conclusions on this matter,
having full regard to the reports prepared in respect of the appellant.
Professor Daci's report is undermined by the fact that his attention was
not drawn to the record of the District Court proceedings.  That record
stands in stark contrast to the account which the appellant decided he
would put forward, as the latest in a sustained series of attempts,
stretching back over a decade, to resist deportation by any means at his
disposal.  We reject as entirely unbelievable the appellant's claim that he
had only read the District Court decision for the first time "recently".
His contention that the document is wholly "fabricated" is the only way in
which he can seek to evade the damage done to his case by the emergence of
the court record in the present proceedings.

89.  The report of Dr Young deals almost entirely with the issue of risk on
return due to the alleged blood feud, which is not an issue in the re-
making of the appeal.  It does not seem Dr Young was shown the record of
the appellant's trial.  Whether or not the prosecutor at the appellant's
trial was found guilty of corruption in 2011 for taking a bribe in order to
request a lenient sentence, does not begin to cast doubt on the fairness of
the appellant's 1994 trial.  The same is true regarding the passage in Dr
Young's report where she says the judge who was in charge of the murder
trial has been recently dismissed from his position having failed to
complete his professional examinations.  It is significant that Dr Young
was asked to undertake research into whether the three judges had been
involved in corruption in Albania and that she found no relevant
information in this regard in respect of any of them.  Being dismissed for
not sitting a professional exam, and returning to practice as an advocate,
is entirely different from being corrupt.  The appellant's case is that the
record of the proceedings is wholly fabricated.  It is not his case that
the proceedings were accurately recorded but that the proceedings were,
nevertheless, in some way fundamentally unfair or otherwise unjust.  But,
even if that were the appellant's case, the evidence does not support it.
The fact that the professional participants in the appellant's murder trial
may not have been of the highest quality, and that standards in Albania
have subsequently improved, does not mean those proceedings should, in
2020, be regarded as unsound.

90.  Dr Ahmed's psychiatric report diagnoses post-traumatic stress disorder
and mixed anxiety and depressive disorder.  We have had due regard to the
fact that these are compatible with the appellant having been tortured in
police custody in Albania in the 1990s.  However, as Mr Gullick points out,
these conditions could have arisen as a result of one or more of a number
of elements of the appellant's undisputed past, such as being imprisoned
for lengthy periods in the Albanian prison system; twice entering the
United Kingdom clandestinely, including in a lorry; and being involved in
protracted legal proceedings to avoid being deported and, as a result,
being physically separated from family in the United Kingdom.  One aspect
that we do not consider to be material from the appellant's past is his
alleged fear of a blood feud from the family of the man he murdered.  The
First-tier Tribunal found there is no reasonable likelihood that that feud
exists.

91.  In reaching our conclusions, we have also had regard to the scarring
report of Dr Izquierdo-Martin.  There is no doubt that the appellant bears
the scars upon which he now relies, in support of his belated claim to have
been tortured in police detention in Albania.  They are consistent with
that claim; in particular, the cigarette burns.  As with the psychiatric
report, however, the appellant's past could account for the scarring,
otherwise than at the hands of the police.

92.  We have had regard to the fact that, after the appellant was
extradited to Albania, the Supreme Court there allowed the appellant's
appeal against his conviction in absentia for armed robbery.  As we have
seen, this was on the basis that a signature, said to be that of the
appellant, had been forged.  The fact that the appellant was the subject of
a false charge and conviction is relevant in deciding whether there is a
reasonable likelihood that his murder conviction was also unsafe.  The
insuperable problem for the appellant, however, is that his successful
challenge to the robbery conviction makes it all the more remarkable that
he did not similarly challenge before the Supreme Court the validity of his
1996 murder conviction.  Ms Naik submitted that the appellant's appeal
against his robbery conviction occurred after Albania became a signatory to
the ECHR and that the judgment of the Supreme Court of 2010, to which we
have already made reference, emphasising the importance of the ECHR, must
be viewed in that context.  This does not, however, in any way explain the
appellant's failure to raise the murder conviction if there were any truth
in the assertion that he had been tortured by the police into pleading
guilty rather than, as the record states, unsuccessfully raising self-
defence in a contested trial.

93.  Standing back and looking at matters overall, we find that the
appellant has not shown that there is a real risk or reasonable likelihood
that his murder conviction is unsafe, and therefore must be disregarded.
Accordingly, the appellant needs to make out an Article 8 proportionality
case that outweighs the strong public interest which flows from the fact
that the appellant is a convicted murderer.

94.  Because the appellant has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
of at least four years, if he were seeking entry to the United Kingdom, S-
EC.1.4 would make his exclusion conducive to the public good, regardless of
the length of time that had passed.  In view of what we have said about the
appellant only being in the United Kingdom because he has unlawfully
entered it, we reiterate that the approach taken in entry clearance cases
ought to guide the assessment of the public interest in the appellant's
removal by means of deportation.  This means that the appellant must show
"unjustifiably harsh consequences" for him, his wife, and/or children (both
minor and adult) in order to defeat deportation.

(d) The factors weighing in favour of the respondent

95.  We adopt the "balance sheet" approach commended by Lord Thomas in
Hesham Ali (at paragraphs 82 to 84).  We look first at the balance lying on
the respondent's side.

96.  Although the public interest in deporting the appellant as a murderer
is strong, we accept that the strength of the public interest is not a
fixity.  It may vary between cases: Akinyemi v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2098 at paragraph 50.  A relevant factor in
the present case is the length of time since the appellant killed his
victim.  The appellant was a young man in his 20s when he committed the
murder.  He is now 46.  He has, as far as we are aware, no criminal record
in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's ability to plead passage of time
is, however, negated by the following factors.  First, the appellant
entered the United Kingdom unlawfully, following which he sought to prolong
his stay by making false claims in respect of the alleged blood feud
between him and the family of his victim.  Secondly, murder is one of the
very gravest crimes that can be committed in any human society.  Its
significance is much less susceptible to diminishment over time than in the
case of other offences.  Third, the appellant's stance on remorse is
hopeless.  Despite prior protestations of remorse from the appellant and
his wife, the appellant's present position is to deny wrongdoing on his
part, ascribing all blame to his victim and the Albanian justice system.

97.  For these reasons, the public interest in deportation is undiminished.
 There is, however, as we have already noted, a second aspect to the public
interest in removing the appellant from the United Kingdom.  This lies in
his repeated and flagrant abuse of immigration laws, including those which
give effect to the United Kingdom's international responsibilities in the
refugee and human rights spheres.  Public confidence in the respondent's
system of immigration controls would, we consider, be seriously damaged if
this particular appellant were able to succeed, in the absence of truly
compelling human rights factors involving himself and/or his family.  We
therefore turn to consider the strength of those countervailing factors.

(e) The factors weighing in favour of the appellant

98.  The appellant is said to run a successful carwash business in the
Midlands.  How he does this, given his circumstances, was unexplained.  We
are, nevertheless, prepared to accept that it is more likely than not that
he does so.  This, however, runs against the claim of the appellant and his
wife that the appellant "cannot go out of the house freely" (wife's
statement of 9 August 2018).  The appellant's account of living in fear
from Albanians seeking to pursue a blood feud against him is, as we have
already emphasised, false.  The evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant
is here, as elsewhere, contradictory.  His wife's statement asserts that
the appellant cannot take their children to school or, for that matter,
anywhere else.  The child MdC, however, says in his 2018 statement that "my
life with my dad is very pleasant, he takes me to school and picks me up
because my mum is really tired and her arm hurts".

99.  Insofar as the evidence from the children articulates a concern that,
if the appellant were removed to Albania, he would be at risk from the
blood feud, this evidence has, we find, either been composed in the light
of pressure from the appellant and his wife; or else is the genuine concern
of children who have, regrettably, been fed untruths by their parents.  For
the purposes of assessing the strength of the appellant's case for
resisting deportation, we are prepared to follow the latter approach to the
children's evidence.

100. We were impressed by the oral evidence of MC, the appellant's adult
son.  He too confirmed that the appellant takes the other children to
school and provides them with support.  Overall, the picture given by MC is
one of a normal family, involving both adult and minor children and their
parents in a loving and mutually supportive household.

101. Significantly, MC confirmed that, contrary to the position when the
appellant was extradited and MC was aged 11, he would, as a 21 year old, be
able to assist the appellant's wife in helping with the other children, if
the appellant were to be deported.  We accept that, as MC said, deportation
"would ruin a lot of things".  The fact of the matter is, however, that the
state of the family is now such that the appellant's wife would be able to
cope better than she did when the appellant was extradited when there was
no evidence adduced to show that the family had suffered significant and
long-lasting problems.

102. We have had regard to the report of Mr Forrester, an independent
social worker, dated 8 August 2018.

103. Mr Forrester's report accepted, at face value, the appellant's story
about the blood feud.  Mr Forrester quite properly said that "naturally if
there is information not known to me then I cannot argue my point of view
correctly".  That is right. Mr Forrester is not party to the full evidence.

104. Unfortunately, however, Mr Forrester's report is remarkable for
containing passages which frankly do not belong in the report of an expert
witness.  There is, for example, this:-

"...  If what I know are the full facts then it is reasonable to conclude
that the Home Office cannot continue to work with [the appellant] on the
basis of 'what if' again meaning what if he murders someone else (sic).

They must undertake a risk assessment and make decisions based on evidence
and not on assumptions or a media story.  There must be a better way to
manage perceived risks beyond seemingly knee-jerk, panic responses to media
stories.

The UK no longer practises Corporal punishment (sic) therefore other
British murderers who have served their sentences and have been released
must be living amongst us in the community without the assumption they will
commit another murder.  In most cases they are deemed to be reformed, sent
back into the wider community and allowed to get on with their lives.  So
the question must be why is [the appellant] assumed to be a greater risk.

I know [the appellant] is not an EU national but he has been living in this
country for over twenty years, it therefore makes little sense if he has
not committed any crimes in the UK to now deport him after 20 years.  This
act is clearly going to destroy his family".

105. Later on, we find the following:-

"It is vital that the court does not become complicit in supporting a
hostile and inhumane immigration service who are na�vely replacing one
wrong committed by [the appellant] with another being done to his children
by the state".

106. The comment that deportation would "destroy" the family is, we
consider, both hyperbolic and finds no proper reasoning in the report.

107. The assessment of the effect of deportation on the appellant's wife
is, likewise, intensely problematic:-

"It is my assessment that the deportation of [the appellant] would be
devastating for [the appellant's wife] as she does not want to be made to
care for her children on her own.  She has never trained to do any jobs, so
she would find it very hard to secure meaningful employment that would pay
her enough wages to enable her to meet the living expenses of her family.

I am also of the opinion [the appellant's wife] will spiral into deep
depression very quickly because culturally, I did not assess her as someone
designed to function as a single parent.  Her outlook is that her family is
priority and both parents are the head of this union within which she has a
role and [the appellant] has a role".

108. Absent from this analysis is any consideration of whether the
appellant's wife was destroyed "morally and emotionally" by the appellant's
extradition to Albania, at a time when there were no adult children to help
look after their siblings.  There is no indication also that Mr Forrester
is a psychiatrist who can opine that the appellant's wife will "spiral into
deep depression".  The fact that a wife has a cultural expectation that she
would not be required to secure gainful employment is, moreover, not a
factor that is likely to carry significant weight.  It certainly does not
in this case, where there is no indication that the appellant's wife, who
says she can speak English fluently, could not look for work.  In any
event, it is a commonplace of cases of this kind that family members of
deportees may have to access relevant state benefits.

109.  Mr Forrester's report further undermines the appellant's present
stance regarding the murder. Mr Forrester recorded that the appellant "is
deeply remorseful about what happened in his past and has now engaged
himself in his religion, praying every day as part of a structured way of
managing his life in a calm and peaceful manner".  There is nothing in the
rest of the evidence about the appellant turning to religion.  As we have
already seen, the appellant's alleged remorse comes and goes, according to
what he perceives to be the nature of his audience.

110. Ms Naik submitted that, since there are four minor children, the
harshness of deportation must be "stronger (by a factor of four) than it
would be if [the appellant] had one child only".  That mathematical
calculation is, we consider, an inappropriate way of assessing matters.
The effect on each child must be examined.  The interests of each child
must each be a primary consideration.  There is no reliable evidence that
the deportation of the appellant would have an effect on any of the minor
children (aged 15, 12, 8 and 4) that could be characterised as unduly
harsh.  That is not, of course, to say that the children would not be
extremely upset if the appellant were to leave their home.  However, none
has any identified special needs or particular vulnerabilities.  We remind
ourselves that there will, inevitably, be a "degree of harshness" involved
in deportation of a family member: Secretary of State for the Home
Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 at paragraph 34.

111. The fact that there are several children involved can, of course, be
relevant if there can be shown to be a particularly serious effect on one
child, which may indirectly impact on the others.  The same is true of
other family members, such as the appellant's mother.  If she were likely
to suffer profound depression, as Mr Forrester contends, then that would be
likely to impact on the children.  There is, however, nothing of this kind
here.  On the contrary, we accept the evidence of MC that he could and
would help the other children, in the event of the appellant's deportation.
 We have heard nothing to indicate that the other adult child, aged 19,
would be unable to act similarly.

112. Although the children may, for a short time, be concerned about the
appellant's physical wellbeing, if returned to Albania, on the basis that
they have been made by their parents to think that the appellant is
genuinely at risk, the children will soon realise that this is untrue.

113. Ms Naik submitted that the appellant, having been prescribed
medication for anxiety, would face additional difficulties accessing
appropriate support for his mental health.  In fairness, this was not a
matter which she emphasised in her oral submissions.  Any anxiety that the
appellant might have about his deportation would, of course, have ceased.
There is no evidence at all to show that he would be unable to access
relevant healthcare in Albania, in order to treat any remaining (or newly
arising) anxiety.  The same is true of the appellant's other health
problems, as described to Dr Ahmed.

(f) Striking the balance

114. The outcome of the proportionality balancing exercise is, we find,
firmly in the favour of the respondent.  The best interests of the
appellant's minor children are, clearly, that he should stay living with
them in the United Kingdom.  The evidence, however, fails by a significant
margin to show that it would be unduly harsh on each or all of them, if the
appellant were to be deported. The same is true of the appellant's wife and
the adult children.



Decision

     The appellant's human rights appeal, by reference to Article 8 of the
ECHR is dismissed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                               Signed[pic]            Date: 23 April 2020


                               The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                               President of the Upper Tribunal
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber



                                  ADDENDUM

 1. Following an application by News Group Newspapers Ltd and  the  hearing
    of submissions by relevant parties at Field House on 30 November  2020,
    the Tribunal (President, UTJ O'Callaghan) lifted  the  anonymity  order
    previously granted in this matter. The decision was subject to  various
    orders staying its coming into force, the last of which  expired  on  2
    July 2021.

 2.  By  an  Order  dated  11  January  2021,  having  considered   written
    submissions filed and served  by  the  applicant  and  respondent,  the
    Tribunal stayed its decision to lift the anonymity order consequent  to
    the respondent having filed an appeal  with  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    respect of the Tribunal's substantive consideration of  his  article  8
    appeal: [2020] UKUT 00187 (IAC). The Tribunal ordered that the decision
    to lift the anonymity order would take effect at the end of the  period
    of ten working days after  the  date  on  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    informed  the  respondent  of  its  decision  on  the  application  for
    permission.

 3. By an Order dated 19 February  2021  Elisabeth  Laing  LJ  refused  the
    respondent permission to appeal from the order  in  [2020]  UKUT  00187
    (IAC). She found no reason to interfere with the Tribunal's  subsequent
    order that the respondent continue to be anonymised until  ten  working
    days of her decision on the application for permission to  appeal.  The
    tenth working day was 5 March 2021.

 4. The respondent filed an application for judicial review challenging the
    Tribunal's decision to lift the anonymity order and applied for interim
    relief (CO/809/2021). By an Order dated 5 March 2021  Linden  J  stayed
    the  Tribunal's  decision  to  lift   the   anonymity   order   pending
    determination, on the papers, of  the  application  for  permission  to
    apply for judicial review.

 5. By an Order of Ms. Margaret Obi, sitting as a Deputy High Court  Judge,
    dated 22 June 2021, the respondent was refused permission to  challenge
    the Tribunal's decision to lift the anonymity order and the application
    was certified as totally without merit.  The  Order  of  Linden  J  was
    discharged. The decision of the Tribunal to lift  the  anonymity  order
    made in respect of the respondent was stayed until seven days after the
    date of service of the Order. The Order was served on 25 June 2021  and
    the stay imposed by the Deputy Judge expired on 2 July 2021.

 6. The decision of the Tribunal previously reported  as  SC  (paras  A398-
    339D: 'foreign criminal': procedure) Albania [2020]  UKUT  00187  (IAC)
    will now be reported as Cokaj  (paras  A398-339D:  'foreign  criminal':
    procedure) Albania [2020] UKUT 00187 (IAC)

                               Signed: [pic]     Date: 19 July 2021
                       The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                       President of the Upper Tribunal
                                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber
