
[pic]
IAC-fH-kh-V3

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

       MO (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 February 2011                           |On 27 May 2011               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                                LADY DORRIAN
                       SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE STOREY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE P R LANE

                                   Between

                                     MO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
Dyer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


(i) The figures relating to UK entry clearance  applications  since  2006  -
particularly since September 2008 - show  a  very  significant  change  from
those considered by the Tribunal in MA  (Draft  evaders-illegal  departures-
risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 and are among a  number  of  indications
that it has become more difficult for Eritreans to obtain lawful  exit  from
Eritrea.

(ii) The Eritrean authorities continue to  envisage  lawful  exit  as  being
possible for those who are above national service age or children  of  7  or
younger. Otherwise, however, the potential categories  of  lawful  exit  are
limited to two narrowly drawn medical categories and those  who  are  either
highly trusted government officials or their families or who are members  of
ministerial staff recommended by the department to attend studies abroad.

(iii) The general position concerning illegal exit remains as  expressed  in
MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of or  approaching  draft  age  and
not medically unfit  cannot  be  assumed  if  they  had  been  found  wholly
incredible. However, if such a person is found to have left  Eritrea  on  or
after August/September 2008, it may be, that inferences can  be  drawn  from
their health history or level of education or their  skills  profile  as  to
whether  legal  exit  on  their  part  was  feasible,  provided  that   such
inferences can be drawn in the light of the  adverse  credibility  findings.


(iv) The general position adopted in MA, that a  person  of  or  approaching
draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still not above the upper age limits  for
military service, being under 54 for men and under 47 for  women)   and  not
medically unfit  who  is  accepted  as  having  left  Eritrea  illegally  is
reasonably likely to be  regarded  with  serious  hostility  on  return,  is
reconfirmed, subject to limited exceptions in respect of  (1)  persons  whom
the regime's military and political leadership  perceives  as  having  given
them valuable service (either in Eritrea or abroad);  (2)  persons  who  are
trusted family  members  of,  or  are  themselves  part  of,   the  regime's
military or political leadership. A further possible exception, requiring  a
more case-specific  analysis,  is  (3)  persons  (and  their  children  born
afterwards) who fled (what later became the  territory  of)  Eritrea  during
the war of independence.

(v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers  as  such
are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return,  on
present evidence  the great majority  of  such  persons  are  likely  to  be
perceived as having left illegally and this  fact,  save  for  very  limited
exceptions, will mean that on return they face a real  risk  of  persecution
or serious harm.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    This case is one that was identified  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  an
    intended country guidance case some time ago.  It concerns  a  national
    of Eritrea born on 19 May 2008 whose claim for asylum  was  refused  by
    the respondent on 16 February 2009 and whose subsequent  appeal  to  an
    Immigration Judge (IJ) Page was dismissed in a  determination  notified
    on 15 April 2009. Following a reconsideration hearing that  took  place
    on 13 November 2009, Senior Immigration Judge  P  R  Lane's  subsequent
    decision on 16 March 2009 that the IJ had materially erred in law  (see
    Appendix A) stated that the parties were in agreement with him that the
    case was a suitable vehicle for giving country guidance. The Tribunal's
    direction to the parties made at the time, specified  that  the  issues
    were confined to:

          1)  risk on return where there has been illegal exit from Eritrea;
             and/or


         .2)      [risk on return] where a person has claimed asylum in  the
         United
           Kingdom (regardless of status of exit).

2.          As is increasingly the practice of  the  Tribunal  it  was  then
    subject  to  case  management.  Sometimes  exchanges  during  the  case
    management process can lead to  the  country  guidance  issue(s)  being
    refined or altered, but this did not prove necessary in this  case.  We
    are grateful to both parties for their  diligence  in  identifying  and
    assembling relevant evidence.  Following the replacement on 15 February
    2010 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (AIT) by a two-tier system,
    the Upper Tribunal, Immigration and Asylum Chamber is required  to  re-
    make the decision in the appeal.


3.    Except for one point of  clarification  we  have  not  sought  to  re-
    examine in this appeal  the  issues  of  the  nature  of  military  and
    national service in Eritrea,  demobilisation  and  risk  on  return  to
    persons who are or would be perceived as  draft  evaders  or  deserters
    which are the subject of the guidance given  in  MA  (Draft  evaders  -
    illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059.   Nor  do  we
    need to re-examine the question of whether MA reflected a correct legal
    approach: in GM (Eritrea) & Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 833 it was held that the approach in MA  was
    correct. In MA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2010] UKSC 49 the Supreme Court agreed.


4.    On the issues we shall re-examine, the position as stated  in  MA  was
    set out at paras 445-449 of that decision:


         "445. It is clear that a person of military service age or  who  is
         approaching military  service  age  who  leaves  Eritrea  illegally
         before  undertaking  or  completing  Active  National  Service  (as
         defined in Article 8 of the  1995  Proclamation)...  is  reasonably
         likely to be regarded by the Eritrean authorities as a deserter and
         punished accordingly. The evidence of a "shoot to kill"  policy  in
         respect of deserters, the imprisoning of parents  and  the  process
         known as "the giffa", together  with  the  more  general  objective
         evidence regarding the oppressive nature of  the  Eritrean  regime,
         confirms that any such punishment  is  likely  to  be  both  extra-
         judicial and of such  a  severity  as  to  amount  to  persecution,
         serious harm and ill-treatment.
         .446. What also emerges plainly from the evidence, is that a person
         of draft age, who has left illegally and who is not medically unfit
         will be similarly regarded even if he has completed Active National
         Service and  has  been  "demobilised"  therefrom  because,  in  the
         absence of special factors, he or she is still  regarded  as  being
         subject to National Service. The  country  guidance  in  IN  (Draft
         evaders - evidence of risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00106,  KA
         (draft-related risk categories updated)  Eritrea  CG  [2005]  UKAIT
         00165 and AH (Failed asylum seekers - involuntary returns)  Eritrea
         CG [2006] UKAIT 00078 is therefore modified so as to  include  this
         category of persons amongst those who are in general at real risk.
         .447. As stated in paragraphs 371 - 374 above, we do not find  that
         all returning failed asylum seekers are as such at real risk.  That
         is so even if the returnee is of draft age (or approaching it).  If
         the position were otherwise, we should expect to see some  evidence
         in the background materials. Dr Pool did not advance such a view in
         his evidence. The only specific evidence was in the comments of  Dr
         Kibreab, recorded in paragraph 374 above. Although  we  have  found
         him in general  a  witness  whose  testimony  carries  weight,  his
         comments on this issue are unrelated to any specific  case  history
         and struck us as unacceptably vague.
         .448. A person of or approaching draft age who fails to  show  that
         he or she left Eritrea illegally is not  reasonably  likely  to  be
         regarded with serious hostility on return, even if the  authorities
         are or would be reasonably likely to be aware that that person  had
         made an unsuccessful asylum claim abroad.
         .449. A finding as to whether an Eritrean appellant has shown  that
         it is reasonably likely he or she left  the  country  illegally  is
         therefore likely to remain crucial in deciding risk  on  return  to
         that country.... In making such a  finding,  judicial  fact-finders
         will need to be aware of evidence that tends to show the numbers of
         those exiting Eritrea illegally appear to be  substantially  higher
         than those who  do  so  legally  and  that  distaste  for  what  is
         effectively open-ended service at the  behest  of  the  state  lies
         behind  a  good  deal  of  the  current  emigration  from  Eritrea.
         Nevertheless, where a person has come to  this  country  and  given
         what the fact-finder concludes (according to the requisite standard
         of proof) to be an incredible account of  his  or  her  experiences
         that person may well fail to show that he or she exited illegally."
5.    Although  these  findings  noted  some  points  of  disagreement  with
    Professor Kibreab, the Tribunal had attached significant weight to  his
    evidence (as stated at para 205) that those able to obtain  exit  visas
    were limited to eight categories:

          .   Ministers
           . Ex-ministers
           . Party activists
           .  Eritrean  expatriates,  namely  those  who  would  be  British
             citizens working in Eritrea but of Eritrean origin


           . Elderly people over fifty who were forty or over  in  1994  who
             wanted to go on Haj or visit relatives abroad

           .    Scholarship students (the government  now  restricted  their
             movements as many did not return)


           .   Government employees who  attended  conferences  (although  D
             Kibreab maintained this had recently stopped)


        .   Relatives of those in power might arguably obtain exit visas  as
          a result.
6.    Professor Kibreab's evidence then was that, otherwise,  no  one  under
    fifty for whatever reason could lawfully obtain an exit visa and  would
    have to walk to Ethiopia or the Sudan, which  was  risky,  and  try  to
    cross the border (para 206).


Procedural history

7.    At a CMR hearing on 25 March 2010  SIJ  P  R  Lane  issued  directions
    designed, inter alia, to  assist  the  appellant's  representatives  in
    making a request to the respondent for  information  regarding  student
    and other visas issued by the UK Embassy in Eritrea and the  number  of
    persons entering the UK pursuant to such visas (there being Freedom  of
    Information considerations).

8.    The respondent's response  confirmed,  inter  alia,  that  since  2005
    there had been eleven successful applications for entry clearance visas
    issued to students  by  the  British  Embassy  in  Asmara.   A  further
    direction following CMR hearings on 11 August 2010 and 24 November 2010
    specified the need for the respondent to provide a further breakdown of
    the  figures  already  furnished  relating  to  the   eleven   students
    concerned, in particular with  a  view  to  establishing  whether  they
    actually entered  the  UK  and  for  the  appellant's  representative's
    expert, Dr (now Professor) Kibreab, to produce his report  and  confirm
    whether  he  would  be  giving  oral  evidence.  Subsequent   responses
    clarified that, of these eleven, seven had been granted leave to enter.

 9. In response to Tribunal directions the  respondent  also  produced  two
    letters from the British Embassy in Asmara dated 11 October 2010 and 22
    February 2011, whose contents are described below.

10. One other procedural matter we should note is that in response to  oral
    directions given by the Tribunal on 24 February  2011,  the  respondent
    wrote on 15 April 2011 producing and commenting on the latest US  State
    Department report, 8 April 2011, making three observations: (1) in  the
    section on disappearances  the  sources  quoted  were  not  necessarily
    reliable or [were] very vague. It was  not  clear  that  the  paragraph
    referring to the two Eritreans  returned  from  Germany  was  factually
    accurate. Other background evidence suggested that  the  two  Eritreans
    returned by Germany subsequently fled again and were granted asylum  in
    Germany; (2) the section  on  academic  freedom  contains  a  paragraph
    suggesting  that  children  of  "liberation  fighters"  are   sometimes
    required to serve 5 months military service. It was  the  view  of  the
    respondent that this may well be a relevant factor as to  exit  permits
    and how they might be perceived by the state should such  a  person  be
    returned as a failed asylum seeker; and (3) the section on  freedom  of
    movement is substantially the same as before but  it  seems  even  less
    clear on the issue  of  exit  permits.  On  21  April  the  appellant's
    solicitors wrote commenting (with obvious reference to (2) above,  that
    "we are of the opinion that  the  reference  to  potentially  different
    service obligations for  children  of  liberation  [fighters]  requires
    further attention in relation to service obligations and the  obtaining
    of exit visas." Given this they sought to  submit  an  addendum  expert
    report and written submissions by Friday 13th May asking that  at  that
    stage the Tribunal and the respondent consider whether the case  needed
    relisting for further hearing. On 10  May  2011  the  Tribunal  sent  a
    response to the parties making clear that it would not receive  further
    evidence and that the case would not be relisted for  further  hearing.




The Appellant

10.   The appellant entered the UK on 13 November 2008.  He  claimed  asylum
    based on an account that the Eritrean authorities had  accused  him  of
    being a Pentecostalist, that he had deserted from the army and that  he
    had left Eritrea illegally.

11. In dismissing the appellant's appeal  IJ  Page  found  the  appellant's
    account not credible in all save two respects.  These were that the  IJ
    accepted (1) that the appellant had done military service; and (2) that
    the appellant left Eritrea in September 2009.  On the  basis  of  those
    findings the IJ did not accept the appellant left Eritrea illegally  or
    that he would be at risk of persecution on return for any other reason.
     When SIJ P R Lane subsequently found that the IJ had materially  erred
    in law it was on the basis of the inadequate reasoning on the issue  of
    illegal exit. He  emphasised,  however,  the  importance  of  the  IJ's
    finding that the appellant left Eritrea in September 2009, given the US
    State  Department  Report  reference  to  the  government  of   Eritrea
    suspending exit visas in August 2008 (see again Appendix A).

12. It is instructive to note at this  juncture  that  even  though  it  is
    common parlance to refer in asylum  appeals  to  persons  found  wholly
    incredible as "failed asylum seekers", in the Eritrean context there is
    an especial need  to  have  regard  to  such  persons'  basic  physical
    characteristics - in particular their age and sex - as well as to their
    likely date of departure from Eritrea. Age and health history of course
    may or may not be accepted as established, but they, together with sex,
    are key  characteristics  because  of  Eritrea's  unique  military  and
    national service system and the way it impacts on the possibilities  of
    legal exit.  Why the date (if any can be established) an  appellant  is
    to be taken to have left Eritrea is important is already hinted  at  in
    SIJ PR Lane's above observation, but we will say more about  it  later.
    The importance of Immigration Judges  so  far  as  is  possible  making
    careful and specific findings in Eritrean cases  on  age  and  date  of
    departure and health  if  relevant  (see  below  para  115)  cannot  be
    overstated. (A person's sex is also a key  matter  in  the  context  of
    Eritrea, although  that  will  almost  always  be  uncontentious.)  For
    reasons we shall come to later, it may also  be  relevant  to  look  at
    uncontentious personal data recorded about an appellant to  see  if  it
    indicates anything further about his or her profile.


Professor Kibreab: written evidence

13.   We do not need to  set  out  Professor  Kibreab's  qualifications  and
    experience as he was an expert in the MA case, which  noted  them.   It
    suffices to note that he is currently  working  at  London  South  Bank
    University as a Professor and Director of Refugee  Studies.   Professor
    Kibreab's report dated 8 January  2011,  emphasises  how  in  order  to
    compensate for the fact that  the  Eritrean  regime  makes  it  acutely
    difficult for analysts to obtain information about its workings, he has
    built up  networks  of  informants  inside  and  outside  the  country,
    including former and current civil servants.   He  has  a  practice  of
    counter-checking every source.

14.   In his report Professor Kibreab stated that the  four  out  of  eleven
    students confirmed by the respondent in response to Tribunal directions
    to have been granted visas by the UK Embassy in Asmara between 2005 and
    2009 but who never entered the UK, were probably denied exit  visas  by
    the Eritrean authorities.  From the fact that the figure was so tiny it
    can safely be  assumed  that  the  overwhelming  majority  of  Eritrean
    nationals who leave Eritrea to seek asylum in the UK do  so  illegally.
    It seems that as a result of the British Embassy in  Asmara  curtailing
    its visa services in the second half of  September  2006,  no  Eritrean
    citizen was able to get entry clearance to come to the UK.  After  this
    curtailment, those  Eritrean  nationals  who  were  unaffected  by  the
    military and national service obligations who wanted to apply for entry
    clearance to the UK often went to Nairobi, Dubai or Cairo.

15.   The possibility for national service-aged Eritreans to be issued  exit
    visas by the Eritrean government - and so to leave the country  legally
    -  was extremely  restricted  or  non-existent.   Being  granted  entry
    clearance by the British Embassy had nothing to  do  with  whether  one
    will be granted an exit visa.

16.   Professor Kibreab referred to the figures provided by  the  respondent
    relating to the numbers of Eritrean nationals granted  leave  to  enter
    the UK since 2005. These showed that  a  total  of  771  Eritreans  had
    applied. Professor Kibreab said he found these  figures  revealing,  as
    they were fairly constant, remaining at  the  same  level  despite  the
    sharp decline in the number of applications for entry clearance made to
    the British Embassy in Eritrea after 2005/6.   This  suggested  in  his
    opinion that it has remained the case  for  some  time  that  Eritreans
    coming to the UK  have  been  persons  who  had  already  left  Eritrea
    illegally and gone somewhere else.

17.   Given the Eritrean leadership's record of ignoring its own  laws  when
    it suits it he could not rule out that leaders would be able to arrange
    the grant of exit visas to their loved ones and those who served  their
    interests.

18.   A key part of Professor Kibreab's report  was  his  identification  of
    those who still had the potential to apply for exit  visas.   Referring
    to his previous list as given in MA which contained eight categories he
    stated that one, ex-Ministers, no longer obtained and all the rest were
    now more narrowly drawn than when he had given evidence  in  MA.   Even
    when a person came within one of them an  exit  visa  was  still  often
    denied. In relation to the category of government official on  a  short
    course or scholarship or seeking workshop or conference attendance,  he
    stated that at present no male Eritrean  citizen  under  54  or  female
    Eritrean citizen under 47 can leave Eritrea legally.

19.   As to the exit visa service in Asmara, Professor Kibreab  stated  that
    in 2008 the  government suspended its activities, but according to  his
    sources inside Eritrea it has now re-opened albeit its  activities  are
    now limited to providing services to (i) men and women  who  are  older
    than 54 and 47 respectively; (ii) seriously ill citizens whose ailments
    cannot be treated within the country, as certified  by  the  government
    medical board; (iii) diaspora (British citizen) Eritreans who live  and
    work in Eritrea; and  (iv)  an  extremely  limited  number  of  foreign
    nationals living and working in the country.

20.   Professor Kibreab stated that the  procedure  for  Eritrean  residents
    who wished to apply for exit visas was that (1) they had to apply (to a
    different department)  for a valid passport; (2)  they  had  to  apply,
    using this passport, to be issued  entry  clearance  from  the  country
    concerned; and  only then were they able (3)  to  apply  for  the  exit
    visa, filling out a form supplying certain  information  and  enclosing
    supporting  documentation  (e.g.  birth  certificates,  tax  clearance,
    neighbourhood committee clearance documentation, and,  for  non-service
    aged persons wishing to attend overseas courses or workshops, a  letter
    of approval from the President's office).  Medical  categories  had  to
    submit a letter of certification from the state's  medical  board.   In
    cases where the applicant has a spouse or partner abroad  it  was  also
    necessary to provide evidence of payment of the  2%  diaspora  tax  and
    certain other contributions.  Exit visas are stamped on  passports  and
    the Immigration Department would keep records to that effect.

21.   Professor Kibreab's report also dealt with  the  appellant's  personal
    circumstances.  Leaving aside those found not to be credible by the IJ,
    these related to his age and the fact that he  had  completed  military
    service and the date when he left Eritrea.   The  professor  considered
    that the Tribunal's conclusion  in  MA  that  no  demobilisations  were
    taking place in Eritrea, coupled with  his  own  studies,  demonstrated
    that the appellant would still have been engaged  in  national  service
    when he left Eritrea in September 2009.  At that  time  the  exit  visa
    service was most probably suspended; that was the view of the US  State
    Department Report 2010  and  the  UNHCR  2009  Guidelines.   Hence  the
    likelihood of him having been granted an  exit  visa  was  almost  non-
    existent.  At para 11.40 Professor Kibreab stated that  "the  appellant
    as a deserter and as a person who most likely  left  Eritrea  illegally
    and as a failed asylum seeker forcibly  returned  to  Eritrea  is  most
    likely  to  face  imminent  risk  of   persecution..."   The   Eritrean
    authorities run rigorous checks on  returnees  (as  they  do  on  those
    seeking to depart).  If they have reason to suspect a returnee has left
    illegally and/or sought  asylum  elsewhere,  that  person  is  kept  in
    custody until they check records or interrogate him:

         "11.2 ...     The degree of checks is more rigorous when the person
                  concerned is of draft  age,  does  not  have  a  residence
                  permit in the country  where  he  is  returning  from,  if
                  deported or if there is any indication to suggest he  left
                  Eritrea after 1994.
                                          ...

         11.33.   Whenever the security people need to investigate  further,
                  the usual routine is to detain the person concerned either
                  at Aid Abeto or at Corscelli in Asmara.  In the  meantime,
                  the authorities investigate the matter to see whether  the
                  person   left   illegally,   whether   they    have    any
                  political/military profile or engaged  in  anti-government
                  activities - demonstrations, meetings etc  or  had  sought
                  asylum."


      Professor Kibreab states that in cases of doubt persons are  subjected
    to interrogation which includes ill-treatment.


22.   Professor Kibreab says he agreed with  the  Tribunal  in  MA  that  it
    cannot be ruled out that the Eritrean  government  is  likely  to  send
    people abroad in pursuit of its different interests "without  incurring
    any costs as this will be met by  the  country  of  asylum".   However,
    "these are likely to be very few" and "the  large  majority  of  failed
    asylum seekers, including those  who  left  the  country  legally,  are
    likely to  face  risk  of  being  persecuted  for  seeking  asylum  and
    consequently  for  having  'washed  the  government's  dirty  linen  in
    public'."

23.   Professor Kibreab said  it  was  clear  from  the  accounts  given  to
    Amnesty International by two Eritreans forcibly returned by Germany  to
    Eritrea in 2008,  that  the  mere  act  of  seeking  asylum  was  taken
    seriously by the Eritrean security officials (who told  such  returnees
    that they were traitors (11.29)).

Professor Kibreab's Oral Evidence

24.   Professor Kibreab was asked to comment on the observation made by  the
    British Embassy, Asmara in its letter of  22  February  2011,  that  in
    relation to those who had left illegally the Eritrean  authorities  did
    not always take action against them on return.  He  said  such  persons
    must exclusively be those who had fled during the war of  independence.
    The Eritrean authorities encouraged the  return  of  such  persons  and
    their lack of valid documentation would  not  matter  to  the  Eritrean
    authorities, so long as they could show pre-independence residence.

25.   Professor Kibreab said it was possible  for  Eritreans  who  had  left
    Eritrea  illegally  post-independence  and  gone  to  Sudan  to  obtain
    Eritrean passports there, although only a few were  able  to  do  this.
    Such people would want passports so they could  move  on  to  countries
    such as Kenya and Uganda  who  required  passports.   They  would  need
    contacts inside the Eritrean embassy in Khartoum: they  would  have  to
    sign a form regretting their betrayal of Eritrea and stating that  they
    were  willing  to  accept  any  punishment.  Asked  why  the   Eritrean
    authorities would be prepared to issue passports to  such  persons,  Dr
    Kibreab said it was to "cut their losses".  Such a move enabled them to
    help disperse expatriates who might otherwise form oppositions  in  the
    Sudan, to keep tabs on such people and also to extract money from  them
    in the form of the 2% tax.  It had proved an effective tactic.  Some of
    those concerned were recruited as informers.

26.   Professor Kibreab said that Eritreans abroad were liable  to  pay  the
    2% tax wherever they were in the world.  If you did not pay  you  would
    not get key services, e.g. the documentation necessary for  expatriates
    to inherit from their parents in Eritrea or the permission for them  to
    build houses in Eritrea.  He said that even if an Eritrean had got hold
    of a passport after having exited illegally, e.g. through bribery,  the
    authorities on return would still scrutinise the returnee to see if  he
    left illegally.  He thought that having signed a repentance form  would
    have no impact on the attitude of the Eritrean authorities at the point
    of return.

27.   Professor Kibreab was asked to comment on the categories of  those  he
    had listed in his evidence to the Tribunal in MA in 2007 as potentially
    able to get exit visas (see above para 5).  He confirmed that he  would
    now delete the "Ex-Ministers" category altogether and draw each of  the
    remaining categories more narrowly.  Ministers and government officials
    and employees were now less  likely  to  get  exit  visas  due  to  the
    regime's reaction to the fact that significant numbers  of  persons  in
    these categories who had been  given  exit  visas  in  the  past  never
    returned.  He also considered the category, "friends/relatives of those
    in power", was likely to be narrower now; the President did not let his
    own son leave the country, so as  to  set  an  example.   The  regime's
    leadership, being aware of abuses, had imposed random  checks.   People
    who might hope to get exit  visas  through  bribes  now  faced  greater
    scrutiny and severe punishment if caught.  He accepted,  however,  that
    the inner circle might be able to arrange exit  for  their  own  family
    members and friends secretly.

28.   In cross-examination he was asked why he had concluded in  his  report
    that the number of scholarship students given exit visas would be  very
    few.  Surely, Mr Avery asked, the fact  that  since  2006  the  British
    Embassy in Asmara's facilities had been scaled down could not  be  used
    as the sole test of this.  Professor Kibreab agreed but said  that  the
    very small numbers corroborated evidence from elsewhere pointing to the
    same conclusions. He pointed to his note of caution about  this  matter
    at paragraph 43 of his report.  When the  Tribunal  decided  MA,  there
    were more students who were making applications and their  outcome  was
    unknown.  Now we knew that since then only two had been successful, one
    in 2007 and one in 2009.  Therefore he considered this  category  would
    really just be  a  limited  opportunity  for  people  working  for  the
    government and would be for study in places such as  China  and  Qatar.
    The decision would be made by the  President's  office,  that  being  a
    further filter.

29.   Professor Kibreab was taxed  about  his  opinion  that  there  was  no
    correlation between  being  granted  entry  clearance  by  the  British
    Embassy and being granted an exit visa by the Eritrean authorities.  Mr
    Avery pointed out that applicants for entry  clearance  would  need  to
    have valid passports.  Why would the regime issue passports, he  asked,
    if they were set against granting  recipients  exit  visas?   Professor
    Kibreab said that to get a passport the  level  of  scrutiny  was  less
    rigorous.

30.   Dr. Kibreab said he agreed he had no direct evidence to  back  up  his
    claim that almost all returnees  would  be  mistreated  -  because  his
    information was that no-one returns.

31.   Asked why he thought the Eritrean authorities  would  be  prepared  to
    issue passports to those who had illegally exited and gone into  Sudan,
    when that might seem to give a green light to others in Eritrea to flee
    to  that  country,  he  thought  that  the  regime  relied  on   people
    considering the risk of being shot on sight during the exit enough of a
    deterrent.  In any event, only a few were able to get such passports.

32.   In re-examination Professor Kibreab said he  thought  it  likely  that
    the Eritreans claiming entry  clearance  in  Cairo  and  Khartoum  used
    Eritrean passports; he assumed the majority  would  have  left  Eritrea
    illegally.

33.   In reply to questions from the panel he agreed that it  was  seemingly
    odd that the Eritrean embassy in Sudan would sometimes issue  passports
    to Eritreans who had left Eritrea illegally, but the matter had  to  be
    looked at in the light of how it worked on the  ground.   He  estimated
    that around 10,000 Eritreans a year exited illegally and went to Sudan.
     Those who did not want to stay were  usually  young  Christians  (also
    some young Muslims) who did not speak  the  language  in  Sudan.   Most
    originated from rural areas. Only a few obtained passports.  He had  no
    evidence but his experience led him to think some of these  would  have
    been asked to act as informants amongst the  Eritrean  diaspora  or  as
    mobilisers or recruits. In the UK a great many  more  Eritreans  attend
    pro-government meetings/events than anti-government meetings/events (he
    gave the example of a  pro-government  meeting  or  event  attended  by
    approx. 2,500 Eritreans), but he believed  that  quite  a  few  of  the
    former were doing it for appearances only.   Professor Kibreab said he
    believed almost all Eritreans in  the  UK  were  or  had  been  asylum-
    seekers.  Although the great majority professed to  be  pro-government,
    this did not mean that they truly were and the regime knew this.

34.   Asked about the procedure for applying for an exit  visa  in  Eritrea,
    Professor Kibreab said the form required you to state which country  or
    countries you proposed to travel to. I was easier to get a visa to  the
    Gulf States and countries with whom Eritrea had  close  political  ties
    such as China, but the very  stringent  restrictions  outlined  in  his
    report would still apply.

35.   He was asked about the likely numbers of Eritreans in  Sudan  who  had
    fled there in  the  war  for  independence;  he  said  around  600,000.
    Encouraging them to return to Eritrea helped  the  Eritrean  government
    show it was not unpopular.

36.   Professor Kibreab said he was adamant the latest  list  of  categories
    he had  given  of  those  potentially  able  to  get  exit  visas  were
    exhaustive. Because of highly  embarrassing  defections,  sportspersons
    were now barely able to travel.

37.   Asked how people in Eritrea who were  family  members  of  persons  in
    Western countries managed  to  achieve  family  reunion  in  a  Western
    country, Professor Kibreab said  they  would  almost  all  have  exited
    Eritrea illegally first.

38.   Professor  Kibreab  said  he  considered  that  the  attitude  of  the
    Eritrean authorities to Eritreans who had claimed asylum  abroad  would
    be hostile.  If they  had  exited  illegally  they  would  have  severe
    problems; if they had exited legally  they  would  still  have  serious
    problems unless they were people who had been sent abroad by the regime
    and/or they were seen to have done service for them.  The  attitude  of
    the authorities was that such persons had been given a huge favour  and
    so were expected to be ardent supporters of the regime. The  government
    suspected expatriates of betrayal and disloyalty.  He did not  know  of
    any such persons having returned except for the few cases  he  recorded
    in his report and such cases strongly suggested  that  persecution  was
    the norm.  The only exception would be  people  who  had  fled  Eritrea
    during the war of independence and their children.

39.   Asked what he thought would happen to the children of people  who  had
    fled Eritrea during the war of independence if they  went  back  having
    claimed asylum in the UK, Professor Kibreab said that  may  not  be  an
    issue for them, but they would be required to do  military  service  if
    within the stipulated age ranges.

Background Evidence

40.   The major country  reports  concur  in  painting  a  grim  picture  of
    present day Eritrea.  In its April 2009 report Human Rights Watch notes
    that Eritrea is one of the world's youngest countries but  has  rapidly
    become one of its most repressive.  Reporteurs San  Frontieres  in  its
    2008 Press Freedom Index ranked Eritrea ahead of all other countries in
    terms of the absence of freedom of the press and expression.  President
    Isaias Afewerki, who piloted the country through its  30  year  war  of
    independence (which ended in 1994)  and  its  1998-2002  conflict  with
    Ethiopia, runs it as a one-party state controlled by the People's Front
    for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ)  apparatus.  He  uses  the  unresolved
    border dispute with Ethiopia to keep the country  on  a  permanent  war
    footing.  According to the International Crisis  Group,  "Eritrea:  The
    Siege State" of September 2010, he is no longer seen  as  the  "beloved
    leader of the nation-at-arms" but as a  "mentally  unstable  autocrat".
    Following the  imposition  of  UN  Security  Council  sanctions  on  23
    December 2009 (at the behest of the African Union) for its  support  of
    the Somali Islamic insurgency and Al-Shabab (UNSC 1907 (2009)), Eritrea
    has become increasingly isolated internationally.

  41.  According  to  the  International  Institute  of  Strategic  Studies,
      Eritrea's population (around 4 million) is  the  world's  second  most
      militarised.  Thousands of Eritrean  soldiers  remain  massed  on  the
      border with Ethiopia.  According to Europe World accessed  on  12  May
      2010, it is estimated that of the 2.2 military reservists and  current
      military conscripts, about 1.7 million are fit for  military  service.
      The introduction in 2002 of the  Warsai  Yekalo  Development  Campaign
      (WYDC) has seen the system of compulsory military service mutate  into
      a programme of indefinite mobilisation  of  most  of  the  able-bodied
      adult  population  to  do  national  service  or  reserve  duty.   The
      repressive  apparatus  required  to  keep  so  many  unwilling  people
      conscripted is increasingly unpopular and has led to tens of thousands
      fleeing the country. In consequence Eritrea is currently among the top
      refugee-producing nations in the world.


  42. Repression in Eritrea is multi-faceted.  The Human Rights Watch  World
      Report 2010 (20 January 2010) states that:


         "Eritrea remains a  country  in  shackles.  Arbitrary  arrests  and
         detention, torture, extrajudicial killings, severe restrictions  of
         freedom of expression and worship, and forced labour  are  routine.
         Despite government efforts to veil abuses from  scrutiny,  Eritrean
         refugees provided  consistent  first-hand  accounts  of  widespread
         abuses. Thousands of  people  fled  the  country  in  2009  due  to
         Eritrea's serious human rights violations and  indefinite  military
         conscription".


  43. According to the US State Department Report (USSD) for 2009 (11  March
      2010):

         "Human rights abuses included abridgement  of  citizens'  right  to
         change their government  through  a  democratic  process;  unlawful
         killings by security forces;  torture  and  beating  of  prisoners,
         sometimes resulting in  deaths;   abuse  and  torture  of  national
         service evaders, some of whom reportedly died from  their  injuries
         while in detention; harsh and life-threatening  prison  conditions;
         arbitrary arrest  and  detention,  including  of  national  service
         evaders and their family members;  executive  interference  in  the
         judiciary and the use of  a  special  court  system  to  limit  due
         process; and infringement of privacy rights, including roundups  of
         young men and women  for  national  service,  and  the  arrest  and
         detention of the family members of service evaders.  The government
         severely  restricted   freedoms   of   speech,   press,   assembly,
         association, and religion. The government also limited  freedom  of
         movement and travel for citizens in the national  service,  foreign
         residents,  employees  of  diplomatic   missions,   the   UN,   and
         humanitarian and development agencies.  Restrictions  continued  on
         the  activities  of  nongovernment  organizations  (NGOs)  and  the
         International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).    Female  genital
         mutilation  (FGM)  was   widespread,   and   societal   abuse   and
         discrimination against women, members of the Kunama  ethnic  group,
         homosexuals, and persons with HIV/AIDS were problems.   There  were
         limitations on worker rights, including forced labor."


44.   Several major reports contain either express  or  implicit  assessment
    of risk facing Eritreans who are facing forcible return to Eritrea.

45.   We mention first of all the  Amnesty  International  report  dated  17
    November 2010 (written by Paul Dillane  of  the  Refugee  Programme  UK
    (AIUK) for the purposes of this hearing) which  was  furnished  to  the
    Tribunal as part of the appellant's bundle  of  evidence.  This  report
    covers risks due to evasion or military service,  exiting  the  country
    illegally and the risk due to having  sought,  or  being  suspected  of
    having sought, asylum aboard.  The report states that  the  information
    in it is sourced from Amnesty International's Eritrea Team, part of the
    AFRICA Programme at the International Secretariat,  which  carries  out
    research  and  advocacy  work  on  Eritrea.   It  also  sets  out   the
    methodology Amnesty uses in compiling its reports. Having set  out  its
    assessment of the widespread abuses of human rights  committed  by  the
    Eritrean government, the report states that:

         "AI recommends that governments  hosting  Eritrean  asylum  seekers
         refrain from forcibly returning any rejected or non-assessed asylum-
         seeker to Eritrea, where they would be at serious risk of arbitrary
         arrest, incommunicado detention, torture and  other  ill-treatment,
         including as a direct result of their rejected asylum claim. ...All
         forcibly returned Eritreans are at risk of torture and other  forms
         of ill-treatment during interrogation.  According to accounts given
         by escaped detainees, Eritrean security officials are  particularly
         interested in what rejected asylum seekers have said about  Eritrea
         during their asylum application process. Under torture,  or  threat
         of torture, returnees have been forced  to  state  that  they  have
         committed  treason  by  falsely  claiming  persecution  in   asylum
         applications. Leaving the  country  is  itself  considered  by  the
         authorities as an act of treason. "

46.   An e-mail from the Horn of Africa team leader for Human  Rights  Watch
    dated 23 February 2011 stated that:


         "This is to confirm... that HRW has been monitoring  the  situation
         in Eritrea for many years and  is  extremely  concerned  about  the
         human rights situation there and  the  grave  risks  facing  anyone
         forcibly returned in violation of UNHCR guidelines.


         1. The Eritrean state considers anyone without an exit visa to be a
             traitor  and  deserter.   Since  most  of  the  population  is
             eligible for military conscription,  desertion  is  a  serious
             charge.


         2. HRW spoke to many people in 2008/2009 who had been in  detention
             in Dahlek maximum security prison  who  had  spent  time  with
             failed asylum seekers returned from Malta who told us that the
             returnees were among those tortured the worst.


         3. There is much anecdotal evidence of people  being  detained  and
             tortured or mistreated upon return to Eritrea but  such  cases
             are extremely hard to document because of the impossibility of
             doing research inside Eritrea, the extremely secretive  nature
             of the prison network in Eritrea, the paranoia of the citizens
             remaining there and the surveillance  by  the  state  of  most
             communication with the outside world.  A lack of public record
             of violations of persons who have been returned should  in  no
             way be taken to mean that persons returned to Eritrea are  not
             at risk.  The presumption should be very much  the  other  way
             around: anyone returned to Eritrea is at a very high  risk  of
             mistreatment and torture in our view."


47.   The materials before us did not contain an  express  policy  statement
    from the International Crisis Group on the same issue but it  is  clear
    from items we  have from this body that their position on failed asylum
    seekers is very similar to that of  Amnesty  International   and  Human
    Rights Watch.

48.   The UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines  for  Assessing  the  International
    Protection Needs of Asylum-seekers from Eritrea  April  2009  note  the
    rise in the numbers of Eritreans seeking asylum, Eritrea having  become
    in 2007 the world's third largest  country  of  origin  for  individual
    asylum-seekers, after Iraq and  Somalia.   The  Guidelines  state  that
    among those routinely denied exit visas are men up to the  age  of  54,
    regardless of whether they have completed national service,  and  women
    under the age of 47, as well as students wanting to study abroad:


         "Individuals of,  or  approaching,  draft  age  who  leave  Eritrea
         illegally, will be at risk of persecution as a (perceived) deserter
         or draft evader upon return to Eritrea.  This is equally  true  for
         those who have completed  active  military  service  or  have  been
         demobilised, given that all persons of draft  age  are  subject  to
         national service and, as such, are liable to be recalled."


49.   Under the sub-heading, "Forcible return to  Eritrea",  the  Guidelines
    state:-


         "Eritreans who are forcibly  returned  may,  according  to  several
         reports, face arrest without charge, of  detention,  ill-treatment,
         torture or sometimes death at the hands of  the  authorities.  They
         are reportedly held incommunicado, in over-crowded  and  unhygienic
         conditions with  little  access  to  medical  care,  sometimes  for
         extended periods of time.  According  to  credible  sources,  1,200
         persons were forcibly returned from Egypt to Eritrea in June  2008,
         where the majority was detained in military facilities.   UNHCR  is
         aware of at least two Eritrean asylum-seekers who have  arrived  in
         Sudan having escaped  from  detention  following  deportation  from
         Egypt in June 2008.  Eritreans forcibly returned from Malta in 2002
         and Libya in 2004 were arrested on arrival in Eritrea and tortured.
         The returnees were sent to two prisons on Dahlak Island and on  the
         Red  Sea  coast,  where  most  are  still  believed  to   be   held
         incommunicado. There are also  unconfirmed  reports  that  some  of
         those returned from Malta were killed. In another case, a  rejected
         asylum-seeker was detained by the  Eritrean  authorities  upon  her
         forcible return from the United Kingdom  on  14  May  2008.  German
         immigration  authorities  forcibly  returned  two  rejected  asylum
         seekers to Eritrea. They were reportedly detained at Asmara airport
         upon arrival and are being held incommunicado, and believed  to  be
         at risk of torture or other ill-treatment.


         For some Eritreans, being outside the  country  may  be  sufficient
         cause on return to be subjected to scrutiny,  reprisals  and  harsh
         treatment.  Individuals may be suspected of  having  sought  asylum
         participating in diaspora-based opposition  meetings  or  otherwise
         posing a (real or perceived) threat to the Government, particularly
         where they have exited the country illegally.  It has been reported
         that, as of September 2008, a blanket restriction on  passport  and
         exit visa requests had been imposed by the Government.   Given  the
         efficiency and reach of the State intelligence apparatus, there  is
         a reasonable possibility that those in  possession  of  exit  visas
         obtained through bribery would be identified  as  having  illegally
         left the country.


         In light of the above, UNHCR urges States to exercise caution  when
         considering the return of individuals  not  found  to  be  refugees
         under the criteria of the 1951 and/or OAU  Convention  following  a
         determination of their claims in fair and efficient refugee  status
         determination procedures, including the  right  of  appeal.   UNHCR
         further advises against the return of  Eritrean  asylum-seekers  to
         countries they may have transited or in which they  may  have  been
         granted status, but from which there is a risk  of  refoulement  or
         deportation.  Should an  individual  demonstrate  other  needs  for
         which a complementary form of protection would be  appropriate  the
         appropriate  response  should  be  assessed  accordingly.  In  this
         regard, States' obligations under international  human  rights  law
         remain unaffected."


50.   UNHCR summarises its general approach as follows:

         UNHCR considers that most Eritreans fleeing their country should be
         considered as refugees according to the criteria contained  in  the
         1951  Convention  relating  to  the  Status   of   Refugees   (1951
         Convention) and its  1967  Protocol,  and/or  the  1969  Convention
         governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in  Africa  (OAU
         Convention), particularly on the  grounds  of  "political  opinion"
         (both real and imputed) and "religion". In this respect, the groups
         considered to have a presumption of eligibility  include,  but  are
         not limited to, draft  evaders/deserters,  political  opponents  or
         dissidents  (real  or  perceived),  journalists  and  other   media
         professionals, trade unionists and labour rights activists, members
         of  religious  minorities,  women  with  particular  profiles   and
         homosexuals. In countries in which asylum claims are determined  on
         an individual basis, they should be so duly considered in light  of
         the 1951/OAU Conventions' criteria. All claims by Eritrean  asylum-
         seekers should be considered  on  the  basis  of  their  individual
         merits according to fair and efficient refugee status determination
         procedures. In countries where Eritrean asylum-seekers have arrived
         in very large numbers, represent a discernible and similar  pattern
         in  the  nature  of  their  claims,  and   where   refugee   status
         determination exceeds the local capabilities, UNHCR encourages  the
         adoption of a prima facie approach in processing claims."


British Embassy

51.   In response to questions asked by the appellant's representatives  the
    British Embassy in Eritrea has written two  letters  dated  11  October
    2010 and 22 February 2011 (we also had before us the 2010  COIS  report
    which quoted from extracts of earlier letters from this embassy). Their
    general tenor was to say that although the Eritrean authorities operate
    a 'shoot to kill' policy on their borders to  seek  to  deter  or  stop
    those attempting to leave, it was difficult to say what action  if  any
    would be taken against those returning who  were  found  to  have  left
    illegally; it seemed dependent on circumstances and  age.   As  regards
    failed asylum seekers, this was a  "grey  area"  as  "there  is  little
    experience of failed asylum seekers". The Eritrean authorities had said
    no action would be taken except  against  those  who  had  committed  a
    criminal offence, but given that it was an offence to leave the country
    illegally, returnees would be  liable  to  detention  and  questioning:
    "Some have been released without further action but those who have  not
    undertaken military service could be sent to a military training  camp.
    Some have been fined and some detained".  It is also stated that "There
    are also some Eritreans who have returned  'illegally',  i.e.  returned
    from Sudan or Ethiopia without documentation, where no action has  been
    taken."

52. The Embassy said it had not heard of any  suspension  by  the  Eritrean
    authorities  of  the  issue  of  passports  and  exit  visas  in  2008.
    "Passports are issued only to those who can prove they  have  completed
    their national service and  'to  those  travelling  on  behalf  of  the
    Government of Eritrea."  Details were also given of the reduction of UK
    visa services in July 2006, the number of student visas (see above para
    14) and the nature of Khartoum's and Cairo's  visa  work.  Figures  for
    these two posts showed that between June 2008 and May 2009  there  were
    422 decisions (282 to issue entry clearance) and, between 2009 and  May
    2010, 522 (359 to issue entry clearance).


53. As regards the extent to which the Eritreans hold records  relating  to
    the mode of exit, the same  British  Embassy  letter  states  that  the
    airport in Asmara maintains a list, believed to be paper rather than IT
    records, which lists all of  the  passports  and  exit  permits  issued
    legally: "These lists are checked on arrival - we  assume,  but  cannot
    confirm,  they  would  be  able  to  determine  if  someone  had   left
    illegally".

US State Department report, 8 April 2011

54. Section 1.b of the latest US State  Department  report,  8  April  2011
    (which we directed be produced to us as soon  as  it  became  available
    after the hearing), under the heading Disappearance, states:
        "Eritrean  refugees  and  asylum  seekers  repatriated  from  other
        countries during the year reportedly  disappeared  and  an  unknown
        number of persons assumed to be in government detention  have  also
        disappeared.  The  government  does  not  provide  information   on
        disappearances, and does not regularly  notify  family  members  or
        respond to information requests regarding the status of persons  in
        detention.
        In February,  according  to  an  opposition  Web  site,  12  of  67
        Eritreans deported from Libya disappeared. There  were  unconfirmed
        reports that nine of the deportees were detained  incommunicado  in
        Embatkala  prison  before  its  closure.  Their  names  are:  Zigta
        Tewelde,  Asmelash  Kidane,  Captain  Zeraburuk   Tsehaye,   Second
        Lieutenant  Zewde  Teferi,  Yohannes  Tekle,  Ghebrekidan   Tesema,
        Tilinte Estifanos Halefom, Nebyat Tesfay,  and  Tilinte  Tesfagabre
        Mengstu. Additional unconfirmed reports state that Habte Semere and
        Yonas Ghebremichael, who worked for the President's  Office  before
        they left Eritrea,  are  being  detained  incommunicado  in  Ghedem
        prison near Massawa.
        During the year a number  of  imprisoned  journalists  disappeared,
        according to NGO Reporters Without Borders.
        In January 2009 the government of Egypt  refouled  several  hundred
        Eritrean refugees and asylum seekers, all of whom were returned  to
        their families, according to the  government.  Nevertheless,  there
        were numerous reports from family members of  missing  individuals,
        mostly young men and women who had not completed national service.
        In 2008 approximately 1,200 Eritreans were repatriated from  Egypt,
        many of whom remained missing at  year's  end.  Similarly  in  2008
        German immigration authorities  returned  two  Eritrean  nationals,
        neither of whom had been seen since their arrival in Asmara."

55.  Section 2.d states in its relevant parts:
         "Citizens required government permission for most travel within the
         country and to change their places  of  residence.  The  government
         severely restricts travel to the border regions and does  not  even
         offer bus  services  to  towns  near  the  border.  The  government
         continually modified its requirements to obtain passports and  exit
         visas, sometimes suspending passport or exit visa services  without
         prior warning. During the year the  government  introduced  a  new,
         machine-readable passport at a cost of 4,000 nakfa ($267) valid for
         two years. It costs a citizen in national service approximately  40
         percent of his  gross  yearly  salary  just  to  maintain  a  valid
         passport. The prohibitive cost of the passport deters many citizens
         from foreign travel.
         Citizens  participating  in  national  service  were  often  denied
         internal travel permits, passports, and exit  visas.  Many  persons
         who previously were issued passports  were  not  allowed  to  renew
         them,  nor  were  they  granted   exit   visas.   Military   police
         periodically set up surprise checkpoints in  Asmara  and  on  roads
         between cities to find draft evaders  and  deserters.  Police  also
         stopped persons on the street and detained those who were unable to
         present identification documents or movement  papers  showing  they
         had permission to be in that area.
         Citizens and some foreign nationals were required  to  obtain  exit
         visas to depart the country. Persons routinely  denied  exit  visas
         included men under the age of 54, regardless of  whether  they  had
         completed national service; women under the age of 47;  members  of
         Jehovah's Witnesses and unregistered religious groups; persons  who
         had not completed national service; and other persons out of  favor
         with,  or  seen  as  critical  of,  the  government.  In  2006  the
         government began refusing to issue exit visas to children 11  years
         old and older. During the year some children as young as five years
         of age were denied exit visas either on the grounds that they  were
         approaching the age of eligibility for national service or  because
         their foreign-based parents had not paid the 2 percent  income  tax
         required of all citizens residing abroad. The government did not in
         general grant exit visas to entire families or the male and  female
         parents of children simultaneously in  order  to  prevent  families
         from fleeing the country. Some citizens were given exit visas  only
         after posting bonds of approximately 150,000 nakfa ($10,000).  Exit
         visa policies are frequently adjusted  in  nontransparent  ways  to
         specifically  benefit  the  relatives  of  high-ranking  government
         officials, such as the unannounced posting  of  public  notices  in
         locations that the public cannot access."
56. The  same  report  also  refers  to  the  matters  highlighted  by  the
    respondent in para 10 above (relating to  disappearances,  preferential
    treatment for children of liberation fighters and exit permits).

Specific matters in more detail

57.   The nature of our inquiry necessitates that we  consider  in  the  one
    place the state of the evidence about  specific  matters,  even  though
    this does mean some overlap with our earlier summary of the evidence so
    far.

Exit Visas

58.   We have already noted the evidence of  Professor  Kibreab,  the  major
    country reports and the British Embassy  in  Asmara  relating  to  exit
    visas. There is broad consensus that the siege mentality of the present
    regime has led  it  to  restrict  considerably  the  possibilities  for
    Eritreans to leave the  country.  Professor  Kibreab  stated  that  the
    Eritrean authorities had probably suspended its exit  visa  service  in
    September 2008. The British Embassy, Asmara letter of 22 February  2011
    states that it had not heard  of  any  such  suspension.  However,  the
    Awate.com report 'No Legal Exit, No Limit on Exodus' dated 25 September
    2008 (cited in the COIS report June 2010 at para 32.12) stated that the
    regime had"now" issued a "blanket denial for all passport and exit visa
    requests  from  Eritrea".  UNHCR's  2009  Guidelines   also   mentioned
    September: see para 49 above. According to the  USSD  Report  for  2009
    (and the latest report dated 8 April is to similar  effect),  passports
    and exit visas have been increasingly difficult to obtain:

         "While citizens could generally travel freely  within  the  country
         and change their places of  residence,  the  government  restricted
         travel to some areas within the  country,  particularly  along  the
         borders  with  Sudan  and  Ethiopia.   The  government  continually
         modified its requirements  to  obtain  passports  and  exit  visas,
         sometimes suspending passport or exit visa services  without  prior
         warning.  Citizens participating in  national  service  were  often
         denied internal travel permits, passports, and  exit  visas.   Many
         persons who previously were issued passports were  not  allowed  to
         renew them, nor were they  granted  exit  visas.   Military  police
         periodically set up roadblocks  in  Asmara  and  on  roads  between
         cities to find draft evaders and  deserters.  Police  also  stopped
         persons on the street and forcibly detained those who  were  unable
         to present identification documents or movement papers showing they
         had permission in that area.


         Citizens and some foreign nationals were required  to  obtain  exit
         visas to depart the country.  Persons routinely denied  exit  visas
         included men up to the age of 54, regardless of  whether  they  had
         completed national service; women under the age of 47;  members  of
         Jehovah's Witnesses; and other persons out of favour with, or  seen
         as critical of, the  government.   In  2006  the  government  began
         refusing to issue exit visas to children 11 years and  older.   The
         government also refused to issue exit visas to  children,  some  as
         young as five years of age, either on the grounds  that  they  were
         approaching the age of eligibility for national service or  because
         their expatriate parents had not paid  the  2  percent  income  tax
         required of all citizens residing abroad.  Some citizens were given
         exit visas only after posting bonds of approximately 150,000  nafka
         ($10,000)."


59.   The precise scope that remains for persons to obtain  exit  visas  has
    become a key issue in asylum appeals brought by Eritrean nationals.  We
    recall that in his evidence to the Tribunal in the  MA  case  in  2007,
    Professor Kibreab was recorded as stating that the categories of  those
    able to obtain exit visas was limited to eight  categories:  ministers;
    ex-Ministers; party activists;  Eritrean expatriates, namely those  who
    would be British citizens working in Eritrea abut of  Eritrean  origin;
    elderly people over fifty who were forty or over in 1994 who wanted  to
    go on Haj  or  visit  relatives  abroad;  scholarship  students  ;  and
    government employees who attended conferences; and relatives  of  those
    in power (para 205).

60.   In his recent report and oral evidence to us  Professor  Kibreab  said
    the categories potentially able to get an exit visa were now  seven  in
    number (in his report he first refers to there being 11 categories  but
    later compresses them to seven):

         (i)      a male of 54 years or over;


         (ii)     a female of 47 years or over;


         (iii)    children of 7 or younger;


         (iv)     a person declared by an official committee to be unfit  on
             medical grounds to perform any military or national service;


         (v)      a person certificated  by  an  official  committee  to  be
             unable to receive appropriate medical treatment in Eritrea;


         (vi)     highly trusted government officials and their families;


         (vii)    members of ministerial staff recommended by the department
             to attend studies abroad.

61.   Some of the country reports placed  before  us,  e.g.  the  latest  US
    State Department report, do not descend to the level of detail given by
    Professor Kibreab in his latest evidence on these categories,  but  his
    updated  description  appears  broadly  consistent  with  much  of  the
    evidence before us, although, as we will come to below, Mr Palmer  drew
    attention to the fact that the latest British  Embassy,  Asmara  letter
    appeared to consider they were more limited.

The Eritrean diaspora

62.   The way that the Eritrean regime has been supported by  and  has  made
    use of its diaspora links has been the subject of much commentary:  see
    e.g. COIS report, June 2010, para 15.06.  In  MA  at  paras  368-9  the
    Tribunal found that the Eritrea diaspora was sizeable, referring to the
    CIOS Report, at paragraph 31.10, noting  that  over  100,000  Eritreans
    have lived in lived in Sudan for up to 25 years and the evidence of  Dr
    Pool that at the time of the UN-monitored  referendum  in  April  1993,
    which resulted in independence for Eritrea, Eritreans  were  living  in
    Ethiopia, Sudan,  Saudi  Arabia  and  Europe.  We  have  already  noted
    Professor Kibreab's evidence to us on Eritreans in the UK: see para  33
    above. The ICG report highlights the fact that  the  Eritrean  diaspora
    are expected to pay a voluntary 2% of their  monthly  salaries  to  the
    government, an extraterritorial income tax mainly managed through local
    embassies and consulates. Such taxes are required in order to  maintain
    their full rights as citizens,  particularly  if  they  later  wish  to
    return or open a business. The report notes that:  "Many  do  pay,  but
    increasing numbers, especially of the newly arrived,  do  not,  whether
    because of their economic situation or hostility to the  regime".  What
    is clear, however, is that the funds collected through the  tax  are  a
    crucial source of revenue  for  the  Eritrean  government.   The  Human
    Rights  Watch  Report,  under  the  sub-paragraph-head,  "Coercion   of
    Eritreans in Exile" states:


         "The tragic reality for Eritreans who flee the country is that once
         they have escaped, they -and particularly their families- are still
         not  entirely  safe  from  repressive  actions  by   the   Eritrean
         government. In a small country with a relatively  small  population
         (4 million), the local administrations in  towns  and  rural  areas
         usually have a clear idea of who is where.  And as  described,  the
         government has made it clear that it considers every  Eritrean  who
         leaves the country illegally to be a traitor to the nation.  Once a
         person leaves the country they are, in effect, treated as fugitives
         by the government and if returned are treated as criminals who will
         face detention, torture, and sometimes death.


         There are a variety of ways in which the Eritrean government exerts
         pressure on exiles for both financial and  political  reasons.  The
         government expects all Eritreans in  the  diaspora  to  pay  a  two
         percent tax on income. While taxing expatriates may be a legitimate
         state function, the manner in which the Eritrean government coerces
         individuals into paying this income presents serious  human  rights
         concerns. If refugees or other Eritrean expatriates do not pay  the
         two percent tax  then  the  government  typically  punishes  family
         members in Eritrea by arbitrarily detaining them, extorting  fines,
         and denying them the right to do business by revoking  licenses  or
         confiscating land.


         The two percent tax is not only a financial mechanism, however. The
         government also  uses  it  to  consolidate  its  control  over  the
         diaspora population  by  denying  politically  suspect  individuals
         essential documents such as passports and requiring those who  live
         in Eritrea to provide 'clearance' documents for their relatives who
         live abroad - essentially coercion to ensure that  their  relatives
         have paid the two percent expatriate income  tax  demanded  by  the
         government."


63. The same report under the sub-head "Collective punishment of deserters'
    families" describes the families of those  who  flee  national  service
    (including those who go abroad) being jailed or forced  to  pay  fines.
    This analysis is supported by observations made in the USSD report  for
    2008 and 2009.

64. The USSD report for 2008, in the course of describing how citizens  are
    forced to attend PFDJ meetings irrespective of membership  notes  that:
    "There were reports that similar meetings were mandatory  for  Eritrean
    communities abroad,  with  names  of  those  not  in  attendance  being
    reported to government officials."

65. The COIS report June 2010 at para 32.08 cites an Awate.com  article  of
    21 May 2008 stating:

         "A small privileged group composed of the children and families  of
         high government officials and ministers as well as of loyal cadres,
         some in need of specialised medical diagnosis  and  treatment,  are
         allowed to travel via Asmara  Airport  and  encouraged  to  acquire
         permanent residence  permits  in  the  West,  posing  as  paperless
         political asylum seekers.  When granted refugee status they  travel
         frequently to Eritrea and remain ardent supporters  of  the  regime
         from whom  they  have  sought  'asylum'.   Likewise,  many  of  the
         pepetuators [sic] of human rights violations in Eritrea have  their
         entire families transferred abroad and travel  regularly  to  visit
         them."


Evidence of Returns

66.   As we know from previous country guidance cases there was  a  forcible
    mass return of Eritreans to Eritrea by Malta in 2002 and  by  Libya  in
    2004. In KA the Tribunal stated:
    ."56.  In IN the Tribunal had before it considerable evidence  relating
         to the fate of the 223 persons whom Malta had returned en masse  to
         Eritrea in 2002 (see paras 19-20), and the fate of the 111  persons
         returned from Libya in July 2004 (see paras 21-22) and the case  of
         several individuals Djibouti (see para 23).
    .57.   The background evidence before us also covers these incidents in
         great detail. The Amnesty International report of 25 May 2004 notes
         that some of the  232  Eritreans  who  were  forcibly  returned  to
         Eritrea from Malta in 2002 continued to be  detained  incommunicado
         without charge on the main Daklak Island in the Red Sea or at other
         military detention centres. There is no  mention  in  the  evidence
         before us of any further incidents of mass return.
    .58.   We can see no reason to take a different view on this issue than
         the Tribunal did in IN. Essentially the Tribunal's  view  continues
         to be that although the Maltese and Libyan  mass  return  incidents
         are particularly serious, we do not consider they are sufficient to
         establish that there is a real risk of serious  harm  to  returnees
         generally. Most returns to Eritrea  continue,  as  far  as  we  are
         aware, to take place on an individual or family  basis,  not  on  a
         mass basis. Given the extent to which human rights bodies have been
         able to obtain information about what is happening inside  Eritrea,
         despite the regime`s efforts to suppress dissent and  reportage  of
         abuses, we consider that if  individual  returnees  were  routinely
         encountering serious harm or ill treatment, that  fact  would  have
         been identified and documented to a greater or lesser extent. "
67.   There is considerable evidence relating to returns by Egypt  in  2008-
    2009. According to the Human Rights Watch Report 2009:

         "In June 2008 Egypt returned to Eritrea up to 1,200  Eritreans  who
         had crossed into Egypt from Sudan.  As of late 2008, at  least  740
         of those returnees were still  imprisoned  in  Wi'a,  the  military
         detention facility in Eritrea."


    The same  report  refers  to  the  forcible  return  of  "dozens  more"
    Eritreans in December 2008 and January 2008,  but  without  noting  any
    feedback on what happened to them.


68.   An Amnesty International communiqu� of 29 May 2008 states that  on  14
    May  German  immigration   authorities   forcibly   returned   Eritrean
    nationals, Xonas Haile Mehari and Petros Aforki Mulugeta,  to  Eritrea.
    Neither man was said to have been  seen  since.  The  latest  US  State
    Department report, 8 April 2011 appears  to  refer  to  information  to
    similar effect.

69.   Professor Kibreab's report,  however,  contains  a  recent  update  on
    their situation.  According to a  document  given  to  him  by  Amnesty
    International, both men  had  been  transferred  to  Aid  Aeto  prison,
    Mulugeta being transferred to Wi'a and Mehori, classified as a military
    deserter, having been transferred to an unknown military unit where  he
    was held incommunicado.  But they then managed to escape for  a  second
    time. He recounts that:

         "The two were allowed to enter  Germany  in  April  and  June  2010
         respectively  because  their  applications  for  asylum  had   been
         recognised  on  the  basis  of  confirmed   reports   about   their
         detention...."


70.   In interviews with Amnesty International staff  both  described  being
    subjected to detailed questioning relating to how they left Eritrea and
    what they said to the German authorities about  Eritrea  when  claiming
    asylum.


71.   In a short report dated  29  November  2009  AI  stated  that  the  UK
    authorities had forcibly returned Miskir Semerab Goitom to  Eritrea  on
    21 October 2009, she was said to have arrived in the UK via Sudan on 24
    January 2007 and claimed asylum, which was refused:

         "She was sent via Saudi Arabia  to  the  airport  in  the  capital,
         Asmara.   She  was  ordered  to  report  to  airport  security  the
         following day where she was detained.   [She]  has  not  been  seen
         since.  She is reportedly held in Aid Abeto  military  prison  near
         Asmara and [AI] believes she is at risk of torture."


72.   Professor  Kibreab's  written  report  referred  to  further  evidence
    relating to Ms Goitom. At 11.9 he records that since the AI  report  he
    had been informed by a Ms  Elsa  Churm,  a  London-based  human  rights
    activist, that this woman had been removed from Aid Abeto prison to  an
    underground  cell  outside  the  Wi'a  military  training  camp   where
    conditions are likely to be inhumane.


73.   The Amnesty International  report  of  May  2010  having  referred  to
    forcible return by Egypt of at least 64 Eritreans trying to cross  into
    Israel; and, by Sweden, of 8 people, states that:

         "According to  accounts  by  escaped  detainees,  Eritrea  security
         officials  were  particularly  interested  in  what  failed  asylum
         seekers had said about  Eritrea  during  their  asylum  application
         process.   All  statements  about  persecution  in   Eritrea   were
         perceived as acts of treason against the state."


74.   Professor Kibreab cites an A1 document titled 'Sent Home to  Detention
    and Torture' stating that by late 2008, up to 1,200 asylum seekers were
    returned by Egypt  to  Eritrea  and  detained  on  arrival:  "the  vast
    majority of those returned asylum seekers were  reportedly  transferred
    to  Wi'a  prison,  a  remote  desert  faculty,  and   other   detention
    facilities."

75.   We recall that the 23 February 2011 e-mail from the Horn of Africa
    team leader for Human Rights Watch cited earlier noted, inter alia,
    that:

         "HRW spoke to many people in 2008/2009 who had been in detention in
         Dahlek maximum security prison  who  had  spent  time  with  failed
         asylum seekers returned from Malta who told us that  the  returnees
         were among those tortured the worst".


Submissions

76.   Mr Palmer averred on the general issues that  we  should  continue  to
    take the view that a crucial factor in assessing  risk  on  return  was
    previous illegal exit but should now recognise that the "high majority"
    of Eritreans in the UK will have exited illegally.  Whilst he  accepted
    that the evidence still  fell  short  of  establishing  that  all  such
    persons must have left illegally, we should find that  very  few  could
    have done otherwise.  The government's control of emigration  had  been
    tightened further.  Professor Kibreab's evidence made  clear  that  the
    categories of those still potentially able to obtain  exit  visas  were
    now more tightly drawn.   Therefore  we  should  find  that  males  and
    females of or approaching military age when they left  would  not  have
    left legally.

77.   In the light of the evidence that the possibilities of legal exit  for
    Eritrea have shrunken even further,  the  Tribunal  should  modify  its
    approach to the  cases  of  Eritrean  appellants  found  to  be  wholly
    incredible.  In GM Laws LJ had clarified that, where the Tribunal finds
    a claimant's account wholly incredible, he could  be  assumed  to  have
    left Eritrea legally  unless  there  was  sufficiently  strong  general
    evidence that persons in the claimant's position would  not  have  left
    legally.  The Tribunal in  MA  had  properly  found  that  the  general
    evidence was not of this character.  However, in Mr Palmer's submission
    the general evidence could now fairly be  said  in  most  cases  to  be
    sufficiently strong to counteract negative credibility  findings.   The
    respondent had  not  adduced  any  rebuttal  evidence  undermining  the
    strength of the general evidence pointing to a presumption  of  illegal
    exit.

78.   In consequence, Mr Palmer urged,  the  Tribunal  should  hold  that  a
    finding that a person  left  illegally  (or  obtained  legal  departure
    through bribery) was sufficient to establish that on  return  he  would
    face a real risk of persecution.

79.   Finally, submitted Mr Palmer, the Tribunal should  take  the  position
    that irrespective of whether it considered a person had exited  legally
    or  illegally,  failed  asylum-seekers  would  face  a  real  risk   of
    persecution on return.  In support of this argument  Mr  Palmer  placed
    considerable reliance on major country reports. These demonstrated,  he
    said, that it is reasonably likely that  the  act  of  claiming  asylum
    abroad will be treated  by  the  Eritrean  authorities  as  an  act  of
    opposition or treason against the Eritrean state.  He  highlighted  the
    Human Rights Watch observation (as stated in a 23 February 2011  email)
    that the Eritrean state considers anyone without an exit visa to  be  a
    traitor and deserter and the ICG Report's reference at  page  189  that
    those the regime jailed as enemies of the state "include  first  failed
    asylum seekers".  For asylum seekers from the UK  there  would  be  the
    further problem that the Eritrea regime heaps opprobrium on the UK as a
    key ally of Ethiopia and the US.  It  was  particularly  important,  he
    submitted, to attach weight to the evidence relating  to  the  ways  in
    which the Eritrean regime keeps tabs on Eritreans in exile, through the
    2% extraterritorial tax especially.   Even  if  the  Tribunal  was  not
    persuaded failed asylum-seekers per se would be at risk, it should find
    that those of or approaching draft age when they left would be.

80.   So far as the appellant's case was concerned, Mr Palmer  said  he  was
    entitled to succeed either on the basis that he fell into the  category
    of  those  who  were  at  risk  because   they   left   illegally   or,
    alternatively, even if the Tribunal did not accept that, because he was
    a failed asylum-seeker.

81.   It was important to bear in mind, added Mr Palmer, that the  appellant
    was not found incredible in every particular.  The IJ had accepted that
    he had served in the military.

82.   In the light of the findings made by the Tribunal in  MA  relating  to
    demobilisation, we should find, Mr Palmer argued in conclusion, that he
    would not have been formally demobilised and would therefore have  been
    under a continuing  duty  to  serve  in  either  military  or  national
    service.  Particularly bearing in mind that he left Eritrea post-August
    2008, it was not reasonably likely that he left  Eritrea  legally.   He
    was of draft age.

83.   For the respondent, Mr Avery  submitted  that  whilst  the  background
    evidence shows that it is difficult for an Eritrean national to  obtain
    an exit visa, it does not show that every Eritrean in the UK must  have
    left illegally.  Indeed, the figures relating to  the  number  of  visa
    applications made to the British Embassy in Asmara (more than  half  of
    which had been granted entry clearance), indicated that  a  significant
    number of Eritreans must have expected to be able to be able  to  leave
    Eritrea  legally.   Otherwise  they  would  not  have   pursued   their
    applications.  The lower figures for applicants since July 2006 was due
    to the Embassy reducing its visa service and it was clear that Khartoum
    and Cairo continued to receive and process entry clearance applications
    at significant levels.  The continuing possibility of  Eritreans  being
    able to obtain exit visas was supported by the latest  COIS  report  at
    para 32.04.

84.   Mr Avery asked us to attach significant weight to  the  evidence  that
    came to light during oral examination of Professor  Kibreab,  that  the
    Eritrean Embassy in Sudan sometimes issued passports to  nationals  who
    had left Eritrea illegally.  That  did  not  suggest  as  hard-line  an
    approach to illegal exit as Mr Palmer argued for.

85.   Mr Avery  said  the  respondent  accepted  that  the  Eritrean  regime
    appears to have made it more difficult to obtain  exit  visas,  but  on
    Professor Kibreab's evidence the categories still possible were largely
    unchanged.

86.   In any event, submitted Mr Avery, the proposition that  Eritreans  who
    left Eritrea illegally would be at risk of  persecution  now  stood  in
    need of revision in the light of evidence from the British  Embassy  in
    Asmara showing that although some returnees  had  been  detained,  some
    have been released without further action being taken, some  have  been
    fined, some have been sent to do national service  (which  was  not  in
    itself persecutory) and that some returnees from Sudan and Ethiopia who
    had returned illegally had no action taken  against  them.   Hence  the
    evidence was far  from  amounting  to  what  Laws  LJ  referred  to  as
    "sufficiently strong" general evidence countering negative  credibility
    findings.

87.    So  far  as  concerns  failed  asylum-seekers  this  meant  that  the
    respondent did not accept, Mr Avery clarified, that they  would  be  at
    risk even if it were found that they had  left  illegally.   Those  who
    were found not to  have  established  they  left  illegally,  would,  a
    fortiori, not be at risk of  persecution  on  return.   The  respondent
    accepted, however, that those who had left illegally and  who  were  or
    were approaching draft age when they left Eritrea would be at  risk  on
    return.

88.   The Tribunal should be attentive, said Mr  Avery,  to  the  fact  that
    much of the evidence in  this  case  had  lacunae  and  even  Professor
    Kibreab and the authors of  the  major  country  reports  confessed  to
    having difficulty obtaining hard evidence.

89.   Mr Palmer's response observed that even  though  the  British  Embassy
    letters rejected the view  that  illegal  exit  always  attracted  ill-
    treatment by  the  Eritrean  authorities,  they  identified  that  some
    returnees had had serious difficulties.   The  Embassy's  reference  to
    some Eritreans who had left illegally not  facing  problems  on  return
    from Sudan had been shown  by  Professor  Kibreab  to  most  likely  be
    confined to historical cases linked to the  war  of  independence.   As
    regards the significance of the evidence that had come to  light  about
    some Eritreans who had exited illegally into Sudan being able to obtain
    Eritrean passports there,  Professor Kibreab had said they would be few
    in number and he had  given  a  sound  analysis  of  why  the  Eritrean
    authorities were prepared to do this.  Given the strong  evidence  that
    the Eritrean leadership was becoming increasingly  paranoid  about  the
    role of Eritrean exiles in trying to overthrow it, it was necessary  to
    view the category of those returnees the regime would not ill-treat  on
    return as being strictly confined to the "highly trusted" and, in order
    to be satisfied that someone fell  into  that  category,  the  Tribunal
    should require very hard evidence.

OUR ASSESSMENT

90   In deciding the issues before us in this appeal we  take  into  account
    the entirety of the evidence,  the  background  country  sources  being
    specified in Appendix B.

Professor Kibreab's Evidence

91.   Like the Tribunal in MA, we consider that Professor Kibreab should  be
    considered as a  serious  expert  on  country  conditions  in  Eritrea.
    However, like that Tribunal we have some limited reservations about his
    evidence.  Theirs were expressed at paras 262-263 and alluded  to  some
    of his opinions being vague and speculative: see e.g. para 4 above).

92.   Ours relate mainly to his tendency to state conclusions  that  do  not
    obviously follow from his immediately preceding analysis.  For example,
    why he should think it could safely be concluded, merely from the  fact
    that in five years only seven Eritrean students  had  been  granted  UK
    entry clearance, that "the overwhelming majority of Eritrean  nationals
    who leave Eritrea to seek asylum in the UK do so illegally" (para 1.11)
    is difficult to follow.  He seeks to supply the missing  steps  to  his
    argument elsewhere, but the reader should not be expected to unpack his
    report in this way. There is a similar difficulty with the way that  he
    deals in his written report with the categories of Eritreans still able
    to obtain lawful exit visas. At paras 5.15-5.16(a)-(j) he identifies 11
    such categories, yet at 5.16(k), without expressly noting  that  he  is
    doing so he then refers back to the 8 categories in MA and reduces them
    by one. The list he then gives in 5.16 (m) is not in precisely the same
    terms as either of those he had given  at  5.15-5.16(k).  Nor  are  the
    details he gives for some of the categories always easy to follow.  For
    example, having stated in categorical terms in para 5.16(g) that  "[a]t
    present no male Eritrean citizen who is younger than  54  years  and  a
    woman who is younger than 47 years can  leave  Eritrea  legally  for  a
    course, conference or scholarship",  he  immediately  adds  "[h]owever,
    there are extremely few exceptions".  On balance  we  consider  we  are
    able  to  reconstruct  his  overall  position,  in  the  light  of  the
    clarifications he gave in his oral evidence but, once again, the reader
    should not be expected to have to untangle matters of such importance.

93.   We note that his written report does not  make  his  precise  position
    clear on all important  issues,  particularly  that  concerning  failed
    asylum seekers.  After discussing major country reports, including  the
    UNHCR Guidelines of 2009, he concludes at para 11.47  that  "All  these
    reports by the world's most reputable  human  rights  and  humanitarian
    organisations clearly suggest that failed  asylum-seekers...are  likely
    to face high risk of being treated inhumanly".   That  is  an  accurate
    description  of  the  Amnesty  International  and  Human  Rights  Watch
    position but is an inaccurate summary of the position set forth in  the
    UNHCR Guidelines: see paras 48-50  above.   Nonetheless,  having  noted
    these difficulties, we observe the care that he took in his  report  to
    source his evidence on various matters and were impressed by the way he
    was able in  oral  examination  to  explain  and  clarify  his  written
    evidence and tackle difficulties that arose. Whilst we do not find  his
    opinions on some matters persuasive we accord  his  evidence  generally
    considerable weight.

94.   We take heed of the broad agreement  voiced  by  serious  analysts  of
    Eritrean politics that the closed nature of its  political  system  and
    its repressive policies makes it one of the most difficult countries to
    research and obtain  properly  verifiable  evidence  about.   Professor
    Kibreab was explicit about that and in our view, as it seems to  us  Mr
    Avery conceded, the British Embassy evidence implicitly  accepted  much
    the same. The fact that there are significant lacunae cuts two ways: it
    reminds us of the perils of deducing a lack of  risk  from  a  lack  of
    evidence but also makes us wary of assuming difficulties exist that are
    not substantiated.

95.   As already noted, save for one clarification (which we  will  come  to
    shortly), we do not seek in this case to  revisit  the  issues  of  the
    nature of military and national service in Eritrea, demobilisation  and
    risk on return if a person is perceived as a draft evader or  deserter.
    Of course we have more up-to-date evidence before us relating to  these
    matters, but we do not consider that it  is  such  as  to  require  any
    modification of the guidance given on them by the Tribunal in  MA.  The
    only point we would note is that it does not seem to us that both  sets
    of submissions always kept fully in mind that in MA at para 447 it  was
    found that even if  a  person  has  completed  military  service/active
    national service he remains subject to an ongoing obligation to perform
    national service until he or she ceases to be of draft age. We  see  no
    reasons to depart from what the Tribunal said in MA about that.

Those who have exited Eritrea illegally and gone  to  the  Sudan  in  recent
    times

96.   We have not found easy the question of what significance to attach  to
    Eritrean nationals who had left Eritrea illegally being able to  obtain
    passports in Sudan. We had not only Professor Kibreab's evidence  about
    that but also other references,  in  particular  the  Aware  report  of
    September 2008 cited at para 32.06 of the COIS report for 2010. On  the
    one hand it is difficult to understand why the  Eritrean  regime  would
    countenance it, since news of it must surely act  as  an  incentive  to
    people in Eritrea thinking of leaving.  Given  the  likely  profile  of
    such persons as stated by Professor Kibreab (see above paras 24, 25, 31-
    33) we also doubt that the regime would seriously worry they might  end
    up joining anti-regime elements  in  Sudan,  since  according  to  that
    profile they were largely young persons intent on moving out of  Africa
    (the COIS report refer to Eritrean escapees securing visas  "mostly  to
    the Arab Gulf States").  On the other hand, discontented Eritreans know
    that in order to leave they still have to run the gauntlet of a  'shoot
    to kill' policy.  As to those who have got to the Sudan, we agree  with
    Professor Kibreab that being prepared sometimes to grant them passports
    increases the chances they will disperse and is likely to  further  the
    regime's interests in more  than  one  respect,  not  least  making  it
    possible to impose and collect the 2% extraterritorial tax in years  to
    come. That is also supported by the evidence of the Awate  report  just
    referred to. On balance it seems to us that this practice, particularly
    bearing in mind that it is only  given  to  relatively  few,  does  not
    establish anything either way in relation to the broader issue  of  how
    easy it is to obtain an exit visa for those in Eritrea.

UK Entry clearance/visa applications

97.   The evidence we now have does, however,  require  us  to  revisit  the
    position relating to student visas.  In MA the Tribunal, in  concluding
    that it still appeared to  be  the  case  that  Eritreans  could  leave
    Eritrea on student visas, relied on the British Embassy  evidence  that
    student visas were being granted (paras 353 and 363).  In GM the  Court
    of Appeal attached significant weight to the fact  that  such  evidence
    was significantly uncertain as to whether they left illegally.  We  now
    know that in fact there has not been any  student  visa  granted  since
    2006 apart from one in 2007 (relating to a 2005 application  successful
    on appeal) and another in 2009, which was apparently issued in view  of
    the applicant's government service profile.  We agree  with  Mr  Palmer
    that the MA Tribunal's assumption of an open-ended category of students
    or scholarship students has fallen away.

98.   Less clear is the state of the evidence relating to  visas  generally.
    Here a main point of  contention  between  the  parties  has  been  the
    significance of the evidence relating to entry  clearance  applications
    as a whole made to the British Embassy in Asmara. Mr  Palmer  seeks  to
    rely heavily on Professor Kibreab's evidence (which was to very similar
    effect to that which he gave in MA) that being granted entry  clearance
    by the British Embassy has nothing to  do  with  whether  the  Eritrean
    authorities will grant exit visas, and that there is no significance at
    all to be attached to the figure of 771 applications having  been  made
    to the British Embassy, Asmara since 2005.   Mr  Avery  argued  to  the
    contrary, reminding us that the Tribunal in  MA  had  already  rejected
    much the same argument.


99.   We accept that the increasingly  repressive  nature  of  the  Eritrean
    regime has meant that disillusioned inhabitants have been  prepared  to
    go to great lengths to try and leave.  However, on Professor  Kibreab's
    own evidence, supplied by his sources inside  and  outside  Eritrea,  a
    person who intends to seek an exit visa from the  Eritrean  authorities
    in Eritrea knows  they  have  got  several  hurdles  to  surmount.   In
    particular, even before applying for such an exit visa they must  first
    obtain an Eritrean passport and then apply to the  British  Embassy  in
    Asmara for entry clearance/a UK visa.  In our judgment it  is  unlikely
    that such persons would proceed with the first two steps,  unless  they
    thought there was at least a  colourable  chance  they  would  succeed,
    especially as the  process  of  obtaining  an  exit  visa  entails  the
    Eritrean authorities scrutinising them closely.

100.  Nevertheless, we  cannot  see  that  a  finding  that  there  is  some
    correlation between  applications  for  UK  entry  clearance/visas  and
    perceived prospects of success in an application for an exit visa  from
    the Eritrean authorities much helps Mr Avery's cause. That  is  because
    of the significant decline in the number of applications since 2006. In
    MA the Tribunal at paras 355-6 took the view that the figures for  visa
    applications to the British Embassy in Asmara made in  2006  show  that
    230 people applied for entry clearance with 150  being  successful  and
    the fact of there being a significant number of applicants aged between
    10 and 50 indicated that there were opportunities to  gain  exit  visas
    without falling within the  very  restrictive  categories  outlined  by
    Professor Kibreab.


101.  The evidence we have covering the years since  2005/6  paints  a  very
    different  picture.  Since  2006,  when  there  were  209  applications
    (presumably a revised figure from  the  figure  of  230  given  to  the
    Tribunal  in  MA),  the  number  of  applications  has   reduced   very
    considerably in number - falling to 20  in  2007,  19  in  2008  before
    rising slightly to 22 in 2009 and then going down to 14 in 2010.That is
    a dramatic decline.

102.  Mr Avery sought to persuade us  that  this  decline  was  primarily  a
    function of the British Embassy in Asmara limiting its visa service  in
    mid 2006. However, we do not think that this reduction makes the  steep
    fall in numbers any less significant.  There is no suggestion that  the
    Embassy imposed a quota or even made known that  only  applications  of
    certain kinds would be accepted.  And the  fact  that  the  numbers  of
    applications made in Khartoum and Cairo is still significant  tells  us
    little because, according to Mr Avery, Khartoum is only for  applicants
    who have travelled to Sudan, i.e. those who have already left  Eritrea.
    (We assume, although we have scant  evidence  to  help  us,  that  most
    Eritreans who apply in Khartoum have an Eritrean passport but  even  if
    that assumption is right we do not know how recently they  obtained  it
    or whether it was issued in Eritrea.)  Secondly, we  observe  that  the
    Tribunal's assessment in MA seems to have been predicated on the belief
    that Eritreans obtained exit visas before applying for entry  clearance
    (see para  355).   The  evidence  before  us  indicates  that  that  is
    incorrect: the Eritrean exit visa application must be made after  entry
    clearance has been applied for and  obtained.   Professor  Kibreab  was
    adamant that this was the case (see his written report at paras 7.1-7.3
    in support of which he cited sources inside  Eritrea)  and  we  observe
    that the respondent  did  not  seek  to  challenge  this  part  of  his
    evidence. There has been no British Embassy, Eritrea  evidence  to  the
    contrary.


103.  Thirdly, although we now have  a  table  produced  by  the  respondent
    showing that the number of Eritreans given leave to enter  the  UK  has
    remained roughly at the same level it was when the  Tribunal  heard  MA
    (the Tribunal in MA was given the figure for 2006  of   1,750)  -  with
    there being  1,595 in 2007  and  1,670  in  2008  (the  majority  being
    visitors) - we do not find that they indicate, as  Mr Avery  sought  to
    persuade us they did, that a significant number of  Eritreans  continue
    to be  able to obtain Eritrean exit visas.  Rather  we  agree  with  Mr
    Palmer that, being figures for Eritreans from all over the  world,  and
    being silent as to whether such persons (i) applied from Eritrea rather
    than from elsewhere and (ii)  had obtained Eritrean  exit  visas,  this
    table establishes very little.  Around a quarter of these were, in  any
    event, people returning to the UK after  a  temporary  absence  and  we
    know, of course, that  Eritrean  diaspora  communities  exist  in  many
    countries.



104.  Our overall conclusion on the significance of the figures relating  to
    UK entry clearance applications is that they  do  not  shed  very  much
    light at all on the underlying issue of to  what  extent  there  remain
    avenues of legal exit from Eritrea, but, to the extent that they  point
    in any direction, it is towards the view that since 2006 - particularly
    since August/September 2008 - it has become  gradually  more  difficult
    for  Eritreans  to  obtain   lawful   exit   from   Eritrea.   We   say
    "August/September" because there have been references to both months in
    different reports (SIJ P  R  Lane  noted  in  the  decision  finding  a
    material error of law that the US  State  Department  report  for  2008
    refers to the Eritrean government suspending  exit  visa  and  passport
    services "in August [2008]"; and, looking at the language used  in  the
    various reports, we cannot exclude that the change may  have  commenced
    in the month prior to September 2008.

105.  We have given consideration to whether references  in  the  latest  US
    State Department  report, 8 April 2011,  indicating  that  children  of
    liberation fighters are treated preferentially in terms  of  length  of
    military service, being required, it is said, to serve only  5  months.
    In a 15 April 2011 letter Mr Avery suggested that this may  well  be  a
    relevant factor  in  respect  of  exit  visas  and  the  scope  of  the
    categories able to  obtain  them.  We  note  that  evidence  suggesting
    favouritism being shown the children of liberation fighters is not new,
    but the question  we  have  to  address  is  whether  this  impacts  on
    categories of lawful exit. We would accept that  there  is  a  possible
    link but  in  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  indicate  that  such
    favouritism is also applied to applicants for exit visas,  we  consider
    it unsafe to regard this as a new and distinct  category.  The  parties
    have had sufficient opportunity to  adduce  further  evidence  on  this
    matter and we were not minded to adjourn in order for either of them to
    search further.

Categories of lawful exit

106.  It seems to us that in deciding on the  continuing  scope  for  lawful
    exit from Eritrea, the  most  significant  piece  of  evidence  remains
    Professor Kibreab's latest evidence on what  he  considers  to  be  the
    remaining categories of lawful exit, together with his opinion on their
    likely ambit.  We  remind  ourselves  that  according  to  his  revised
    formulation the remaining categories are:

         (i)      a male of 54 years or over;


         (ii)     a female of 47 years or over


         (iii)    children of 7 or younger;


         (iv)     a person declared by an official committee to be unfit  on
             medical grounds to perform any military or national service;


         (v)      a person certificated  by  an  official  committee  to  be
             unable to receive appropriate medical treatment in Eritrea;


         (vi)     highly trusted government officials and their families;


         (vii)    members of ministerial staff recommended by the department
             to attend studies abroad.

107.  His current reformulated list can be seen to delete one category  from
    his MA list (see above  para  27)  entirely  (ex-Ministers),  and  view
    others as more narrowly applied.


108.  Three initial observations are in order about this list  even  as  now
    slimmed down. The first is that it  demonstrates  to  our  satisfaction
    that the Eritrean authorities continue to envisage lawful exit as being
    possible for those who are 7 or under and those who are  over  national
    service age.  Putting matters in this way also serves as a  useful  way
    of clarifying the purport of the reference in MA to persons  being  "of
    or approaching draft age". Odd as it may seem at first sight, that must
    now be understood to mean (and it seems to us to have been implicit  in
    MA already) persons being seven or over and still of  draft  age.  This
    clarification must be borne in mind when applying this part of  the  MA
    guidance presently. The second observation, which is partly related, is
    that in terms of gauging whether an Eritrean asylum claimant might have
    had  a  basis  for  lawful  exit,   the   categories   are   relatively
    straightforward except for the last two. In respect of the first  three
    categories, being based  on  sex  and/or  age,  it  should  be  readily
    ascertainable whether a person has a  qualifying  basis  for  obtaining
    exit legally or not.  In respect of the fourth and fifth categories (on
    the basis that medical evidence from medical experts in the  UK  should
    in principle be obtainable to corroborate them), it should likewise  be
    relatively  straightforward  to  establish  whether  legal   exit   was
    possible.  The  last  two  categories  raise  greater  problems  since,
    applying GM principles, the evidence still  does  not  appear  to  show
    conclusively that appellants cannot fall within them (but see para  115
    below).  Furthermore, it may be, in relation to  category  (vii),  that
    the  regime's  interest  in  maintaining  close  ties  with   its   few
    international friends (the Human Rights Watch report  specifies  Qatar,
    China, Iran and Libya) means it is more confident that  those  students
    granted exit visas to study in those countries will not defect. [We are
    aware, of course, that  recent  events  in  Libya  might  require  some
    reconsideration of whether it remains a friend of  Eritrea].  In  other
    words it may be that Professor Kibreab's evidence focuses too  much  on
    persons who wish to exit to study in Western countries. A final initial
    observation is that it is implicit in Professor  Kibread's  description
    and analysis of category (vi)  that  it  must  include  those  who  are
    themselves members of the military or political leadership.

Illegal exit and risk on  return  in  the  context  of  those  found  wholly
incredible

109.  At paras 444-448 in MA the Tribunal formed the view that a  person  of
    or approaching draft age and not medically unfit  who  is  accepted  as
    having left Eritrea illegally is  reasonably likely to be regarded with
    serious hostility on return, but will not  be  so  regarded  if  it  is
    concluded he left legally. However, the Tribunal did not consider  that
    illegal entry by a person of or approaching draft age and not medically
    unfit could be assumed if they had been  found  wholly  incredible.  As
    already noted, both the Court of Appeal  and  the  Supreme  Court  have
    subsequently found that such an approach to  the  evidence  was  valid.
    However,  in  GM,  a  key  criterion  for  deciding  such  matters  was
    identified. Proceeding on the assumption that, if it was accepted  that
    such a person left Eritrea illegally he or she  would  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm, the Court of Appeal decided by a majority that  even  MY,
    who was a 17 year old  girl  -  and  so  someone  approaching  military
    service age -  could not be taken to have left illegally.  At  para  54
    Laws LJ stated:

         "The position would only be otherwise if the general  evidence  was
         so solid as to admit of only fanciful exceptions; if the  court  or
         Tribunal concluded that the 17 year old must  have  left  illegally
         whatever the particular facts."

110.  Mr Palmer submits that things are now different and that  the  general
    evidence as to conditions in Eritrea is now such that it can be assumed
    that anyone of or approaching draft age who is medically fit would have
    left illegally.

111.  We are unable to accept that submission. As already  noted,  Professor
    Kibreab's own list of persons potentially able  to  obtain  exit  visas
    continues to include at least two categories:

         (vi)     highly trusted government officials  and  their  families;
             and


                 (vii) members of  ministerial  staff  recommended  by  the
             department to attend studies abroad.

112.  We would accept that both  categories  are  likely  to  be  relatively
    small in number. And indeed it seems to us that some of those in  these
    categories may, since 23 December 2009,  be  deterred  from  trying  to
    apply to travel by the terms of the UN Security Council Resolution 1907
    of 2009. This refers to "individuals and entities,  including  but  not
    limited to Eritrean political and military leadership, governmental and
    parastatal entities and entities privately owned by Eritrean  nationals
    living within or outside of  Eritrean  territory".  At  Article  10  it
    requires that all Member States "take the necessary measures to prevent
    the entry  into  or  transit  through  their  territories..."  of  such
    individuals. But in our judgement it still cannot be said that they are
    fanciful or that their factual existence can be wholly disregarded.  In
    view of these two categories the test set out by Laws LJ at para 54  of
    GM remains unmet.
113.  Nevertheless, we do think the evidence now before us does  require  us
    to be less ready to  conclude  that  non-credible  Eritreans  who  left
    Eritrea after August/ September 2008 did so lawfully. Put another  way,
    we do consider that this evidence is now sufficiently  strong  in  most
    cases to counteract negative credibility findings  in  relation  to  an
    appellant's evidence (see MA (Somalia) para  33).   We  regard  August/
    September 2008 as the turning point because there is credible  evidence
    indicating  that  that  was  the  point  in  time  when  the   Eritrean
    authorities, angered by the growing number of cases of persons who  had
    been granted exit visas who had then failed to return, decided  to  put
    their foot down by suspending exit visa facilities. (We put the date at
    August/September to reflect the fact that some  reports,  e.g.  the  US
    State Department report for 2008, locate the date of this suspension as
    being August). We are aware that the British Embassy, Asmara letter  of
    22 February 2011 seeks to cast doubt on whether there was ever  such  a
    suspension. However, we note that  Professor  Kibreab's  evidence  that
    there was such a suspension is supported by several other  sources,  in
    particular UNHCR, the US State  Department  report  for  2008  and  the
    Aswate.com website,  which  the  Tribunal  in  MA  at  para  336  found
    reliable, noting that it was described by Dr Pool  (another  expert  in
    that case on whom that Tribunal found they  could  place  reliance)  as
    independent of opposition political parties and  although  critical  of
    the Eritrean Government, one that he found:
        "... to be one of the most reliable because it is  rare  to  see  a
        website that corrects itself if subsequently proven to be wrong  on
        factual errors and it is a website on which the Home  Office  often
        relies, indeed it is exemplified by the fact that it is  quoted  in
        this COI".
114.  It is true that Professor Kibreab's evidence is also that  since  that
    suspension the exit visa facility has re-opened, but it is also that it
    has done so on a more limited basis.


115.  We appreciate that in the context of a case  in  which  the  decision-
    maker has found a  claimant/appellant  wholly  lacking  in  credibility
    (save in relation to sex and perhaps age and/or date of departure  from
    Eritrea and health), it is difficult  to  see  any  basis  for  finding
    conclusively that they would not  fall within  one  of  the  above  two
    categories (highly trusted government officials and their  families  or
    those  who  are  themselves  members  of  the  military  or   political
    leadership; members of ministerial staff recommended by the  department
    to attend studies abroad). But  at  least  in  a  range  of  cases  the
    evidence may be such as to make it clear that the  claimant  concerned,
    albeit wholly or largely lacking in credibility,  could  not  have  any
    links with government officials or the regime's inner circle and  could
    not have an education or skills profile making it likely they have been
    civil servants or have an educational bent (e.g. if they are  found  to
    come from a rural part of Eritrea and have had no secondary schooling).
    What may be involved here  sometimes  is  clearer  recognition  by  the
    decision-maker that when finding a claimant wholly incredible they  are
    not in fact meaning that they lack  credibility  in  every  conceivable
    particular, since they may in fact accept, for example, that  they  are
    from a rural background and lack education.


116.  The general position concerning illegal exit  remains,  therefore,  as
    expressed in MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of or approaching
    draft age and not medically unfit cannot be assumed if  they  had  been
    found wholly incredible. However, if such a person  is  found  to  have
    left Eritrea  on  or  after  August/September  2008,  it  may  be  that
    inferences can be drawn from uncontentious personal data recorded on an
    appellant as to their level of education or their skills profile as  to
    whether legal exit was feasible.

Illegal exit and risk on return

117.  In MA the Tribunal considered that at least in relation  to  those  of
    or approaching draft age who were medically fit, a  finding  that  they
    had left illegally sufficed to show that they would face a real risk on
    return of persecution or ill treatment. On the evidence before  us,  we
    think that although the numbers affected may be relatively small, it is
    necessary to qualify that guidance for several reasons. We set them out
    by reference to Professor Kibreab's evidence but would observe that  we
    consider his evidence on these matters finds support in the  background
    evidence considered as a whole. (Our reasons necessarily link  back  to
    what we have just said about the remaining scope for  lawful  exit  but
    because our focus is now on the likely effect of illegal exit  on  risk
    on return, there are wider considerations that have to  be  taken  into
    account.)


118.  First of all, it is clear from Professor Kibreab's evidence  that  any
    issue of  apparent  illegal  exit  will  not  necessarily  be  regarded
    adversely by the regime if  the  persons  concerned  fled  (what  later
    became the territory of) Eritrea during the war of independence; indeed
    it would appear such persons are welcomed  back  and  it  is  generally
    understood by the regime that such persons would have had valid reasons
    in the former's eyes for having  exited  (what  later  became  Eritrean
    territory) when they did.


119.  Second, it is  also  clear  from  Professor  Kibreab's  evidence  that
    having left illegally will not result in adverse treatment  when  those
    concerned  are  persons  whom  the  regime's  military  and   political
    leadership perceives as having given them  active  service  (either  in
    Eritrea or abroad). He gave the example of  someone  who  left  Eritrea
    illegally and went to Sudan where in exchange for a passport the person
    has agreed to act as a party activist or mobiliser in the  diaspora  in
    countries such as the UK.


120.  Third, based on what Professor Kibreab told us, the same is likely  to
    be true of someone who exited illegally but who  is  a  trusted  family
    member of, or is himself/herself a member of, the regime's military  or
    political leadership. It may be that it is unlikely such  persons  will
    have exited illegally but the professor was quite clear that  at  least
    for such family members whom  the  military  and  political  leadership
    trusts, blood is thicker than illegality. To some extent this exception
    was identified in the evidence before the Tribunal in MA, although  not
    very clearly, perhaps because it was considered the  numbers  of  those
    involved would be relatively small.


121.  So far as concerns risk on return, then, it seems to  us  that  whilst
    the central proposition in MA remains correct as a general  rule  (that
    if an appellant establishes that he left illegally or establishes  that
    he would be perceived as having left illegally - e.g. because it  comes
    to light that he used bribery to obtain an exit visa  -  he  will  very
    likely be able to show he faces a real risk of persecution on  return),
    it must now be seen  as  subject  to  a  number  of  exceptions.  Those
    exceptions relate to persons (and their children born  afterwards)  who
    fled Eritrea during the war of independence (but see below  para  129);
    those whom the regime considers have rendered  them  valuable  service;
    and those who are trusted family members of, or who are themselves part
    of, the regime's military and political leadership.

Failed Asylum-Seekers

122.  In para 377 of MA the Tribunal rejected the view that Eritrean  failed
    asylum-seekers as such were at real risk of persecution on return.   It
    took into account but did not  find  determinative  the  evidence  from
    Amnesty International and Dr Kibreab (as he was then  known)  that  the
    regime regarded the fact that a national has applied for asylum  abroad
    as an act of disloyalty and reason  to  detain  and  torture  a  person
    returned to Eritrea after rejection of asylum.  The Tribunal stated:

         "If the position really were that returning failed  asylum  seekers
         were, as such,  being  persecuted  in  Eritrea,  absent  any  other
         factors such as  actual  or  perceived  desertion,  we  would  have
         expected that to be reflected  to  some  extent  at  least  in  the
         background evidence before us and it is not."

123.  Amongst the reasons why the Tribunal  considered  its  conclusion  was
    justified was "the wish on the part  of  the  Eritrean  authorities  to
    embed family members of their regime abroad in case trouble  arises  in
    Eritrea, to  infiltrate  the  diaspora  community  or  as  a  means  of
    encouraging foreign remittances from those who are, in  reality,  well-
    disposed towards it".

124.  Mr Palmer submitted that we should now take a different  view,  namely
    that "there is a reasonable likelihood of persecution for failed asylum-
    seekers". However, it is noteworthy that the evidence he marshalled  in
    support actually fell into two categories:  (a)  sources  that  espouse
    this view  (e.g.  Amnesty  International  and  Human  Rights  Watch  in
    particular), and (b) sources that, whilst considering  that  the  large
    majority of failed asylum seekers are at risk, draw  short  of  stating
    that all are: e.g.  UNHCR in its April 2009 Eligibility Guidelines  and
    sections at least of Professor Kibreab's report which identify at least
    one exception and also parts  of  his  oral  evidence  which  seemingly
    identified two others. The category of exception which he  set  out  at
    paras 11.21-11.23 of his report relates to those  sent  abroad  by  the
    Eritrea government in pursuit of its specific interests  (he  specifies
    family members whom the  regime  chooses  to  embed  abroad  ("in  case
    trouble arises in Eritrea to infiltrate the diaspora community or as  a
    means of encouraging foreign remittances to Eritrea from those who are,
    in reality, well-disposed towards it"). It is  difficult  to  see  that
    this category would not also include  (or  overlap  heavily  with)  the
    category we have just identified as an exception to those who would not
    be at risk despite having left illegally, namely those who  are  family
    members of the regime's military and political  leadership,  regardless
    of how they came to be in the UK.  Then  there  is  the  category  also
    discussed in  the  same  previous  context,  namely  persons  whom  the
    military and  political  leadership  considers  as  having  given  them
    valuable service. A third seeming category of exception  identified  by
    him in his oral evidence before us consists in persons who fled Eritrea
    during the war of independence or their children. Admittedly he did not
    identify  them  as  an  exception  in  this  way,  perhaps  because  he
    considered it  unlikely  that  such  persons  would  be  failed  asylum
    seekers, but that it seems to us is the logic of his own  analysis  and
    we cannot rule out that amongst such persons there are those who in one
    way or another have come to the UK - or being born  in  the  UK  -  and
    claimed asylum.

125.  In considering whether to  agree  with  (a)  we  are  mindful  of  the
    evidence before us from Amnesty International, Human Rights  Watch  and
    the International Crisis Group among other sources, including  the  ICG
    evidence highlighting the fact that  the  Eritrean  regime  has  become
    extremely suspicious of  the  outside  world  and  paranoid  about  any
    Eritrean associated with external influences and not fully committed to
    the national cause; and the fact that the regime sees the UK as  a  key
    ally of Ethiopia and the US.

126.  We also take into account the specific post-MA  evidence  relating  to
    cases of failed asylum-seekers who have been returned to Eritrea (which
    includes in particular the  important  Amnesty  International  evidence
    about them).  We exercise a degree at least of caution regarding  these
    cases, however.  The Tribunal  generally  holds  reports  from  Amnesty
    International in high esteem, but bearing in mind the  standards  which
    it states that it applies to its own evidence-gathering, we are  struck
    by the lack of any sourcing of its conclusion that  the  two  Eritreans
    who were forcibly returned by Germany to Eritrea on 29  May  2008  were
    detained, ill-treated but managed to escape (for  a  second  time)  and
    return to Germany. Their  reports  appear  to  rely  on  their  general
    opening statement declaring  that  individuals'  stories  are  properly
    checked and cross-checked. But the actual accounts regarding these  two
    are not themselves sourced. As a result, questions inevitably spring to
    mind: e.g. were they granted asylum in Germany on the basis that  their
    accounts were accepted as credible?  Was this on the basis of a  proper
    testing of their evidence?  We simply do not know the answers  to  such
    questions.  It may  well  be  that  Amnesty  International  has  cogent
    reasons for treating their cases as verified, but we are not told  what
    they are.  We are also struck by the lack  of  any  indication  of  the
    reliability of the source of its information regarding Ms Goitom who it
    reports as having been forcibly returned by the UK  to  Eritrea  on  21
    October 2009, detained back there and not seen since.   From  Professor
    Kibreab's report it would appear that the  source  is  a  human  rights
    activist in the UK, but we simply do not  know;  nor,  if  it  is  this
    activist, do we know what her own evidential basis for that report  is.
    In relation to the forcible returns by Egypt in 2008, we note that once
    again we are not  given  any  indication  as  to  the  source  of  that
    information, although the fact that among other  international  bodies,
    UNHCR, who have been closely involved in processing  asylum-seekers  in
    Egypt, have accepted this information, enables us to attach significant
    weight to it.

127.  On the other hand, there  is  an  element  of  persistency  about  the
    reports of problems that have faced those who have been the subject  of
    mass forcible returns from Malta, Libya (and now Egypt) and we note  in
    this regard that there are still references being made to the continued
    ill-treatment of those returned by Malta in  2002.  In  our  judgement,
    persistency of this kind must be seen as adding weight to the evidence.
    At the same time - in relation to the mass returns by Malta in 2002 and
    Libya in 2003 and now it would appear the large-scale returns  made  by
    Egypt in 2008-9 - we continue to take the same view as the Tribunal  in
    MA that when faced with  high-profile  collective  returns  of  visible
    numbers the Eritrean authorities may well  feel  impelled  to  take  an
    oppressive approach irrespective of how they treat individual  returns.
    In UK asylum appeals we of course are only concerned  with  the  latter
    and we cannot assume that the same approach would apply.

128.  Mr Palmer sets considerable store by the evidence indicating that  the
    Eritrean authorities regard  the  claiming  of  asylum  as  an  act  of
    disloyalty.  We have no  doubt  that  in  cases  where  the  individual
    concerned cannot show any pre-end of war of independence origins or pro-
    regime activity, claiming asylum is likely to be viewed adversely.  But
    we cannot accept that claiming asylum would  particularly  trouble  the
    Eritrean authorities if someone is able to show (or is  known  to  have
    shown) pro-regime activity. Indeed, given the further evidence  we  now
    have regarding the Eritrean diaspora,  including  that  from  Professor
    Kibreab, our doubts for considering that the Eritrean authorities would
    regard the mere act of claiming asylum an act  of  disloyalty  are,  if
    anything, stronger.  Many Eritrean exiles pay the 2%  extra-territorial
    tax  and  offer  contributions  demanded  by  the  regime  through  its
    embassies abroad.  According to the professor  the  great  majority  of
    Eritrean nationals in the UK are or have  been  asylum  seekers.   Also
    according to Professor Kibreab, the numbers of  them  who  attend  pro-
    regime meetings and events are far greater than those  attending  anti-
    regime meetings and events. Whilst he said he was sure quite a  few  of
    them only do so for appearances and others no doubt for social  reasons
    such as companionship with fellow-Eritreans, it  illustrates  the  fact
    that at the point of return Eritrean nationals may be able  to  satisfy
    officials of their active loyalty notwithstanding it  coming  to  light
    that they claimed asylum and did so in a country (the UK) seen  by  the
    regime as pro-Ethiopia.

129. Whilst we have in the foregoing paragraph bracketed those with  pre-end
    of war of independence origins  with  those  able  to  show  pro-regime
    activity, we would add that we consider that in relation to the  former
    there would be a greater need for a case-specific analysis. We are able
    to follow why the regime would be kindly disposed  towards  those  with
    pre-end of independence origins and their children,  but  at  the  same
    time, if  the  regime  learns  they  have  claimed  asylum  in  Western
    countries, it may be that it would not take  much  for  the  regime  to
    regard them in the same way  as  other  failed  asylum-seekers,  albeit
    being unconcerned that they left illegally.

130.  Given the foregoing we consider that  if  a  decision-maker  is  faced
    with an Eritrean asylum claimant whose evidence has been  found  wholly
    incredible (save in relation to sex -self-evidently- and possibly  age,
    date of departure from Eritrea and health), it cannot be simply assumed
    that such a person would be perceived on return to  have  committed  an
    act of disloyalty merely by virtue of having claimed asylum in the  UK.
    Unlike the position when it comes to  deciding  whether  a  person  has
    exited illegally (where we consider that the  categories  have  reduced
    considerably and so it would be exceptional at least for a person of or
    approaching draft age to be  considered  to  have  left  lawfully)  the
    position in respect of this issue is that  a very significant number of
     Eritreans are likely, on Professor Kibreab's evidence, to be  able  to
    at least show they have been pro-government - e.g. by paying the 2% tax
    and/or attending pro-government meetings.


131.  Whilst therefore we are not persuaded that failed  asylum  seekers  as
    such are at real risk of persecution on return, we recognise  that  for
    reasons given earlier that on present evidence the  great  majority  of
    such persons are likely to be perceived as having left  illegally;  and
    that this fact, save for very limited exceptions,  will  mean  that  on
    return they face a real risk of persecution or serious harm.


132.  That brings us back to the significance  of  determining,  if  at  all
    possible,   whether   a   person   left   Eritrea   before   or   after
    August/September 2008. If they left before, it seems  to  us  that  the
    guidance given in MA remains broadly applicable and that, even if of or
    approaching draft age,  if they have been found wholly incredible, they
    are likely to  be  found  not  to  have  established  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return. If, however,  it  is  determined
    that they left Eritrea after August/ September 2008, then,  bearing  in
    mind that from that date  the  regime  decided  to  take  a  much  more
    restrictive approach to issuing exit visas, we consider that  decision-
    makers should be alert  to  examine  whether  the  claimant's  personal
    circumstances, in particular whether he comes from a rural area or  has
    any educational profile, make it reasonable to infer  that  they  could
    not fall within one of the limited exceptions.


Summary of conclusions

133.  From the foregoing we derive the following conclusions:



(i) The figures relating to UK entry clearance  applications  since  2006  -
particularly since September 2008 - show  a  very  significant  change  from
those considered by the Tribunal in MA  (Draft  evaders-illegal  departures-
risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 and are among a  number  of  indications
that it has become more difficult for Eritreans to obtain lawful  exit  from
Eritrea.

(ii) The Eritrean authorities continue to  envisage  lawful  exit  as  being
possible for those who are above national service age or children  of  7  or
younger. Otherwise, however, the potential categories  of  lawful  exit  are
limited to two narrowly drawn medical categories and those  who  are  either
highly trusted government officials or their families or who are members  of
ministerial staff recommended by the department to attend studies abroad.

(iii) The general position concerning illegal exit remains as  expressed  in
MA, namely that illegal exit by a person of or  approaching  draft  age  and
not medically unfit  cannot  be  assumed  if  they  had  been  found  wholly
incredible. However, if such a person is found to have left  Eritrea  on  or
after August/September 2008, it may be, that inferences can  be  drawn  from
their health history or level of education or their  skills  profile  as  to
whether  legal  exit  on  their  part  was  feasible,  provided  that   such
inferences can be drawn in the light of the  adverse  credibility  findings.


(iv) The general position adopted in MA, that a  person  of  or  approaching
draft age (i.e. aged 8 or over and still not above the upper age limits  for
military service, being under 54 for men and under 47 for  women)   and  not
medically unfit  who  is  accepted  as  having  left  Eritrea  illegally  is
reasonably likely to be  regarded  with  serious  hostility  on  return,  is
reconfirmed, subject to limited exceptions in respect of  (1)  persons  whom
the regime's military and political leadership  perceives  as  having  given
them valuable service (either in Eritrea or abroad);  (2)  persons  who  are
trusted family  members  of,  or  are  themselves  part  of,   the  regime's
military or political leadership. A further possible exception, requiring  a
more case-specific  analysis,  is  (3)  persons  (and  their  children  born
afterwards) who fled (what later became the  territory  of)  Eritrea  during
the war of independence.

(v) Whilst it also remains the position that failed asylum seekers  as  such
are not generally at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return,  on
present evidence the great  majority  of  such  persons  are  likely  to  be
perceived as having left illegally and this  fact,  save  for  very  limited
exceptions, will mean that on return they face a real  risk  of  persecution
or serious harm.



The appellant


134.  We have already outlined the fact that the appellant was found  wholly
    incredible save that that the IJ accepted (1) that he had done military
    service; and (2) that he left Eritrea in September 2009. We  have  also
    noted that there was clearly also an acceptance that he was male and of
    draft age. Mr Palmer has also  submitted  that  in  the  light  of  the
    findings made by the Tribunal in  MA  relating  to  demobilisation,  we
    should find that the appellant would not have been formally demobilised
    and would therefore have been under  a  continuing  duty  to  serve  in
    either military or national service.  We accept Mr Palmer's submission.
    Applying the approach outlined earlier, we ask  ourselves  whether  the
    respondent's and IJ's approach to the  appellant's  account  sheds  any
    light on whether the appellant was involved in any way with  government
    officials. It appears uncontentious that he had education up  to  grade
    11 or 12 (roughly equivalent to a high school education). That  on  its
    own  might  suggest  it  was  possible  he  had  some  connection  with
    government officialdom or ministerial staff, but in the context of this
    case we  have  to  bear  in  mind  (i)  that   he  left  Eritrea  post-
    August/September 2008; and (ii)  in the immediately preceding years  he
    was involved in doing ordinary military service. In such circumstances,
    we consider it highly unlikely that he was a government official or was
    involved directly or through family with government  officials.  It  is
    also not reasonably likely that he left Eritrea legally.

135.  For similar reasons we are also satisfied that  prior  to  or  at  the
    point of leaving,  Eritrea,  he  was  not  a  student  with  government
    backing.


136.  For  the  above  reasons  we  conclude  that  the  appellant  must  be
    considered as someone who left Eritrea illegally and is  likely  to  be
    subjected to ill treatment in consequence, given in particular that  he
    was still of draft age when he left and even  though   he  had  already
    done his military service.  Notwithstanding that  he  gave  an  account
    that was wholly incredible in almost all respects, we consider that  he
    would be at risk on return.

137.  To summarise:

138.  The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law. The decision we
    remake is to allow the appellant's appeal on asylum and Article 3 ECHR
    grounds.




Signed                                             Date



Senior Immigration Judge Storey
(Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                            Appendix A

DECISION BY SIJ P R LANE THAT THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW 16 NOVEMBER 2009

1.    At the reconsideration hearing on 13 November  2009,  Mr  Walker,  for
    the respondent, informed me that the respondent conceded  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of  the  Immigration  Judge,
    who had dismissed the appellant's appeal.

2.    The Immigration Judge found the appellant's  account  of  his  alleged
    problems in Eritrea not to be credible.  Those findings have  not  been
    successfully challenged.   Indeed,  the  only  criticism  made  in  the
    grounds accompanying the application for reconsideration, turn  on  the
    assumption that, in  paragraph  20  of  the  determination,  where  the
    Immigration Judge found that the appellant had "completed his  military
    service", that the Immigration  Judge  was  thereby  finding  that  the
    appellant had been demobilised.  I do not consider that this  criticism
    is sound.  As the Tribunal explained in  MA  (Draft  evader  -  illegal
    departure - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059, a distinction  has  to
    be  drawn  between  active  military  service  in  Eritrea,   and   the
    requirement to be continuously available for such active  service.   It
    cannot be said that the Immigration Judge found the appellant  to  have
    been "demobilised" in this latter sense.

3.    The reason why Mr Walker conceded a material error  of  law,  however,
    lies in what can be described as the inadequate reasoning to  be  found
    in paragraph 28 of the determination. That paragraph reads as follows:-

         "28. I find  that  given  that  I  have  made  adverse  credibility
             findings against this appellant, I cannot find  to  the  lower
             standard of proof, that the appellant left the country illegal
             as I am being asked to.  I cannot assist  him  by  way  of  an
             assumption made in his favour that the appellant did not  fall
             into the categories of persons that do obtain exit visas.  The
             fact is that this appellant did embark  on  a  very  expensive
             agent-assisted journey to the United Kingdom to  claim  asylum
             and has claimed asylum upon a false basis.   I  am  unable  to
             accept the submission made  that  I  should  assume  that  the
             appellant left illegally and would be at risk upon  return  as
             someone who had done so."

4.    It is entirely unclear what "categories  of  persons  that  do  obtain
    exit visas" from Eritrea were in the mind  of  the  Immigration  Judge.
    There is a reference to the country guidance determination of MA in his
    determination.  There is only reference to the judgments of  the  Court
    of Appeal, which considered MA, in the case of GM  (Eritrea)  &  Others
    [2008] EWCA Civ 833.  It possible that, in  saying  what  he  did,  the
    Immigration Judge was relying on the US State Department Report of 2008
    on Eritrea,  described  in  paragraph  27  of  the  determination,  and
    submitted by the appellant as part of  his  claim  to  be  in  need  on
    international protection.  But the Immigration Judge did  not  say  so;
    and, on a matter of such pivotal importance,  this  must  constitute  a
    legal error.

5.    It therefore falls to this Tribunal to substitute a fresh decision  to
    allow or dismiss the appeal.  In  so  doing,  the  Tribunal  must  have
    regard to the present position regarding the treatment of those who are
    reasonably likely to have left Eritrea illegally. The  evidence  before
    me was, necessarily, somewhat old (the hearing before  the  Immigration
    Judge having taken place in March).   The  parties  were  in  agreement
    that, in the  circumstances,  this  appeal  might  provide  a  suitable
    vehicle for giving country guidance in relation to  illegal  exit  from
    Eritrea and the consequences thereof.  To that end,  I  stated  that  I
    considered that the issue  at  the  adjourned  reconsideration  hearing
    should be risk on the return in those circumstances, on the basis  that
    the appellant's particular account of his experiences  in  Eritrea  was
    not credible, but  that,  having  regard  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    findings in paragraph 23 in particular, the appellant was a person  who
    had exited Eritrea in September 2009.   This  is  relevant,  given  the
    evidence in the US state department report  that  in  August  2008  the
    government suspended exit visas and passport services to its  citizens.










                       Appendix B
                    Background materials


|     |Document                                           |         Date     |
|Item |                                                   |                  |
|1    |Amnesty International, "Urgent Action 319/07 -     |29 November 2007  |
|     |Eritrea: Fear of torture/incommunicado             |                  |
|     |detention/forcible return (military service evader |                  |
|     |detained following forcible return from UK)"       |                  |
|2    |Amnesty International, "Urgent Action 145/08 -     |29 May 2008       |
|     |Eritrea: Fear of torture/incommunicado             |                  |
|     |detention/forcible return (German immigration      |                  |
|     |authorities forcibly return Eritrean nationals)"   |                  |
|3    |Human Rights Watch, "Egypt: Stop Deporting Eritrean|8 January 2009    |
|     |Asylum Seekers"                                    |                  |
|4    |US Department of State, "2008 Human Rights Report: |25 February 2009  |
|     |Eritrea"                                           |                  |
|5    |UNHCR, "UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing |April 2009        |
|     |the International Protection Needs of Asylum       |                  |
|     |Seekers from Eritrea"                              |                  |
|6    |Human Rights Watch, "Service for Life: State       |16 April 2009     |
|     |Repression and Indefinite Conscription in Eritrea" |                  |
|7    |UK Parliament House of Commons, "Commons Hansard   |05 January 2010   |
|     |Debates 05 January 2010 (Written Answers): Eritrea |                  |
|8    |Human Rights Watch, "Libya, Don't Send Eritreans   |15 January 2010   |
|     |Back to Risk of Torture"                           |                  |
|9    |Refugee Documentation Centre (Legal Aid Board,     |21 January 2010   |
|     |Ireland), "Treatment of returned failed asylum     |                  |
|     |seekers"                                           |                  |
|10   |US Department of State, "2009 Human Rights Report: |11 March 2010     |
|     |Eritrea"                                           |                  |
|11   |Christian Solidarity Worldwide (UK), "Uganda:      |12 May 2010       |
|     |refugee in hiding following threat from Eritrean   |                  |
|     |official"                                          |                  |
|12   |Amnesty International, "UK: Refused Eritrean       |25 May 2010       |
|     |asylum-seeker still at risk: Further information"  |                  |
|13   |Amnesty International, "Amnesty International      |27 May 2010       |
|     |Report 2010: Eritrea"                              |                  |
|14   |UK Border Agency, " Country of Origin Information  |8 June 2010       |
|     |Report: Eritrea"                                   |                  |
|15   |International Crisis Group, "Eritrea: The Siege    |21 September 2010 |
|     |State"                                             |                  |
|16   |British Embassy Asmara, "Information About Passport|11 October 2010   |
|     |Controls, Military Training in Sawa, National      |                  |
|     |Service Round-Ups and Exemptions, and Treatment of |                  |
|     |Homosexuals"                                       |                  |
|17   |Human Rights Watch, "World Report 2011: Eritrea"   | 24 January 2011  |
|18   |US Department of State, "2010 Human Rights Report: |8 April 2011      |
|     |Eritrea"                                           |                  |

