
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Shen (Paper appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                          THE HON MR JUSTICE GREEN

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                              MISS YALIAN SHEN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


(1)  In  terms  of  the  approach  that  a  tribunal  should  adopt  towards
decisions of the Secretary of State in  which  dishonesty  or  deception  is
alleged against an applicant for leave to remain, the starting point  should
be, as the Court of Appeal  in  Adedoyin  (formerly  AA  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD)
[2010] EWCA Civ 773 have made clear, that pursuant to paragraph 322  of  the
Immigration Rules, the reference to "false" means "dishonestly" false.

(2)    Where an application form etc is false in a material  way,  this  may
be relied on by the Secretary of State as prima facie evidence  establishing
dishonesty. The inference of deliberate deception  can  be  strengthened  by
other facts: eg if a criminal conviction (not disclosed in  an  application)
occurred shortly before  completion  of  the  application  form.  Here,  the
conviction must have been high in the applicant's mind and  any  explanation
based on oversight would carry little weight. But it is always  open  to  an
appellant to proffer an innocent explanation and if that  explanation  meets
a basic level of plausibility, the burden switches back to the Secretary  of
State to answer that evidence. At the end of the day the Secretary of  State
bears the burden of proving dishonesty.

(3)   The internal organisational decision by the Secretary of State not  to
engage  with  paper  appeals  means  that  the  appellant's  evidence   goes
unchallenged. In that regard, it must be remembered, that in the absence  of
evidence from the Secretary of State putting  the  appellant's  prima  facie
plausible explanation into doubt, it would  be  wrong  to  find  dishonesty.
Thus, in view of the possible evidential difficulties  confronting  a  judge
when deciding a paper application, where the  appellant's  evidence  is  not
met (see para (2) above), a tribunal should  be  slow  to  find  dishonesty,
particularly without hearing evidence and submissions on the point from  the
appellant and/or the Secretary of State.

(4)  A finding of dishonesty can  have  catastrophic  consequences  for  the
appellant in social and economic terms and is not to be made lightly.  Thus,
in a paper case,  if  a  judge  entertains  doubts  as  to  the  appellant's
account, he or she should be mindful of the powers of rule 45 of the  Asylum
and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  to   give   directions
regarding supporting documentary evidence, or for the Secretary of State  to
respond to the appellant's evidence as she considers appropriate.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


A.   The issue

 1. This appeal concerns  the  approach  that  the  Tribunal  should  adopt
    towards decisions of the SSHD  in  which  dishonesty  or  deception  is
    alleged against an applicant for leave to remain. It also highlights  a
    particular problem faced by the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  in  relation
    to dealing with allegations of dishonesty on paper appeals.

 2. There is before the Tribunal an appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Designated Judge Zucker in the  FtT  of  12  February  2014.   In  that
    determination the Judge dismissed, on  paper,  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the SSHD of 18 September 2013 ("the  decision")
    refusing the Appellant's application for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  the  Points  Based
    System (PBS) and for a Biometric Residence Permit.  The  Appellant  did
    not appear before us to make representations.  However  no  explanation
    has been given for this absence and no request has been received for an
    adjournment.  In the circumstances Ms Pal requested  that  we  proceed.
    In the circumstances we have decided, in  the  exercise  of  our  power
    under rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  to
    proceed to determine this appeal.

B    The facts

 3. The decision was to remove the Appellant pursuant to section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   The  basis  of  the
    decision was that the Appellant failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules.   Further  it  was  stated
    that in the Appellant's Tier 4 application, at question J16,  she  said
    that she had never used "deception" to gain  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.   The  operative  part  of  the  decision  was  in  the
    following terms:

         "At section P on the Tier 4 (General) application form you declared
         and confirmed that the  information  you  gave  in  that  form  was
         complete and true to the best of your knowledge and agreed  to  the
         sharing  of  information  held  about  you  by   other   government
         departments,  agencies,  local  authorities,  the  police,  foreign
         governments and other bodies and that if such bodies  provided  the
         Home Office with any  information  held  about  you  which  may  be
         relevant for immigration purposes it may  be  used  in  reaching  a
         decision on your application.

         At section J on the Tier 4 (General) application form you  declared
         that you have no criminal convictions (including traffic offences),
         civil judgments and/or charges  made  against  you  in  the  United
         Kingdom or any other country.  Through routine checks made  by  the
         Home Office we have information that you have  not  disclosed  your
         driving offences.  Your driving offences are as follows:




         Conviction(s):

         1.   22.01.13  Neath Port Talbot Magistrates

              Yalian, Shen
             1.   Failing to stop after accident on 11.05.12
                  No separate penalty.


             2.   Drive mechanically propelled vehicle without due care and
                 attention on 11.05.12
                  No separate penalty.


             3.   Using a vehicle while uninsured on 11.05.12
                  Fine �600.00
                  Victim surcharge �15.00
                  Costs �85.00
                  Disqualified from driving - discretionary 56 days.


             Conviction not spent until 22.01.2018


         Therefore your application for Tier 4 (General)  Student  has  been
         refused under the published Immigration Rules."

 4. It is to be observed that the failure relied upon by the SSHD  was  the
    failure to disclose the offences by which we interpret the decision  to
    refer specifically to mean the convictions which are then  set  out  in
    the letter all of which relate to a single incident on 11 May 2012.

 5. We would note that whilst the decision refers to the declaration, which
    it is said was wrongly  made,  that  the  Appellant  had  no  "criminal
    convictions  (including  traffic  offences),  civil  judgments   and/or
    charges", this is not, in actual fact, a  faithful  reflection  of  the
    application form  that  the  Appellant  was  required  to  complete  in
    conjunction with her application.   In  the  application  there  is  no
    reference to convictions including "traffic offences".

 6. The Appellant appealed to the FtT.  In her application form ( IAFT1) in
    Section 8, she gave the following reasons and evidence:

         "When submitting my Tier 4 (General) application for further  leave
         to remain in the UK, I stated in question J16 that I had never used
         deception to gain leave to remain in the UK.  At Section P  on  the
         Tier 4 (General) application form, I declared  and  confirmed  that
         the information I gave in the form was complete  and  true  to  the
         best of my knowledge.  Furthermore, at Section  J  on  the  Tier  4
         (General) application form, I  declared  that  I  had  no  criminal
         convictions (including traffic  offences),  civil  judgment  and/or
         charges  made  against  me  in  the  UK  or  any   other   country.
         Unfortunately, I was not aware that I was required to disclose  the
         following convictions given to me on 22/01/2013."

    She then proceeded to set out the convictions in issue.   She  recorded
    that as a result of these convictions she was disqualified from driving
    for a discretionary 56 days and required to pay a fine of �700.00.  She
    then proceeded to state as follows:

         "I was informed by the police that I would receive a letter by post
         disclosing the penalty charges, however I had  still  not  received
         any letter by the time  I  had  moved  to  temporary  accommodation
         elsewhere in June 2012.  I continued to contact my friends who were
         continuing to live at my previous address to enquire if the  letter
         had been received.  However my letter had still  not  been  posted.
         In October 2012 I moved address once again in order to commence  my
         studies at Swansea University and I updated my new address with the
         police.  At this time, I had still not  received  a  letter  to  my
         previous address.  As I  had  still  not  received  the  letter  by
         October 2012 and since I had updated the police with my new address
         in Swansea, I had presumed that my case had been closed and that no
         further action would be taken.  When I made  my  Tier  4  (General)
         application on 21/08/13 in order to study at  Cardiff  Metropolitan
         University I did not understand that I should disclose  information
         about my traffic offences as I believed the  police  had  taken  no
         further action to convict me."

 7. The appeal was submitted together  with  an  application,  as  was  the
    Appellant's right, that it be heard on  paper.   The  Appellant  was  a
    litigant in person and she had no legal advisors to  assist  her.   The
    facts as set out in her application have not  been  challenged  by  the
    SSHD.  In the  course  of  submissions  during  oral  argument  it  was
    explained to us by Counsel for the SSHD that, internally, the SSHD  had
    no process or mechanism pursuant to which appeals submitted to the  FtT
    on paper were appraised with a view to be responded to in the course of
    the paper appeal process.  It was for this reason that  the  facts  and
    matters set out by the Appellant in her appeal documentation  were  not
    put in issue or otherwise challenged.

 8. Judge Zucker issued his determination on 12  February  2014  dismissing
    the appeal.  The Judge in paragraphs 1-3 recites,  briefly,  the  facts
    that we have referred  to,  in  somewhat  greater  length,  above.   In
    paragraph 4 he states:

         "In a case such as this the burden is upon the Secretary  of  State
         to demonstrate on balance of probabilities that the Appellant  does
         fall for refusal under the general grounds."

 9. In paragraph 5 he recites paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    He summarises it in the following form:

         "By Paragraph 322(1A) where false representations have been made or
         false documents (or information) have been  submitted  (whether  or
         not material  to  the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the
         applicant's knowledge), or material facts have not  been  disclosed
         in relation to the application, or in  order  to  obtain  documents
         from the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
         the application leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  is
         to be refused."

10. In paragraphs 6 and 7 the Judge recites the Appellant's arguments.  The
    crucial reasoning for the purpose of this appeal is found in  paragraph
    8 and it is in the following terms:

         "8.  The grounds for refusal are mandatory.  Though  the  Appellant
             says that she informed the police of  her  change  of  address
             there is no sufficient  evidence  from  her  to  support  that
             contention.  One might have expected some correspondence  from
             her to the police and vice versa.  That the Appellant has  not
             been entirely honest in her approach to  this  application  is
             demonstrated by the fact that she asserted that  she  believed
             the police were taking no further action, but that  would  not
             have justified answering the question  concerning  charges  in
             the negative.  Whilst the legal burden is upon the Respondent,
             in the face of sufficient  evidence  there  is  an  evidential
             burden on the Appellant to refute what is being  said  against
             her.  She has failed in this regard."

C.   Analysis

11. We turn now to our analysis of the reasoning in the decision.  We  have
    come to the conclusion that in his reasoning the  Judge  erred.   There
    are a number of reasons for this which relate to the  approach  adopted
    towards the allegation of deception or dishonesty made in the decision.



12. First, the only evidence before the Judge as to the  facts  surrounding
    the Appellant's state of mind, and whether this amounted to dishonesty,
    were those set out in form IAFT1 in Section 8, to which we have already
    made reference.  The SSHD did not adduce any evidence to  gainsay  this
    account.  When we make this point we should put it into context.  As we
    have explained the SSHD  does  not  have  any  internal  processes  for
    dealing with paper applications submitted to the FtT.   Accordingly  it
    is not therefore surprising that the SSHD did not  adduce  evidence  in
    the present case.  However, nothing prevented, as a matter of principle
    or law, the SSHD  adducing  evidence.   She  was  entitled  so  to  do.
    Further it is common ground that she had  a  copy  of  the  Appellant's
    application and, therefore, was aware of the position  adopted  by  the
    Appellant in relation to her decision.  On the face of the  Appellant's
    explanation it is plausible.  Nothing leaps out  from  the  page  which
    would lead a reader to doubt  its  veracity.   The  starting  point  is
    therefore  that  the  SSHD  identified  a   a   materially   inaccurate
    application form and concluded  that  this  gave  rise  to  a  case  of
    deception or dishonesty; but the appellant then  provided  a  plausible
    explanation for the mistake. What inferences is  it  possible  to  draw
    from this state of affairs about dishonesty?

13. Two points were taken by the Judge as set out in  paragraph  8  of  his
    determination.

14. The first point concerned the criticism made  by  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellant did not produce any evidence to support her  contention  that
    she informed the  police  of  her  change  of  address.   However,  the
    evidence of the Appellant that she did communicate a change of  address
    to the police was not challenged by the SSHD.  Further  it  has  to  be
    remembered that  there  is  a  requirement  for  international  Tier  4
    Students to keep the police and the Home  Office  up-to-date  with  the
    student's movements.  Documents on the file attest to the fact that the
    Appellant  was  in  regular  contact  with  the  police  and  in   such
    circumstances it would, perhaps, have been surprising had she not  kept
    the police up-to-date with her movements and changes  to  her  address.
    Given that the SSHD did not challenge her evidence no  one,  therefore,
    put the Appellant to proof of the facts that she asserted in her appeal
    documentation.  Had they done so she might well have adduced an  e-mail
    or a letter or some other proof of communication with the police.   For
    the Judge to use the absence of proof in such circumstances as  grounds
    for suspecting a lack of honesty, which is the inference  to  be  drawn
    from paragraph 8 of the determination, was in our view procedurally and
    substantively unfair.

15. More fundamental however is the second point.  Here the Judge concluded
    that the Appellant has "not been entirely honest  in  her  approach  to
    this application".  The Judge then stated that this was  "demonstrated"
    by the fact that the Appellant  believed  the  police  were  taking  no
    further action.  From this the Judge proceeded to the  conclusion  that
    this would  "not  have  justified  answering  the  question  concerning
    charges in the negative" (our emphasis).

16. As to this, the starting point for the analysis is that  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Adedoyin (formerly AA (Nigeria) v SSHD) [2010] EWCA  Civ  773
    has made clear that pursuant to Immigration  Rules  paragraph  322  the
    reference to "false" means "dishonestly" false.  There is no  reference
    in the determination to the ruling of the Court of Appeal  in  Adedoyin
    (ibid) nor is there any  reference  to  the  meaning  which  the  Judge
    attributed  to  the  concept  of  "dishonesty"  and  which  the   Judge
    considered he was applying.

17. The SSHD's Decision focuses  upon  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to
    acknowledge her conviction.  On the basis of unchallenged evidence  the
    Appellant has stated that she thought that the police had  decided  not
    to take further action  against  her.   She  said  that  she  had  both
    notified the police  of  her  change  of  address  and  also  that  she
    regularly checked with former flatmates to see  whether  correspondence
    from the police or the courts had been sent to her at that address.  As
    we have already observed there  is  nothing  intrinsically  implausible
    about a student moving addresses and, in consequence,  not  picking  up
    all of the mail addressed to her.  Once again as we have observed  this
    evidence is unchallenged.  If the evidence is taken at face value  then
    it provides a good faith explanation as to why the  Appellant  did  not
    say "yes" in response to the question in the  application  form  asking
    her whether she had previous convictions - in short she simply did  not
    know that she had been  convicted  and  thought  that  the  police  had
    decided not to pursue the matter.  The negative answer  that  she  gave
    was false in the sense  of  being  inaccurate  but  upon  this  factual
    premise it could not be said  to  be  dishonest  by  reference  to  any
    standard or test in law of dishonesty.

18. We observe that in paragraph 8 of the determination the Judge seeks  to
    draw  a  distinction  between  "convictions"  and  "charges".   We  can
    understand why he did this.  His logic seems to be  that  even  if  the
    Appellant was unaware that she had been convicted she was  not  unaware
    that she had been "charged".   The  application  form  poses  questions
    about charges which are quite discrete from  those  about  convictions.
    However, whilst we understand the Judge's reasoning, his  task  was  to
    assess whether the decision of the SSHD could be upheld upon the  basis
    of a finding of dishonesty.  There are the following difficulties  with
    his conclusion.  First, the actual decision of the SSHD does not  refer
    to charges,  only  to  convictions.   Secondly,  in  her  evidence  the
    Appellant states:

         "I was informed by police that I would receive  a  letter  by  post
         disclosing the penalty charges."

19. There is therefore some evidence that the "charges" that the  Appellant
    thought had to be disclosed were penalty charges i.e. fines and  as  to
    these she had given evidence that  she  thought  the  police  were  not
    pursuing  the  proceedings.   We  recognise  that  "charges"   in   the
    application form might more logically be  interpreted  as  charges  put
    before a court; but in the absence of clear evidence that the Appellant
    was not confused about this, we do not think that  the  evidence  comes
    close to justifying a conclusion of dishonesty.

20. In these circumstances, and upon the basis  of  the  Judge's  logic  in
    paragraph 8 of his decision, we cannot see a basis whereby  it  is  was
    proper in law to uphold a finding of dishonesty.

21. We should add that we have some sympathy with the  Judge.   He  had  to
    determine the appeal on paper.  He was given  no  assistance  from  the
    SSHD.  The internal, organisational, decision by the SSHD not to engage
    with  paper  appeals  meant  that   the   Appellant's   evidence   went
    unchallenged.   The Judge evidently became sceptical of the Appellant's
    case and he proceeded to act upon his scepticism.

22. However, it must be remembered that in the absence of evidence from the
    SSHD putting the Appellant's prima  facie  plausible  explanation  into
    doubt then it was, in our judgment,  wrong  to  find  dishonesty.   The
    Appellant's version of events was credible and  unchallenged.   It  was
    more than sufficient to switch the burden of proof back to the SSHD  to
    prove her case on deception and dishonesty.  For  whatever  reason  she
    declined to do so.

23. In the last two sentences of paragraph 8, the  Judge  referred  to  the
    burden of proof.  We have already referred to this above.  The relevant
    words used were:

         "Whilst the legal burden is upon the Respondent,  in  the  face  of
         sufficient evidence there is an evidential burden on the  Appellant
         to refute what is being said against her.  She has failed  in  this
         regard."

24. A question was raised by the Upper Tribunal Judge  granting  permission
    as to whether, on analysis, Judge Zucker was saying that there  was  an
    evidential burden upon the Appellant to prove that she  was  not  being
    dishonest; in which case the permission Judge was of the view that this
    was incorrect.

25. On analysis we believe that the  way  in  which  the  burden  of  proof
    operates is as follows.  We accept that if an application form is false
    in a material way, that this may be relied upon  as  some  prima  facie
    evidence which assists in establishing dishonesty.   The  inference  of
    deliberate deception can be strengthened by reference to  other  facts,
    for example  if  the  conviction  is  shortly  prior  in  time  to  the
    completion of the application form  this  will  furnish  circumstantial
    supporting evidence that the conviction must  have  been  high  in  the
    applicant's mind and any explanation based upon oversight  would  carry
    little weight.  However, this is not dispositive of dishonesty  and  it
    is open to an Appellant to proffer  an  innocent  explanation.   If  an
    innocent explanation is advanced (by which we mean  one  that  meets  a
    basic, minimum level of plausibility) then the burden switches back  to
    the SSHD to answer that evidence. At the end of the day the SSHD  bears
    the burden of proof. This is a proposition which is uncontroversial and
    has been confirmed on many occasions: eg JC (Part 9 HC395 -  burden  of
    proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027 para 10; MZ (Pakistan) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  919  para  25;  Mumu
    (paragraph 320; Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 00143 (IAC)

26. Where the appellant's evidence is not met, a Tribunal  should  be  slow
    indeed to find dishonesty, particularly without  hearing  evidence  and
    submissions on the point from the Appellant and/or the SSHD.   It  must
    be  recorded  that  a  finding  of  dishonesty  can  have  catastrophic
    consequences for the applicant in social and economic terms.  It is not
    to be found lightly.  What should the Judge have  done?   We  are  very
    conscious that this case was decided as a paper application and of  the
    evidential difficulties confronting the Judge.

27. In our view if the Judge  entertained  doubts  as  to  the  Appellant's
    story, he should have sought to investigate  further.   He  could  have
    exercised the powers that he has pursuant to rules 45 and/or 51 of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 to require,  for
    example, the Appellant to adduce supporting  documentary  evidence,  or
    the SSHD to comment upon  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  adduce  such
    evidence as the SSHD considered appropriate to refute  the  Appellant's
    evidence.  In extremis the  Judge  could  remit  the  matter  for  oral
    hearing.  A further alternative would have been for the Judge  to  have
    allowed the appeal but to have remitted the matter to the SSHD to be re-
    taken, this time with a  proper  focus  upon  the  evidence,  with  the
    Appellant's explanations and evidence now clearly upon the  table,  and
    having regard to the dishonesty test.

28. With respect to the Judge we believe that dismissing the appeal was not
    the proper way to resolve any doubts outstanding in his mind in a  case
    of dishonesty.

29. We turn finally to consider what we should do in these circumstances.

30. The facts fall into a very limited compass.  We can see no  utility  or
    benefit in burdening the FtT again with this matter.  The SSHD has  had
    an opportunity to respond to the  Appellant's  factual  and  evidential
    case and, for good reasons or ill, has chosen not to  do  so.   In  the
    circumstances we consider that it is appropriate to take  the  decision
    ourselves.

31. For the above reasons we therefore conclude that the FtT erred  in  law
    in a manner material to the  decision.   The  Tribunal  erred  in  both
    failing to set out the test for dishonesty which was being  applied  to
    the facts and in inferring from the facts before it that they  amounted
    to dishonesty.

D.   Conclusion

32. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

33.  We set aside the decision.

34.      We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Green

