
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

McLarty (Deportation - proportionality balance) [2014] UKUT 00315 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 May 2014                                |16 June 2014                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR KENROY DAVE McLARTY

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clapham from Chase Legal Services


(1) There can be little doubt that, in enacting the  UK  Borders  Act  2007,
Parliament views the object of deporting those with a criminal record  as  a
very strong policy, which is constant in all  cases  (SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
[2013] EWCA Civ 550).  The weight  to  be  attached  to  that  object  will,
however, include a variable component, which  reflects  the  criminality  in
issue.  Nevertheless, Parliament has tilted the scales  strongly  in  favour
of deportation and for them to return to the level and then swing in  favour
of a criminal opposing deportation there must be compelling  reasons,  which
must be exceptional.

(2) What amounts to compelling reasons or exceptional circumstances is  very
much fact dependent but must necessarily be  seen  in  the  context  of  the
articulated will of Parliament in favour of deportation.

(3) Where the facts surrounding an individual who has committed a crime  are
said to be "exceptional" or "compelling", these are factors to be placed  in
the weighing scale, in order to be weighed against the public interest.

(4) In some other instances, the phrase "exceptional"  or  "compelling"  has
been used to describe the end result:  namely,  that  the  position  of  the
individual is "exceptional" or  "compelling"  because,  having  weighed  the
unusual facts against the (powerful) public interest, the  former  outweighs
the latter.  In this sense "exceptional" or "compelling" is the  end  result
of the proportionality weighing process.




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction


 1. This is an appeal brought by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ("SSHD") against the  determination  of  the  FtT  dated  13
    December 2013 in which the FtT allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Kenroy  Dave
    McLarty (the "Respondent") against the deportation order  of  the  SSHD
    dated 14 June 2013 made pursuant to Section 32(5) UK Borders Act  2007.
    Permission to appeal the decision of the FtT was granted upon the basis
    that it was arguable that the  FtT  had  erred  in  particular  in  its
    application of the proper test to be applied  in  cases  involving  the
    prima facie compulsory deportation of those with criminal records.

Facts

 2. The facts may be summarised as follows.  Mr Kenroy Dave  McLarty  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica born on 22 February 1981.  He first came to  the  UK
    on 15 July 2002 as a visitor.  He joined the army later that  year  and
    was therefore exempt from immigration control pursuant to section  8(4)
    of the Immigration Act 1971.  On 25 June 2005  he  married  Ms  Olivene
    Christie.  Ms Christie was a Jamaican  national  at  the  time  of  the
    marriage but was, as of the date of the appeal to the  FtT,  a  British
    citizen.

 3. On 30 March 2007 the Respondent was convicted of fraud arising  out  of
    the rental of a motor vehicle.

 4. On 7 October 2007 the Respondent was discharged  from  the  army  as  a
    result of cannabis misuse.  He was nonetheless granted indefinite leave
    to remain  by  the  SSHD.   His  application  for  naturalisation  was,
    however, refused on 4 December 2008 by virtue of his earlier conviction
    for fraud.

 5. The Respondent has four children aged between 3 and 10 with  his  wife.
    He also has a child aged 3 with another woman.  As of the date  of  the
    hearing before the FtT two of the children had British citizenship.

 6. On 18 January 2012 the Respondent was convicted at Croydon Crown  Court
    of  being  knowingly  concerned  in  the  fraudulent  evasion  of   the
    prohibition on the  importation  of  class  B  drugs  into  the  United
    Kingdom.  The offence involved the importation of in excess of 15 kg of
    cannabis for which he was to be paid ï¿½6,000.  Under the arrangement  he
    was to import the drugs via Heathrow and hand them over to a courier at
    the airport.  He  was  sentenced,  for  this  offence,  to  a  term  of
    imprisonment of two years and six months following  a  trial.   In  his
    short sentencing remarks the Recorder stated:

         "There were no real mitigating circumstances in this  case.   There
         is some evidence  of  family  hardship,  but  the  introduction  of
         significant amounts of a  dangerous  substance  into  this  country
         through illegal importation is a very serious matter."

 7. On 14 June 2013 the Appellant made  a  deportation  order  pursuant  to
    section 32(1) UK Borders Act 2007 upon  the  basis  that,  pursuant  to
    section 32(4) of that Act, his deportation was conducive to the  public
    good.  This entitled the Respondent to a right of appeal.  The  reasons
    accompanying the deportation order were  detailed.   It  suffices,  for
    present purposes, to summarise them as follows:

    (1)  The decision to remove the Respondent to Jamaica would  give  rise
         to an interference with his Article 8 Convention rights and may not
         be in the best interests of his children.

    (2)  Nonetheless the decision was in accordance  with  the  permissible
         aim and object of preventing  disorder  and  crime  and  protecting
         health and morals.

    (3)  In relation to the Respondent's family life with his four children
         from his wife the SSHD found, in relation to each of them, that  it
         was unreasonable to expect them  to  accompany  the  Respondent  to
         Jamaica as this would deprive each child of rights and entitlements
         that they enjoyed or would enjoy as British and EEA citizens.

    (4)  That pursuant  to  the  judgments  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
         (Tanzania) (FC) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 that where it was proposed  to
         deport  the  parent  of  a  British  citizen  child   the   British
         citizenship of the child would weigh particularly  heavily  in  the
         consideration  whether  to  remove  the  parent.   Though  it   was
         recognised that nationality could  not  be  a  "trump  card"  (ibid
         paragraph 30).

    (5)  However deportation did not, on the facts  of  the  present  case,
         leave the children with no choice but to follow the father  because
         the mother could remain and act as their primary carer, as she  had
         done in the past.

    (6)  It was accepted that the Respondent had a subsisting  relationship
         with  his  wife.   It   was   also   accepted   that   there   were
         "insurmountable obstacles" to family  life  with  the  Respondent's
         wife being able to continue outside of the UK.  This was because of
         the best interests of the children, two of whom  possessed  British
         citizenship.

    (7)  However because the Respondent did not himself meet the  residence
         requirements the fact that his wife could not accompany him was not
         dispositive.

    (8)  The SSHD proceeded  to  balance  the  position  of  the  wife  and
         children against the public interest in deportation.   As  to  this
         the SSHD concluded that whilst the  rights  of  the  children  were
         important they did not always trump other  interests.   Accordingly
         even if it was in the best interests of the children to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom it was still open to the mother to  exercise  an
         independent judgment to relocate with the children  to  Jamaica  in
         order to continue  a  family  life  with  her  husband  there.   In
         particular the SSHD balanced these  interests  against  the  public
         interest.  She referred to the conviction of the Respondent  before
         the Crown Court for the importation of a substantial quantity of  a
         dangerous drug.  In  particular  the  decision  letter  records  as
         follows:

             "The Secretary of State  is  satisfied  that  the  nature  and
             severity of your offences are factors which fully  engage  the
             public interest in  securing  your  removal  from  the  United
             Kingdom as the subject of a Deportation  Order,  both  in  the
             interests of preventing further offending of  this  nature  on
             your part, and establishing a deterrent.

             The Home Office is satisfied that your convictions for drugs -
             importation of Controlled Drugs for which you  were  sentenced
             to 2 years and 6 months' imprisonment for each offence, to  be
             served  concurrently,  are  ones  which  may  be  regarded  as
             serious, and  which  compel  the  UK  Border  Agency  to  give
             significant weight  to  the  question  of  protecting  society
             against crime.

             It would be noted that offences involving drugs  are  offences
             which have a wide impact on  the  health  and  morals  of  the
             community at large - both in terms of the  deleterious  effect
             on the health of those who take the  drugs  imported,  and  in
             terms of the  associated  effects  of  crime  and  anti-social
             behaviour that are fostered by such activities.  It  is  clear
             that your offences are representative of your  willingness  to
             gain profit from the source of such a negative impact  on  the
             community of the United Kingdom.

             Even if it were accepted that you were rehabilitated and posed
             no risk to the public, it is  not  accepted  that  this  alone
             would render your deportation disproportionate.

             As stated above, your crime may be regarded as serious.  It is
             considered that it is appropriate for the Secretary  of  State
             to give weight to the public good and public  interest,  which
             would be served by  your  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,
             irrespective  of  the  nature  of  any  future  risk  of   re-
             offending."

 8. One  evidential  matter  upon  which  the  SSHD  relied  was  that  the
    Respondent's wife had relatives in the United Kingdom who could provide
    her with support and assistance in the event that  the  Respondent  was
    removed to Jamaica.  This finding was made because in  a  questionnaire
    submitted to the SSHD by the respondent giving reasons  why  he  should
    not be deported he explained that  in  relation  to  the  children  the
    "other" family that  the  children  had  in  the  United  Kingdom  were
    "maternal family ".

 9. We turn now to the decision of the FtT.  The Tribunal  set  out,  in  a
    careful judgment, its findings  of  fact.   In  paragraph  24  the  FtT
    observed that the Respondent's wife was born in Jamaica, had family  in
    Jamaica but had no family at all in the United Kingdom.  It  is  stated
    that her mother, grandmother and uncle were in Jamaica and two  sisters
    lived in the USA.

10.  Between  paragraphs  14-37  the  Tribunal  set  out,  in  detail,  the
    chronology of the case and provide relevant background  information  as
    to the Respondent's prior criminal offences.  Apart from the difference
    in the evidence as to the  Respondent's  wife's  family  there  are  no
    material differences between the facts as found  in  the  decision  and
    those as found by the FtT.

11. The FtT sets out  the  relevant  statutory  framework.   In  particular
    pursuant to section 32(5) UK Borders  Act  2007  concerning  "automatic
    deportation" the SSHD is required to deport the Respondent  unless  one
    of the exceptions set out in section 33 apply.  Under section 33(2)  an
    exception exists where removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance  of
    a deportation order would breach that person's Convention  rights.   In
    the present case it was contended by the  Respondent  that  deportation
    would infringe his  Article  8  rights.   The  applicable  "Immigration
    Rules" are paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A.  These provide as follows:


        "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of  the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

            (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                 the public good because they  have  been  convicted  of  an
                 offence for which they have been sentenced to a  period  of
                 imprisonment of at least 4 years;

            (b)    the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                 to the public good because they have been convicted  of  an
                 offence for which they have been sentenced to a  period  of
                 imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
                 months; or

            (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                 the public good because, in the view of  the  Secretary  of
                 State, their offending has caused serious harm or they  are
                 a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for
                 the law,

                 the  Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                 consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it
                 does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
                 the public interest in deportation will  be  outweighed  by
                 other factors.


        399.  This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
             if -

            (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who  is
                 in the UK, and

                 (i)   the child is a British Citizen; or

                 (ii)  the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                     least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of
                     the immigration decision; and in either case

            (a)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                 the UK; and

            (b)   there is no other family member who is able to  care  for
                 the child in the UK; or

            (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                 a partner who is in  the  UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
                 settled in the UK, or in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
                 humanitarian protection, and

                 (i)   the person has lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
                     continuously for at least  the  15  years  immediately
                     preceding  the  date  of  the   immigration   decision
                     (discounting any period  of  imprisonment);  and  (ii)
                     there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with
                     that partner continuing outside the UK

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the person has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
                 20 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
                 decision (discounting any period of  imprisonment)  and  he
                 has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the
                 country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave
                 the UK; or

             (b)   the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at  least
                 half of his life living continuously in the UK  immediately
                 preceding the date of the immigration decision (discounting
                 any period of imprisonment) and he has no  ties  (including
                 social, cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he
                 would have to go if required to leave the UK."

Relevant case law

12. The scope and effect of these Rules has been considered on a number  of
    recent occasions.

13. In particular in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 the  Court  of
    Appeal underlined an aspect of the weighing exercise that any  Tribunal
    is required to undertake but to which, in the  view  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, inadequate emphasis had  hitherto  been  given.   This  was  in
    relation to the fact that the presumption in favour of deportation  was
    a presumption embodied in primary legislation and was not  therefore  a
    policy formulated by executive decision.   For the Court of Appeal this
    was of real importance and meant that when the  public  importance  was
    placed in the proportionality scales  it  carried  substantial  weight.
    Lord Justice Laws (in paragraph 28) stated  of  previous  jurisprudence
    (from this jurisdiction but also from the Strasbourg Court): "There  is
    no acknowledgement ... that the weight to be attached in an  article  8
    case to a State's policy of deporting foreign criminals may be  greater
    where the policy is made, not by the executive government, but  by  the
    legislature.  But this seems to me to be of very great importance".  In
    paragraph 50 he reiterated that: "... it is the importance attached  by
    Parliament itself that matters".

14. From this the Court of Appeal deduced that the width of the  margin  of
    appreciation of the SSHD in criminal deportation cases was a wide  one.
    This was because of the quintessentially political and moral nature  of
    the value judgment embodied in the legislation:
       1. "In my opinion,  however,  this  is  a  central  element  in  the
          adjudication of Article 8 cases where it is proposed to deport  a
          foreign criminal pursuant to s.32 of the 2007 Act. The  width  of
          the primary legislator's discretionary area  of  judgment  is  in
          general vouchsafed by high  authority:  Brown,  Lambert,  Poplar,
          Marcic, Lichniak and Eastside Cheese, cited above. But it is lent
          added  force  where,  as  here,   the   subject-matter   of   the
          legislature's policy lies in the field  of  moral  and  political
          judgment, as to which the first and natural arbiter of the extent
          to which it represents a "pressing social need" is  what  I  have
          called the elected arm of government: and especially the  primary
          legislature, whose Acts are the primary democratic  voice.  What,
          then, should we make of the weight which the democratic voice has
          accorded to the policy of deporting foreign criminals?
          (2) THE NATURE OF THE POLICY: MORAL AND POLITICAL
       1. The importance of the moral and political character of the policy
          shows that the two drivers  of  the  decision-maker's  margin  of
          discretion - the policy's nature and  its  source  -  operate  in
          tandem. An Act of Parliament is anyway to be specially respected;
          but all the more so when it declares policy of this kind. In this
          case, the policy is general and overarching. It is  circumscribed
          only by five carefully drawn exceptions, of which  the  first  is
          violation of a  person's  Convention/Refugee  Convention  rights.
          (The others concern minors, EU cases, extradition cases and cases
          involving  persons  subject  to  orders   under   mental   health
          legislation.) Clearly, Parliament in the 2007  Act  has  attached
          very great weight to the policy as a  well  justified  imperative
          for the protection of the public  and  to  reflect  the  public's
          proper condemnation of serious wrongdoers.  Sedley  LJ  was  with
          respect right to state that "[in the case of a 'foreign criminal'
          the Act places in the proportionality scales a  markedly  greater
          weight than in other cases.
       1. I would draw particular attention to the provision  contained  in
          s.33(7):  "section  32(4)  applies  despite  the  application  of
          Exception 1...", that is to say, a foreign criminal's deportation
          remains  conducive  to  the  public  good   notwithstanding   his
          successful reliance on Article 8. I said  at  paragraph  46  that
          while the authorities  demonstrate  that  there  is  no  rule  of
          exceptionality for Article 8, they also  clearly  show  that  the
          more pressing the public interest in removal or deportation,  the
          stronger must be the claim under Article 8 if it is  to  prevail.
          The pressing nature  of  the  public  interest  here  is  vividly
          informed by the fact that by Parliament's express declaration the
          public interest is injured if the criminal's deportation  is  not
          effected. Such a result could in my judgment only be justified by
          a very strong claim indeed."

15. The court emphasised, in the light of  this  consideration,  that  when
    applying  the  test  of  proportionality  a   principle   of   "minimal
    interference" should be adopted.  This meant  that  whilst  fundamental
    rights could never be treated as token or as a ritual  nonetheless  the
    discretionary judgment enjoyed by the  primary  decision-maker,  though
    variable, meant that the court's role was to keep in balance with  that
    of the elected arms of  Government.   The  court  considered  this  was
    especially important  in  cases  where  a  child's  rights  were  being
    balanced against the deportation of a foreign criminal (ibid  paragraph
    42).

16. In paragraph 47 the court drew together various jurisprudential threads
    and stated:

         "47. It is worth drawing these general considerations together.

          (1) The principle  of  minimal  interference  is  the  essence  of
              proportionality: it ensures that the ECHR right  in  question
              is never treated as a token or a ritual, and thus  guarantees
              its force.

          (2) In  a  child's  case  the  right  in  question  (child's  best
              interests)  is  always   a   consideration   of   substantial
              importance.

          (3) Article 8 contains no rule of 'exceptionality', but  the  more
              pressing the public interest in removal or  deportation,  the
              stronger must be the claim  under  Article  8  if  it  is  to
              prevail.

          (4)  Upon  the  question  whether   the   principle   of   minimal
              interference is fulfilled the primary decision-maker enjoys a
              variable margin of discretion,  at  its  broadest  where  the
              decision  applies   general   policy   created   by   primary
              legislation."

17. In paragraph 54 Lord Justice Laws stated this about the strength of the
    Article 8 evidence needed to counter the policy objection:

         "I would draw particular attention to the  provision  contained  in
         s.33(7):  'Section  32(4)  applies  despite  the   application   of
         Exception 1...', that is to say, a foreign  criminal's  deportation
         remains conducive to the public good notwithstanding his successful
         reliance on Article 8.  I said  at  paragraph  46  that  while  the
         authorities demonstrate that there is no rule of exceptionality for
         Article 8, they also clearly show that the more pressing the public
         interest in removal or deportation, the stronger must be the  claim
         under Article 8 if it is to prevail.  The pressing  nature  of  the
         public interest here is  vividly  informed  by  the  fact  that  by
         Parliament's express declaration the public interest is injured  if
         the criminal's deportation is not effected.  Such a result could in
         my judgment only be justified by a very strong claim indeed."

18. It is worthwhile reciting the summary of the facts in the  case  of  SS
    (Nigeria) set out by the Court at paragraphs 56 and 57:

         "56. This Appellant was convicted of serious offences  of  peddling
         Class A drugs.  He had no vestige of a right to be or remain in the
         United  Kingdom,  so  that  immigration  policy  as  well  as   his
         criminality favours his deportation.  He worked illegally.  The  UT
         found (paragraph 57) that he 'has the potential to present  a  real
         risk to members of the public and to society in general due to  the
         effect of drugs'.

         57. As for the interest of the Appellant's son (now aged  5),  this
         is not a case where the Appellant's deportation  will  involve  the
         child's having to move to Nigeria.  He will continue to  be  looked
         after by his primary  carer,  his  mother,  as  he  was  while  the
         Appellant was in prison.  The Secretary of State had made enquiries
         of the child's mother and also Walsall  Children's  Services.   The
         Appellant appears to have been selling drugs on the streets  whilst
         he had a very young son at home."

19. In MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  (decided  shortly  after  SS
    (Nigeria) (ibid)) the Court of Appeal also addressed  the  strength  of
    the public interest in deporting foreign criminals.  In particular  the
    court focused upon the strength of the "other factors" which would need
    to exist before a justification for deportation would be set aside.  In
    paragraph 40 of their judgment the Court of Appeal stated:

         "Does it follow that the new rules have effected  no  change  other
         than to spell out the circumstances in which a  foreign  criminal's
         claim that deportation would  breach  his  Article  8  rights  will
         succeed? At this point, it is necessary to focus on  the  statement
         that it will only be 'in exceptional circumstances that the  public
         interest in deportation will be outweighed by  other  factors'.  Ms
         Giovannetti submits that the reference to exceptional circumstances
         serves the purpose of emphasising that, in the balancing  exercise,
         great weight should be given to the public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign criminals who do not satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.  It
         is only exceptionally that such foreign criminals will  succeed  in
         showing that their rights  under  Article  8(1)  trump  the  public
         interest in their deportation."

20. In paragraph 42 the Court stated that in cases of criminal deportation:
    "...the scales are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of  deportation  and
    something very compelling (which will be exceptional)  is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest in removal".  In paragraph  43  the  Court
    stated that the general rule was that in the case of foreign  prisoners
    to whom paragraphs 399 and 399A did not apply "very compelling reasons"
    would be required to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

21. Finally, in relation to cases we should refer to the decision of the UT
    in Masih v SSHD (Blake J and UT Judge Freeman) [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC).
     In this case the UT laid down, at paragraph 11 a series of  principles
    which it was intended would be  applied  in  future  deportation  cases
    involving criminality.  On their face they accurately reflect  the  law
    as it stood at the time. But they predate  SS  Nigeria  (ibid)  and  MF
    (Nigeria) (ibid).  In particular they do not emphasise  the  fact  that
    Parliament has  spoken  (in  favour  of  deportation)  and  this  is  a
    consideration that the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria) (ibid) has  made
    clear must be given great weight.  It seems to us therefore that to  be
    consistent with recent case law emphasising this point Masih should  no
    longer be treated as guidance, on this point.

The criticisms made by the SSHD of the FtT judgment

22. With that analysis in mind we turn to the criticisms made by  the  SSHD
    of the decision of the FtT.  These, in summary, are twofold.

23. First, it is submitted that the Tribunal erred in  failing  to  address
    and/or apply itself to the "very strong public interest" in deportation
    in circumstances where, from its reasoning, it is completely unclear as
    to what extent, if at all, the serious nature  of  the  crime  and  the
    wider public interest against the supply of drugs were factors  in  the
    Tribunal's findings.

24. Secondly, it is submitted that the Tribunal  judgment  lacked  adequate
    reasoning.  Where two important countervailing principles collide - the
    public interest in deportation versus the interests of  the  individual
    in having an opportunity to develop a relationship with  his  children,
    fairness requires that the Tribunal provide full and proper reasons  in
    relation to their consideration of both these factors.

Analysis

25. We turn now to set out  our  views.  The  gravamen  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision is found in paragraph 47, which is in the following terms:

         "We return therefore to our  assessment  of  the  factors  in  this
         appeal (at paragraphs 41 of 42 above).  The Secretary of State  has
         conceded in the refusal letter that it is not reasonable to  expect
         the Appellant's family to relocate to Jamaica and  that  there  are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   the   Appellant
         continuing  outside  the  UK.   We  conclude  therefore  that   the
         Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  deport   the   Appellant   is
         disproportionate  and  that  the  factors  weighing   against   the
         deportation are so significant as to  require  this  appeal  to  be
         allowed."

26. We have come to the conclusion that the Tribunal judge erred.

27. In paragraph 47 the Tribunal records what is said to be a concession by
    the Secretary of State that, first, it was not reasonable to expect the
    appellant's family to relocate to Jamaica,  and  secondly,  that  there
    were "insurmountable obstacles"  to  family  life  with  the  appellant
    continuing outside the UK .  In  view  of  this  concession  the  Judge
    proceeded to conclude: "... therefore that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to deport the  appellant  is  disproportionate  and  that  the
    factors weighing against the  deportation  are  so  significant  as  to
    require this appeal to be allowed".

28. With respect to the Tribunal the  approach  adopted  is  flawed,  at  a
    number of different levels.

29. First, the proportionality test requires a Court or Tribunal to address
    itself to and assess the aims or object of the policy in  question  and
    then to set  against  that  assessment  the  factors  said  to  warrant
    departing from the stated object or policy.  In the  present  case  the
    object or policy in question is the public interest, set out in an  Act
    of Parliament, in favour of deporting criminals. It is  essential  that
    in any assessment the weight of the specific object be  appraised  both
    in the abstract sense of how important that object is in policy  terms,
    but also on the basis of the particular facts of the case - how serious
    was the specific appellant's criminality.

30. With regard to the overall weight to be attached to  the  policy  there
    can be little doubt, as we have set  out  above,  but  that  Parliament
    views the object of deporting those with a criminal record  as  a  very
    strong policy. This is a constant in all cases.

31. However, the weight to be attached to that object will also  include  a
    variable component which reflects the criminality in  issue.   In  this
    case the criminality took two forms: first, the  prior  conviction  for
    dishonesty; and secondly the prior  conviction  for  drug  importation.
    Had the only prior offence been the dishonesty then,  upon  the  facts,
    the Tribunal might  arguably  have  been  able  to  conclude  that  the
    countervailing  facts  outweighed  the   strong   presumption   against
    deportation.  However, the drug  importation  was,  as  the  sentencing
    Recorder acknowledged, a serious offence counterbalanced by no material
    mitigation.  The importation was in excess of 15kg, a very large amount
    on any view.

32. In her Decision the Secretary of State explicitly set out a  number  of
    important reasons which perforce  had  to  be  addressed  and  assessed
    specifically in the proportionality weighing exercise.  These were: the
    nature and severity of the offence; the need to protect society against
    crime; the wide impact of drug offences on the community at large;  its
    consequential effects upon other acquisitive crime committed  to  raise
    funds to acquire drugs; and, the need to operate  a  deterrent  policy.
    Although cast in generic terms in the decision  these  factors  acquire
    added weight in the context of an offence involving the importation  of
    a substantial volume of drugs. In paragraph 47 the  Tribunal  does  not
    conduct any sort of a balancing exercise  with,  on  one  side  of  the
    equation, the public interest considerations, and on  the  other  side,
    the factors prayed in aid to warrant departure from those public policy
    considerations. But conducting  this  exercise  is  the  essence  of  a
    proportionality test.

33. With respect to the Tribunal  only  half  of  the  task  was  therefore
    performed.  The Tribunal identified factors in favour of the  appellant
    but then proceeded immediately to a finding on proportionality  without
    working through the essential step of measuring those  factors  against
    the general and specific public  interest  considerations  arising  and
    taking account of the SSHD's margin of discretion.  It  is  notable  in
    this regard that in paragraph 47 the Judge only refers to the facts and
    matters set out in paragraphs 41 and 42 of the Judgment  and  in  these
    paragraphs one finds only the facts favourable to  the  respondent,  Mr
    McLarty. There is no reference in paragraph 47 to the  public  interest
    facts set out in paragraph 43 - these appear  to  have  fallen  out  of
    account.

34. We have therefore come to the conclusion that  the  Tribunal  erred  in
    failing to apply itself to  the  proportionality  test.   The  Tribunal
    assessed and took account of the facts favourable to the respondent, Mr
    McLarty; but did not balance  these  against  the  public  interest  in
    favour of deportation.

35. Secondly, we also accept the SSHD's submission that  the  reasoning  is
    lacking in clarity and/or is generally deficient.   In  the  course  of
    oral argument we posed questions about the structure of the  Tribunal's
    reasons in relation to the exceptional circumstances said  to  outweigh
    the public interest in deportation.

36. In relation to the assessment exercise  which  is  called  for,  it  is
    necessary  to  recall  that  the  scales  are  not   evenly   weighted.
    Parliament has tilted them strongly in favour of deportation and it  is
    not for the Tribunal to seek to rebalance those scales.   It  is  clear
    from case law that for the tilted scales to return  to  the  level  and
    then swing in favour of a criminal opposing deportation that there must
    be compelling reasons which must be exceptional: see  case  law  above.
    What amounts to compelling reasons or exceptional circumstances is very
    much fact dependent but must necessarily be seen in the context of  the
    articulated will of Parliament in favour of deportation.

37. This brings us to the facts of this case.   The two matters  which  the
    Tribunal ultimately alighted upon as relevant  are  those  set  out  at
    paragraph 47: "The Secretary of  State  has  conceded  in  the  refusal
    letter that it is not reasonable to expect the  Appellant's  family  to
    relocate to Jamaica and that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family  life  with  the  Appellant  continuing  outside  the  UK."   On
    analysis, the reasoning lacks clarity and substance.  It proceeds  upon
    the basis of an  ostensible  concession  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    However, it is necessary to  examine  closely  what  that  "concession"
    actually was and whether it, in any event, needed to be re-evaluated in
    the light of the Tribunal's own fact findings.  The "concession" in the
    SSHD's decision was a limited one.  The Secretary  of  State  found  as
    follows: (i) that the wife's family were in the United Kingdom and they
    could assist  in  caring  for  the  children  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant; (ii) that two of the children had  British  citizenship  and
    could exercise those  rights  and  entitlements  associated  with  that
    status in the United Kingdom; (iii), that it was a matter of choice for
    the mother whether she left and relocated to Jamaica.  The Secretary of
    State then stated that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life with the appellant's wife being able to continue  outside  of  the
    UK.

38. Before the Tribunal the factual  basis  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    conclusions altered.  At paragraph 24 the Tribunal found that the  wife
    had no family "at all" in the UK and that her mother,  grandmother  and
    uncle were in Jamaica and two sisters were in the USA.  The  upshot  of
    this was that if the wife so chose she could relocate  to  Jamaica  and
    then be with her family; but if she  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    there would not, in actual fact, be any family members  in  the  United
    Kingdom to assist her with the care of the children.  At least some  of
    the children had British citizenship but they could  also  relocate  to
    Jamaica with the mother  and  they  would  there  be  united  with  the
    mother's family.  The so called "concession" in the Decision does  not,
    so it appears to us, amount to a very great  deal  and  may  have  been
    given undue weight by the Tribunal. In any event the  fact  finding  of
    the Tribunal itself ought to have triggered a  reconsideration  of  the
    "concession" to see if it was  still  relevant  in  the  light  of  the
    ostensibly significant findings that the wife's family were in  Jamaica
    and this was bound to have at least some  possibly  significant  impact
    upon the (in)surmountability of the continuation of a  family  life  in
    Jamaica.

39. In Ahmed v SSHD [2014] EWHC (Admin) at paragraphs [45] - [48] the  High
    Court, applying and confirming the Court of Appeal in  MF  (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu [2013]  UKUT
    00045, held that the test of insurmountable obstacles did not amount to
    obstacles which  were  literally  impossible  to  surmount  but  was  a
    reference to the actual "degree of difficulty" a couple faced.  We  can
    find no assessment of the actual degree of difficulty arising  in  this
    case in the Tribunal's determination.

40. These points serve to highlight the broader point which is that it  was
    the task of the Tribunal to  analyse  closely  the  underlying  factual
    reality; proceeding upon an unanalysed "concession" was not enough.  It
    was also the duty of the Tribunal to set out its reasoning.

41. It follows that the Tribunal erred  in  not  carrying  out  the  proper
    assessment of the facts on either side of the proportionality equation.

42. We would, finally, make an observation about the phrases  "exceptional"
    and "compelling" because it is possible  that  the  phrases  have  been
    understood in two different senses. It follows from our reasoning above
    that simply because the facts surrounding a particular  individual  who
    has committed a crime may be said to be "exceptional"  or  "compelling"
    this is not the end of the story.  In such a case  the  exceptional  or
    unusual position of the individual are factors to be  placed  into  the
    weighing scale and they are then  to  be  weighed  against  the  public
    interest.  As such the use of the phrase exceptional or compelling here
    is no more than a part of the wider weighing  process.   An  individual
    may be  a  person  of  extraordinary  courage  and  fortitude  with  an
    impeccable and distinguished military record and have a long history of
    charitable good deeds.  But the crime for which that  person  is  later
    convicted might be shocking and reveal a propensity to  commit  further
    crimes.  The mere fact that the person  has  exceptional  features  and
    attributes is not dispositive.   It  is  simply  added  weight  in  the
    scales; no more and no less.

43.  However,  in  some  other  instances  the  phrase   "exceptional"   or
    "compelling" has been used in a second way to describe the  end  result
    ie that the position of the individual is "exceptional" or "compelling"
    because  having  weighed  his/her  very  unusual  facts   against   the
    (powerful) public interest the former outweighs  the  latter.  In  this
    sense  "exceptional"  or  "compelling"  is  the  end  result   of   the
    proportionality weighing process.  Provided it is always recalled  that
    there are two components to the exercise this is  little  more  than  a
    semantic quibble.  However, since it seems to us to have given rise  to
    confusion we have thought it helpful to highlight the point.

Result

44. We have therefore come to the  conclusion  that  the  judgment  of  the
    Tribunal must be set aside.  We are not satisfied that the Tribunal has
    addressed itself to the correct test or has  conducted  a  sufficiently
    detailed assessment of the evidence or set  out  the  reasons  for  its
    determination in sufficient terms.

45. We were invited, should we decide to set aside the  Tribunal  decision,
    to decide the case for ourselves by counsel for the SSHD.   However  we
    have decided that we should remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal.



46. There are arguments both for and against in this case and  we  did  not
    find on the basis of the Tribunal fact finding that  we  could  form  a
    clear view one way or the other.  We therefore do not express any  view
    as to the merits but simply remit the matter for a fresh evaluation.


Signed                                                  Date         21  May
    2014


 Mr Justice Green




