
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

SB (refugee revocation; IDP camps) Somalia [2019] UKUT 00358 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 June 2019                               |                              |
|Further written submissions on 31 July and    |..............................|
|8 August 2019                                 |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                                                  (Claimant)

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Toal and Mr D Sellwood, instructed by Wilson
                  Solicitors LLP
     (Claimant)

(1) In Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  MS  (Somalia)  [2019]
EWCA Civ 1345, the Court of Appeal has authoritatively decided that  refugee
status can be revoked on the basis that the refugee now has the  ability  to
relocate internally within  the  country  of  their  nationality  or  former
habitual residence. The  authoritative  status  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
judgments in MS (Somalia) is not affected by the fact that  counsel  for  MS
conceded that internal relocation could in principle lead  to  cessation  of
refugee status. There is also nothing in the House of Lords' opinions  in  R
(Hoxha) v Special Adjudicator and Another [2005]  UKHL  19  that  compels  a
contrary conclusion to that reached by the Court of Appeal.

(2) The conclusion of the Court of Appeal in  Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442 was that the country guidance  in
MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC)  did  not
include any finding that a person who finds themselves in  an  IDP  camp  is
thereby likely to face Article 3  ECHR  harm  (having  regard  to  the  high
threshold established by D v United Kingdom  (1997)  24  EHRR  43  and  N  v
United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39). Although that conclusion  may  have  been
obiter, it was confirmed by Hamblen LJ in MS (Somalia). There is nothing  in
the country guidance  in  AA  and  Others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
returnees; FGM) Somalia [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) that  requires  a  different
view to be taken of the position of such a person. It will be  an  error  of
law for a judge to refuse to follow the  Court  of  Appeal's  conclusion  on
this issue.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant is a citizen of Somalia, born  on  28  September  1977  in
    Kismayo, where he lived until 1991 when, aged 13,  he  fled  to  Kenya.
    The claimant then made his way to the  United  Kingdom,  where  he  was
    recognised by the Secretary of State as a refugee and given  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The claimant was accepted to be
    a member of the minority Bajuni clan.

 2. At some point, the claimant developed a gambling addiction.  His thirst
    for money was such that he engaged, in  an  organised  way,  in  taking
    driving theory tests for others who would have been in difficulties  in
    passing the test, owing to their lack of proficiency  in  English.   In
    2014, he was convicted and sentenced in respect of seven such offences;
    in 2016 he was convicted of sixteen such offences; and in 2017  he  was
    convicted  of  two  such  offences.   The  2017  convictions   involved
    concurrent sentences of eighteen months' imprisonment.

 3. Both the Probation Service and  an  Independent  Clinical  Psychologist
    assessed the claimant as being at  low  risk  of  re-offending  and  as
    posing a low risk of serious harm.

 4. The claimant has a son, born in the United Kingdom  in  2005,  who  was
    taken into care in 2013.  In 2018, the intention of Social Services was
    to return the son to the claimant's care.  Relevant professionals  have
    concluded that the  claimant's  deportation  would  have  a  profoundly
    negative effect upon his son.

 5. In May 2018, the Secretary of State decided that the claimant should be
    deported, as a foreign criminal, pursuant  to  section  32  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  The Secretary  of  State's  letter  referred  to  an
    earlier communication to the claimant, in which he had been informed of
    the Secretary of State's intention to  revoke  the  claimant's  refugee
    status.  Representations had been made on  the  claimant's  behalf,  in
    response to that intention.  Paragraph 338A of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provided that a person's grant of refugee status shall  be  revoked  if
    certain  circumstances  apply.   In  the  case  of  the  claimant,  the
    circumstance in question was said to be  that  described  in  paragraph
    339A(v),  namely  that  the  claimant  "can  no  longer,  because   the
    circumstances in connection with which he  has  been  recognised  as  a
    refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to  avail  himself  of
    the protection of the country of nationality". Reference  was  made  to
    Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Geneva Convention,  which  paragraph  339A(v)
    was intended to reflect.

 6. The Secretary of State's decision letter stated that there had  been  a
    fundamental and non-temporary change in Somalia.   Extensive  reference
    was made by her to the views of the United Nations High  Commission  of
    Refugees (UNHCR), who had been approached by the Secretary of State  in
    connection with the question of whether the claimant should continue to
    be recognised as a refugee.  In this regard,  the  Secretary  of  State
    made  it  plain  it  was  not  being  contended  that  the   claimant's
    criminality had any bearing on this issue.  The question  was  entirely
    whether there had been a requisite change in the conditions in Somalia.



 7. The decision letter explained why the Secretary of State took the  view
    that Kismayo was now a place to which the claimant could  return.   The
    letter also explained why,  in  the  alternative,  the  claimant  could
    remain in Mogadishu (which would be the place in Somalia  to  which  he
    would be returned by the Secretary of State).

 8. In reaching this conclusion, the Secretary of State  placed  particular
    weight on the country guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in MOJ & Ors
    (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).   Having  set
    out extracts from the findings in MOJ, the Secretary of State's  letter
    continued:-

         "In light of the reasons given herein, it is considered that  there
         are no significant obstacles to  your  re-integration  in  Somalia.
         You are an adult male in reasonable health.  You have  demonstrated
         an ability to assimilate into a foreign culture, including learning
         a new language,  following  your  entry  to  the  UK  in  2002  and
         therefore you will be able to re-assimilate to Somali culture.   It
         is considered you  have  sufficient  ties  to  your  home  country,
         including language, cultural background and social network,  to  be
         able to re-adapt to life in Somalia and form  an  adequate  private
         life in that country.

         Moreover, further to MOJ & Others (paragraph 351), it is considered
         that  by  virtue  of  being  a  returnee  from  overseas,  you  are
         considered  likely  to  have  an  enhanced  prospect   of   gaining
         employment upon return as it was  noted  that  returnees  would  be
         considered to be better educated and more resourceful and therefore
         more attractive to employers, especially where the employer him  or
         herself has returned to invest in  a  new  business  in  Mogadishu.
         Furthermore, as noted within the letter of 22 March 2017 it is  for
         your relatives in the UK to decide if they choose to support you in
         re-establishing yourself in Somalia with financial assistance.

         In light of the above,  whilst  you  may  face  challenges  in  re-
         adapting to life in Somalia, it is not accepted  that  your  return
         there would occasion treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR as
         it is not accepted that you will face the  prospect  of  living  in
         circumstances  falling  below   that   which   is   acceptable   in
         humanitarian protection terms.

         Further to the above, the conclusion is the same  as  that  reached
         within the letter of 22 March 2017 that the country  guidance  case
         law of MOJ & Ors remains applicable and  that  in  the  intervening
         years since your grant of refugee status, the security landscape of
         Somalia has improved fundamentally and durably and  therefore  your
         circumstances upon return to Somalia in respect of your  protection
         concerns would not be such as to place you in need of  humanitarian
         protection or engage your rights under the 1951 Refugee  Convention
         or Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR or Article 15c of the Qualification
         Directive.

         The House of Lords has stated in case of Sivakumaran, that in order
         for fear to be well founded, there must be a reasonable  likelihood
         of the fear being realised, were the applicant to return to his  or
         her home country.

         Further to the reasons given within the letter of 22 March 2017 and
         herein, the Home Office is satisfied that, subsequent to  obtaining
         refugee status in the UK in 2002, you can no  longer,  because  the
         circumstances in connection with which you  were  recognised  as  a
         refugee have ceased to exist, continue to refuse to avail  yourself
         of the protection of the country of nationality.

         In light of the above, Paragraph  338A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         applies which states "A person's  grant  of  refugee  status  under
         paragraph 334 shall be revoked or not renewed if any of  paragraphs
         339A to 339AB apply."  In your particular case, after consideration
         of Article 1C(5) of the 1951 Refugee Convention, Paragraph  339A(v)
         of the Immigration Rules, has now been applied.  This decision  has
         been recorded as determined on the date of this letter.

         As you are no  longer  a  refugee,  you  must  now  surrender  your
         original refugee documents,  specifically  your  grant  of  refugee
         status letter dated 9 May 2002 and the Home Office Travel  Document
         issued to you on 12 September 2011.  If you are unable  to  provide
         these documents, you must tell us why immediately.

         Should you wish to travel in the future, it will be open to you  to
         approach the Embassy of Somalia  in  London  for  the  issue  of  a
         national passport."

 9. Having dealt with the issue of humanitarian  protection,  the  decision
    letter considered the claimant's position by reference to Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  In so far as the claimant's son was concerned, the Secretary
    of State did not consider it would be unduly harsh for him to remain in
    the United Kingdom even though the claimant  had  been  deported.   The
    claimant's step-children were all adults and the Secretary of State did
    not consider that any  protected  family  life  between  them  and  the
    claimant have been shown to exist.  It  was  not  considered  that  the
    existence in the United Kingdom  of  the  claimant's  ex-partner  would
    render the claimant's deportation disproportionate.

10. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard
    at Harmondsworth on 28 September  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gibbs.  She concluded that the claimant's appeal should be  allowed  by
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR, having regard to  the  effect  that
    his removal would have upon his  son,  notwithstanding  the  claimant's
    criminality.  That part of  her  decision  is  not  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State.

11. Notwithstanding what the decision letter had said about the  claimant's
    ability to go to Kismayo, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that
    return to that city would not be "a reasonable or safe option for  the"
    claimant (paragraph 46). As we shall see, that aspect of  her  decision
    was sought to be challenged by the Secretary of State.

12. Before turning to what the First-tier Tribunal Judge had to  say  about
    the alternative of the claimant returning to Mogadishu, it is necessary
    to refer to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MS  (Art  1C(5)  -
    Mogadishu) Somalia [2018]  UKUT  00196  (IAC).   In  that  case,  Upper
    Tribunal Kopieczek considered the case of an individual, who, like  the
    present claimant,  hailed  from  Kismayo  but  who,  according  to  the
    Secretary of State, could now be returned to Mogadishu,  owing  to  the
    change in conditions in that part of Somalia, compared  with  when  the
    individual in question was granted refugee status.

13. In summary, Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  held  that  revocation  of
    refugee status is not possible on the ground that, since the time  when
    the individual was recognised as a refugee, the situation pertaining in
    a part of the country from which the individual came has  changed  such
    that he or she could now live there  without  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution.

14. In our case, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  decided  to  follow  the
    decision in MS:-

         "47. Notwithstanding any consideration of the security situation in
             Mogadishu I am satisfied that the Upper Tribunal  case  of  MS
             (Art 1C(4) - Mogadishu) [2018] UKUT 196 (IAC) (22 March  2018)
             is authority that:

                  "The Secretary  of  State  is  not  entitled  to  cease  a
                  person's refugee status pursuant to Article 1C(5)  of  the
                  Refugee Convention solely on the  basis  of  a  change  in
                  circumstances in one  part  of  the  country  of  proposed
                  return."

         48.  I am therefore satisfied that the respondent  cannot  rely  on
             paragraph 339A(v)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Refugee
             Convention does not cease to  apply  to  apply  [sic]  to  the
             appellant."

15. At paragraph 49 of her decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  held
    that "in any event, I am satisfied that Mogadishu does  not  offer  the
    appellant a safe or reasonable  internal  relocation  option".   In  so
    finding, she had regard to the letter about the  claimant's  case  that
    had been produced by the UNHCR and to the expert report that  had  been
    prepared in respect of the case by Mr Ali.  She also had regard to  the
    findings in MOJ.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge continued:

         "50. Ms Afzal did not dispute the appellant's assertion that he  no
             longer has any family members in Somalia, that he left Somalia
             in 1991 or that  he  has  never  lived  in  Mogadishu.   I  am
             therefore satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  a
             support network of family or friends to whom he could turn  in
             Mogadishu, which is a city with which he is wholly unfamiliar,
             in a country from which he has been absent  for  twenty  seven
             years.  In addition the appellant  is  from  a  minority  clan
             which, despite the [headnote  in  MOJ  regarding  the  changed
             significance of clan membership in Mogadishu] will nonetheless
             place the appellant at a disadvantage in  accordance  with  Mr
             Ali's report:

                  "38. In Mogadishu, the Bajuni have a very  small  presence
                      ....  I would not expect the numbers to be more  than
                      a  few  hundred  ....   Mogadishu's   population   is
                      estimated to be around 2.5 million people therefore a
                      population of a few hundred people constitute a  very
                      small presence in the city.

                  39.  If [the claimant] managed to find any members of  the
                      Bajuni community in Mogadishu and  connect  with  his
                      clan,  he  may  still  be  cut  off  from   accessing
                      accommodation, but just economic reasons, but due  to
                      high levels of mistrust  in  Somali  society.   There
                      used to be  a  culture  of  hospitality  in  Somalia.
                      Prior to 2006 before the  rise  of  terrorist  groups
                      like Al-Shabaab, and there  were  even  foster  care,
                      families, the travellers are new  arrivals,  however,
                      that culture is now gone.  In  the  current  climate,
                      the trust level between strangers is almost at  zero,
                      and nobody would take the risk of taking  a  stranger
                      in ....

                  40.  One must also have someone to act as a guarantor  for
                      them  in  order  to  get  accommodation  anywhere  in
                      Mogadishu...

                  41.  All services  including  water  and  electricity  are
                      private services in Somalia, even in areas over which
                      the  government  exercises  control.   Even  if  [the
                      claimant] could find a Bajuni  family  who  would  be
                      willing  to  accommodate  him  in  the  Hamar   Weyne
                      district, the Bajuni are economically deprived so  he
                      would likely  be  living  without  running  water  or
                      without 24 access to electricity...

                  45.  As a result, [the claimant] would find  it  extremely
                      difficult to access any private lodging in Mogadishu,
                      regardless of the cost, putting him at risk of living
                      in an IDP camp and of homelessness."

17. The judge concluded that the  claimant  remained  entitled  to  refugee
    status and that his deportation would breach Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the
    ECHR.

18. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal.   The  grounds  of
    application to the Upper Tribunal need to be set out in some length:-

         "2.  It is respectfully submitted that the  FTTJ  made  a  material
             error in law in relying on the authority of MS [47 and 48], it
             is contended that the correct approach is that adopted  in  MA
             EWCA Civ 994 with reference to MOJ Somalia CG 2014 UKUT  00442
             and applying this ration the FTTJ was bound to find  that  the
             Appellant would not be entitled to a grant of  refugee  status
             as there is no risk of persecution for a convention reason  if
             returned to Mogadishu.

         3.   In MA EWCA Civ 994 the Court of Appeal held:

                  2.(1)    A cessation decision is the  mirror  image  of  a
                      decision determining refugee status.  By that I  mean
                      that the grounds  for  cessation  do  not  go  beyond
                      verifying whether  the  grounds  for  recognition  of
                      refugee status continue to exist.  Thus, the relevant
                      question is whether there has been a significant  and
                      non-temporary change in  circumstances  so  that  the
                      circumstances which caused the person to be a refugee
                      have ceased to apply and there is no other  basis  on
                      which he would be held to be a refugee.

                  47.  I accept that  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
                      purposes of refugee status, whether under the Refugee
                      Convention or the QD,  if  protection  could  be  too
                      easily ceased while a person was  still  in  need  of
                      international protection or  it  was  not  reasonably
                      clear that the need for  it  had  gone.   That  would
                      hardly  solve  the   problem   of   persecution   and
                      displacement which those instruments are intended  to
                      address.  Equally, as it seems to  me,  there  is  no
                      necessary  reason  why  refugee  status   should   be
                      continued beyond the time when the refugee is subject
                      to the persecution  which  entitled  him  to  refugee
                      status or any other persecution which would result in
                      him being a refugee, or why he should be entitled  to
                      further  protection.   There  should  simply   be   a
                      requirement  for  symmetry  between  the  grant   and
                      cessation of refugee status.

                  49.  Another way of putting the point is that the  Refugee
                      Convention and the QD are not measures  for  ensuring
                      political and judicial reform  in  the  countries  of
                      origin  of  refugees.   The   risks   which   entitle
                      individuals to protection are risks which affect them
                      personally and individually.  It is an individualised
                      approach.  Just as it is no answer to an asylum claim
                      that there is a legal system which might in theory be
                      able to protect them, so conversely  the  absence  of
                      such a  system  is  not  an  answer  to  a  cessation
                      decision  if  it  is  shown  that  the  refugee   has
                      sufficient, lasting protection in other ways or  that
                      the fear which gave rise to the need  for  protection
                      has in any event been superseded and disappeared.

         4.   As per MA EWCA Civ 994, the SHHD [sic] maintains that the test
             for cessation of refugee status mirrors  that  relating  to  a
             grant and is forward looking.  Whilst Article  1C(5)  must  be
             interpreted in ordinary language (sic).  In this  appeal,  the
             risk previously identified for the Appellant (persecution as a
             member of a minority clan Bujani) no longer exists and as such
             there is no need for international protection for a convention
             reason, with the Appellant being able to  internally  relocate
             to Mogadishu, this being addressed at  paragraphs  337-343  of
             MOJ Somalia CF 2014 UKUT 00442.

         5.   It is respectfully submitted that the correct  approach  would
             be for the FTTJ to find that the  Appellant  is  no  longer  a
             refugee should then consider Article 3 and the  possible  risk
             of destitution.  In so far as Article 3 is in issue, the Court
             of Appeal in MA held that Said v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  442
             should be preferred over FY [2017] EWCA Civ 1853 and that  the
             FTTJ should have been  aware  of  this  should  have  directed
             himself to Said 2016 [2016] EWCA Civ 442.

         6.   In Said 2016 [2016] EWCA Civ 442, the Court found  that  there
             is no violation of Article 3 by reason only of a person  being
             returned to  a  country  which  for  economic  reasons  cannot
             provide him with a basic living standards.

                  "26. Paragraph 407(a) to (e) are  directed  to  the  issue
                      that arises under article 15(c) of the  Qualification
                      Directive. Sub-paragraphs (f) and (g)  establish  the
                      role of clan membership in today's Mogadishu, and the
                      current absence of risk from belonging to a  minority
                      clan.   Sub-paragraph  (h)  and  paragraph  408   are
                      concerned, in broad terms,  with  the  ability  of  a
                      returning Somali national to  support  himself.   The
                      conclusion at the end of  paragraph  408  raises  the
                      possibility of a person's circumstances falling below
                      what  "is  acceptable  in   humanitarian   protection
                      terms."  It is, with respect, unclear whether that is
                      a reference back to the definition  of  "humanitarian
                      protection"  arising   from   article   15   of   the
                      Qualification Directive.  These factors do not go  to
                      inform any question under article 15(c). Nor does  it
                      chime with article 15(b), which draws on the language
                      of article 3 of the Convention, because the fact that
                      a person might be returned to  very  deprived  living
                      conditions, could not (save in extreme cases) lead to
                      a conclusion that removal would violate article 3."

         7.   It is also respectfully submitted  that  the  FTTJ  failed  to
             apply the correct approach MOJ &  Ors  Somalia  CG  2014  UKUT
             00442 in that the relevant question  is  would  the  Appellant
             have a realistic prospect of securing a livelihood  on  return
             to Mogadishu, that is not based solely on the availability  of
             support and remittances.

         8.   Therefore even if the Appellant could show that he  would  not
             have access to personal or broader clan support, the burden is
             still with the Appellant to demonstrate why he could not  find
             work, as the evidence from MOJ  refers  to  a  presumption  of
             access to employment.

         9.   It is further evidence from the Country Evidence case of MOJ &
             Ors Somalia CG 2014 UKUT 00442 that those from  the  West  who
             have none or limited experiences of living  in  Mogadishu  are
             not disadvantaged, the FTTJ has failed to address this in  the
             determination with reliance placed on the following paragraphs
             of MOJ:

                  351. Further,  there  is  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
                      identified by Dr Mullen, to the effect that returnees
                      from the  West  may  have  an  advantage  in  seeking
                      employment  in  Mogadishu  over  citizens  who   have
                      remained in the city throughout.  This is said to  be
                      because  such  returnees  are  likely  to  be  better
                      educated  and   considered   more   resourceful   and
                      therefore more  attractive  as  potential  employees,
                      especially where the employer himself or herself  has
                      returned  from  the  diaspora  to  invest  in  a  new
                      business.
                  352. For those  reasons  we  do  not  accept  Dr  Hoehne's
                      evidence that it is only a tiny  elite  that  derives
                      any benefit from the  "economic  boom".   Inevitably,
                      jobs have been created and the evidence discloses  no
                      reason  why  a  returnee  would  face  discriminatory
                      obstacles to competing for such employment. It may be
                      that, like other residents of Mogadishu, he would  be
                      more likely to succeed in accessing a livelihood with
                      the support of a clan or nuclear family.
                  477. Having said that, a long period of absence  from  the
                      city and the fact of having had no  adult  experience
                      of living within it cannot be factors  sufficient  in
                      themselves   to   make   the   prospect   of   return
                      unreasonable or unacceptable because  we  have  found
                      that it may  represent  a  suitable  destination  for
                      relocation  for  Somali  citizens  who  have  had  no
                      previous connection with the city at all.
         10.  Although the appellant appears to be unskilled, the  FTTJ  has
             failed  to  consider  the  prospect  of  unskilled   or   self
             employment, and that the Appellant could seek work in the  low
             skilled sector as highlighted in both MOJ  &  Ors  Somalia  CG
             2014 UJUT 00442 (MOJ and  SSM)  and  AAW  (expert  evidence  -
             weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 00673 (paragraph 59).

         11.  It is of note that the Appellants in MOJ & Ors Somalia CG 2014
             00442 (MOJ and SSM) had both been out of Somalia for in excess
             of ten years it was found that both had not shown good  reason
             as to why they could not obtain at a low level employment with
             an enhanced status of being a  returnee  from  the  West  with
             potential access to the Facilitated Returns  Scheme  that  can
             provide up to �1,500, also being considered at  paragraph  423
             of MOJ & Ors Somalia CG 2014 UKUT  00442  it  is  respectfully
             submitted that this should be sufficient  to  provide  support
             whilst the appellant establishes himself.

         12.  This failure to address the findings in the  Country  Guidance
             case of in MOJ & Ors Somalia CG 2014 UKUT 00442 as to why  the
             Appellant would not  have  a  genuine  prospect  of  obtaining
             employment is a material error in law."

19. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  16  January
    2019.  In granting permission, the Deputy Judge said that  the  "burden
    will be  upon  the  [claimant]  to  show  why  he  cannot  relocate  to
    Mogadishu".

DISCUSSION

(a) Can refugee status be revoked on the basis that the refugee now has  the
ability to relocate internally  within  the  country  of  nationality/former
habitual residence?

20. Before dealing with this first question, it is necessary to address the
    submissions made in respect of whether the  claimant  could  return  to
    Kismayo, which was his home area in  Somalia.   At  paragraph  45,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was categoric that  the  Secretary  of  State
    "does not assert that the [claimant] can return to Kismayo which I find
    is consistent with the unchallenged country expert report of  Abdifatah
    Hassan Ali".  At the hearing before us, Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State  was,  in  fact,  challenging  that  aspect  of  the
    decision.  We find, however, that Mr Jarvis  has  not  made  good  that
    challenge.  There is no suggestion, so far as we are  aware,  that  the
    Presenting Officer before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  advanced  a
    submission that return to Kismayo was part of the Secretary of  State's
    case.  References to the city feature only lightly in the Secretary  of
    State's documentation.  In any event, we agree with Mr  Toal  that  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of application for permission to the Upper
    Tribunal do not raise the issue.

21. The first question, then, is whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    wrong in law to rely upon MS and to hold that,  even  if  the  claimant
    could now reasonably be expected to go to live in Mogadishu, that would
    not entitle the Secretary of State to  revoke  the  claimant's  refugee
    status.

22. Both Mr Jarvis  and  Mr  Toal  made  very  detailed  written  and  oral
    submissions on this issue.  After the hearing, however,  the  Court  of
    Appeal gave judgment in the Secretary of  State's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in MS: [2019] EWCA Civ 1345.  Mr  Jarvis
    and Mr Toal then made brief written submissions in  the  light  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment.

23. In circumstances, it is unnecessary for us to consider the written  and
    oral submissions, made prior to the Court of Appeal's judgment,  except
    to the extent that they might touch upon the issue of  how  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal should proceed in the light of  it
    in cases of this kind.

24. Hamblen LJ gave the leading judgment.   Having  set  out  the  relevant
    international and domestic materials, including the  UNHCR  Guidelines,
    Hamblen LJ set out the relevant authorities:-

         "36. Mr John-Paul Waite for the SSHD submitted that the approach of
             the FTT and the UT is  wrong  in  principle  and  contrary  to
             recent Court of Appeal authority.

         37.  It is wrong in principle because the  absence  of  a  suitable
             place of internal relocation is an integral part of  the  test
             for establishing refugee status and logically the availability
             of such a place should equally be a basis upon  which  refugee
             status can be ceased.

         38.  It is contrary to authority because in the recent case of SSHD
             v MA (Somalia) [2019] 1 WLR 241, this Court held at [2] (Arden
             LJ) that:

                  "...A cessation decision is the mirror image of a decision
                  determining refugee  status.  By  that  I  mean  that  the
                  grounds for cessation do not go beyond  verifying  whether
                  the grounds for recognition of refugee status continue  to
                  exist.  Thus, the relevant question is whether  there  has
                  been   a   significant   and   non-temporary   change   in
                  circumstances so that the circumstances which  caused  the
                  person to be a refugee have ceased to apply and  there  is
                  no other  basis  on  which  he  would  be  held  to  be  a
                  refugee...."

         39.  As Arden LJ further stated at [47]:

                  "....there is  no  necessary  reason  why  refugee  status
                  should be continued beyond the time when  the  refugee  is
                  subject to the persecution which entitled him  to  refugee
                  status or any other persecution which would result in  him
                  being a refugee, or why he should be entitled  to  further
                  protection.  There  should  simply  be  a  requirement  of
                  symmetry  between  the  grant  and  cessation  of  refugee
                  status".

         40.  The Court also held that such a requirement  of  symmetry  was
             consistent  with  the  CJEU  decision  on  the   Qualification
             Directive in  Abdulla  v  Bundesrepublik  Deutschland  (Joined
             Cases C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08 and C-179/08) [2011] QB 46.
             As the CJEU observed in that case at [89]:

                  "At  both  of  those  stages  of  the   examination,   the
                  assessment relates to the same question of whether or  not
                  the established circumstances  constitute  such  a  threat
                  that the person concerned  may  reasonably  fear,  in  the
                  light of his individual situation, that he will in fact be
                  subjected to acts of persecution."

         41.   Although  MA  (Somalia)  was  not  concerned  with   internal
             relocation, it was submitted that the  mirror  image  approach
             applies where, as in  this  case,  the  lack  of  a  place  of
             internal relocation was an integral ground of the decision  to
             recognise  refugee  status.   The  SSHD  contended  that  that
             circumstance has ceased to apply on a durable  basis  and  the
             cessation decision was accordingly lawfully made.

         42.  The status of the UT decision in the present case in the light
             of MA (Somalia) was considered by UT Judge Plimmer in  SSHD  v
             AMA [2019]  UKUT  00011,  an  internal  relocation  case.   As
             reflected in the  headnote,  she  held  that:  "Changes  in  a
             refugee's country of origin affecting only part of the country
             may, in principle, lead to cessation of refugee status, albeit
             it is difficult to see how in  practice  protection  could  be
             said to  be  sufficiently  fundamental  and  durable  in  such
             circumstances".


         43.  In relation to  the  issue  of  principle,  UT  Judge  Plimmer
             stated:

                  "45. All the ingredients in article 1A(2) of  the  Refugee
                      Convention must therefore be met at  both  stages  of
                      the examination: when determining status and  whether
                      to cease that status.   This  commonly  requires  the
                      following: (i) a well-founded  fear  of  persecution;
                      (ii) for reasons relating  to  a  Convention  Reason;
                      (iii) making the person unable or unwilling to  avail
                      himself of the protection of the country.  The  final
                      ingredient is based upon the principle  of  surrogacy
                      and necessarily includes an enquiry as to whether the
                      person can be expected to seek protection in  another
                      part of his country of origin.  The  widely  accepted
                      test is whether the person can be reasonably expected
                      to internally relocate - see  Januzi  v  SSHD  [2006]
                      UKHL 5 at [7-8] and [48-49].

                  46.  The wording  of  article  1C(5)  also  supports  this
                      symmetrical approach. It clearly refers not  just  to
                      "the circumstances in connection with  which  he  has
                      been recognised  as  a  refugee"  having  "ceased  to
                      exist" but also to the person not being able to avail
                      himself "of the protection  of  the  country  of  his
                      nationality".   The   principle   of   surrogacy   is
                      therefore found in both  article  1C(5)  and  article
                      1A(2) of the Refugee Convention.  There is  therefore
                      a prima facie argument that if a person  is  able  to
                      avail himself  of  protection  in  one  part  of  the
                      country  then  (unless  that  protection  lacks   the
                      positive qualities required of  it,  including  being
                      effective / durable / fundamental / significant / non-
                      temporary), they do not meet the refugee  definition,
                      and if they are being considered for  cessation  they
                      are  no  longer  a  refugee.   In  other  words,   if
                      effective protection is available then a person  does
                      not meet the definition of a refugee."

         44.  In relation  to  the  evidential  difficulty  of  establishing
             cessation on  the  basis  of  internal  relocation,  UT  Judge
             Plimmer stated:

                  "47. However, the reality of the  situation  is  that  the
                      expectation that a person can avail  himself  of  the
                      protection  of  another  part  of  his   country   of
                      nationality, i.e. through internal  relocation,  only
                      arises for consideration where it  is  accepted  that
                      there is a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a
                      Convention Reason in the home area of  that  country.
                      It  is  difficult  to  envisage  how  and   in   what
                      circumstances a well-founded fear of persecution  can
                      be  said  to  be  "non-temporary",  "significant"  or
                      "permanently  eradicated"  in   a   country   for   a
                      particular person, wherein it  is  accepted  that  it
                      continues in the person's  home  area  of  that  same
                      country and / or the person cannot safely move around
                      the  country.   The  necessary  requirement  for  the
                      changes to be fundamental and durable is most  likely
                      to be absent. It follows  that  the  availability  of
                      internal relocation is generally  unlikely  to  be  a
                      material consideration when applying article 1C(5) of
                      the Refugee Convention or article 11 of the QD.

                  48.  Although I note the difference in approach  with  the
                      first part of [17] of the UNHCR Cessation Guidelines,
                      in principle there remains a requirement to apply the
                      same refugee definition for both the grant of  status
                      and cessation, and this includes a  consideration  of
                      internal relocation.  However, given  the  nature  of
                      the demanding test required to be met for  cessation,
                      it is difficult to see how in practice  'an  internal
                      relocation case' can meet the required threshold.  To
                      that extent, there is force in the last  sentence  of
                      [17] of the Guidelines that where safety  is  limited
                      to  a  specific  part  of  the  country,  that  would
                      indicate that the changes have not been  fundamental.
                      At [57] of MA Arden LJ  was  prepared  to  treat  the
                      Guidelines as an important text for the  purposes  of
                      interpreting   the   QD   replicating   the   Refugee
                      Convention, but considered [17] of the Guidelines  to
                      merely  address   internal   relocation,   which   is
                      separately dealt with in the QD - see [39]  and  [57]
                      of MA.  The Court of Appeal therefore did not provide
                      any clear view on the  correctness  of  [17]  of  the
                      Guidelines.

                  49.  Changes in the refugee's country of origin  affecting
                      only part of the country may, in principle,  lead  to
                      cessation  of  refugee  status  provided   that   the
                      protection available is sufficiently fundamental  and
                      durable notwithstanding the absence of this in  other
                      parts of the country. It is difficult to see  how  in
                      practice protection could be said to  be  fundamental
                      and durable in these circumstances,  but  it  is  not
                      necessarily impossible (particularly in a very  large
                      country).  In so far as MS states that as a matter of
                      principle, refugee status cannot cease solely on  the
                      basis of a change of circumstances in one part of the
                      country of origin, I disagree.  Whilst  in  principle
                      internal relocation is relevant to whether a  refugee
                      can continue  to  refuse  to  avail  himself  of  the
                      protection of his country of  nationality,  generally
                      speaking or as a matter of practice, it is likely  to
                      be very difficult  to  cease  refugee  status  in  an
                      'internal  relocation  case'.   This  is  because  by
                      necessary implication there will be  a  part  of  the
                      country where  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
                      continues (or  else  internal  relocation  would  not
                      arise) and in such circumstances the requirement that
                      the  change  in  circumstances  be  fundamental   and
                      durable  or  "significant   and   non-temporary"   is
                      unlikely to be met."

         45.  At the hearing of the appeal Mr Stephen Vokes for MS  accepted
             that  the  approach  of  the  UT  in  AMA  was  correct.    He
             accordingly conceded that it was wrong to hold  that  internal
             relocation could not in principle lead to cessation.  However,
             he emphasised and relied upon the  practical  difficulties  of
             showing that there had been  a  sufficiently  fundamental  and
             durable change in circumstances where the change only  affects
             a part of the country, as explained by the UT in AMA.  In this
             connection he also relied upon Article 7 of the  Qualification
             Directive and the requirement there  set  out  for  actors  of
             protection to control "the State or a substantial part of  the
             State".

         46.  Mr Vokes  also  relied  upon  the  need  for  a  "strict"  and
             "restrictive" approach to cessation clauses  for  the  reasons
             set out by the House of Lords in Hoxha & Anr  v  Secretary  of
             State  for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  UKHL  19,  and,  in
             particular, in the judgment of Lord Brown at [63]-[65]:

                  "63. This provision [Article 1C(5)], it shall be borne  in
                      mind, is one calculated, if invoked,  to  redound  to
                      the refugee's disadvantage, not  his  benefit.  Small
                      wonder, therefore, that all the emphasis in paras 112
                      and 135 of the Handbook is  upon  the  importance  of
                      ensuring that his recognised refugee status will  not
                      be taken from him save upon a fundamental  change  of
                      circumstances in his home  country.   As  the  Lisbon
                      Conference put it in para 27  of  their  conclusions:
                      "... the asylum authorities should bear the burden of
                      proof that such changes are  indeed  fundamental  and
                      durable".

                  64.  Many other UNHCR publications are to similar  effect.
                      A single further instance will  suffice,  taken  from
                      the April 1999 Guidelines on the application  of  the
                      cessation clauses:

                           "2.  The  cessation  clauses  set  out  the  only
                               situations in which refugee status  properly
                               and legitimately granted comes  to  an  end.
                               This  means  that  once  an  individual   is
                               determined to be a refugee,  his/her  status
                               is maintained until he/she falls within  the
                               terms of one of the cessation clauses.  This
                               strict approach is important since  refugees
                               should not be subjected to  constant  review
                               of their refugee status.  In addition, since
                               the application of the cessation clauses  in
                               effect operates as a formal loss of  refugee
                               status,  a  restrictive  and   well-balanced
                               approach  should   be   adopted   in   their
                               interpretation."

                  65.  The reason for applying a "strict" and  "restrictive"
                      approach to the cessation clauses in general  and  1C
                      (5) in particular is surely  plain.  Once  an  asylum
                      application has been formally determined and  refugee
                      status officially granted, with all the benefits both
                      under the Convention and  under  national  law  which
                      that carries with it, the refugee has  the  assurance
                      of  a  secure  future  in  the  host  country  and  a
                      legitimate expectation that he will not henceforth be
                      stripped of  this  save  for  demonstrably  good  and
                      sufficient reason.  That  assurance  and  expectation
                      simply does not arise in the  earlier  period  whilst
                      the refugee's claim for asylum is under consideration
                      and before it is granted.  Logically, therefore,  the
                      approach to the grant of refugee status under 1A  (2)
                      does  not  precisely  mirror  the  approach  to   its
                      prospective subsequent withdrawal under 1C (5).""

25. Having  considered  these  authorities,  in  particular  MA  (Somalia),
    Hamblen LJ was categoric in his conclusions:-

         "47. In my judgment, this Court  should  follow  the  mirror  image
             approach endorsed in MA (Somalia), if and in so far as  it  is
             not bound so to do.  It should do so for the reasons  set  out
             in MA (Somalia) and, in particular, because  it  reflects  the
             language of Article 1C(5) of the Convention and Article 11  of
             the Qualification Directive, which  link  cessation  with  the
             continued existence of the  circumstances  which  led  to  the
             recognition of refugee status.  It is also consistent with the
             approach of the CJEU in Abdulla.

         48.  As the House of Lords made clear in Hoxha,  the  mirror  image
             approach is subject to the qualification  that  the  requisite
             "strict" and "restrictive" approach to cessation clauses means
             that it must be shown that  the  change  in  circumstances  is
             fundamental and durable - in the  equivalent  wording  of  the
             Qualification Directive, "significant" and "non-temporary". In
             addition, the burden of proof on all issues  will  be  on  the
             SSHD.

         49.  In summary, in a case in which refugee status has been granted
             because the person cannot reasonably be expected to  relocate,
             a cessation decision may be made if circumstances  change,  so
             as to mean that that person could reasonably  be  expected  to
             relocate, provided that the change in circumstances is, in the
             language of the Qualification Directive, "significant and non-
             temporary".  Helpful guidance in relation to the assessment of
             the reasonableness of internal  relocation  is  given  in  the
             recent decision of this  Court  in  AS  (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD
             [2019] EWCA Civ 873.

         50.  The size of the area of relocation will  be  relevant  to  the
             reasonableness of being expected to relocate there and also to
             whether the change in circumstances is  significant  and  non-
             temporary.  I do  not,  however,  accept  that  there  is  any
             requirement that it be a  substantial  part  of  the  country.
             Article 7, which is relied upon by Mr Vokes, is concerned with
             the different issue of the circumstances  in  which  non-State
             parties  or  organisations  may  be  regarded  as  actors   of
             protection. In that context it  is  understandable  that  they
             should be required to be in control of a substantial  part  of
             the State.

         51.  I also have reservations about the generalised statements made
             by UT Judge Plimmer in  AMA  that  it  will  be  difficult  in
             practice  for  a  change  in  circumstances  in  a  place   of
             relocation to  be  sufficiently  fundamental  and  durable  or
             "significant and non-temporary" for  there  to  be  cessation.
             That may be so in some cases, but it will all  depend  on  the
             evidence in any particular case and one should not generalise.



         52.  I recognise that this involves differing from the approach set
             out in paragraph 17 of the UNCHR Guidelines in so far as  that
             states that  "changes  in  the  refugee's  country  of  origin
             affecting only part of the territory should not, in principle,
             lead to cessation of refugee status".  I accept,  however,  as
             the  Guidelines  state,  that  "not  being  able  to  move  or
             establish oneself  freely  in  the  country"  is  relevant  to
             whether  the  change  in  circumstances  is  fundamental,   or
             "significant" and "non-temporary".

         53.  It follows that the FTT and the UT erred  in  law  in  holding
             that  the  availability  of  internal  relocation  cannot   in
             principle lead to a cessation of refugee status and  the  case
             will have to be remitted to consider whether or not it does so
             on the facts in this case."

26. For his part, Underhill LJ considered the "mirror image" approach to be
    "both fair and principled" (paragraph 82).  According to him:-

          "82.    ... the fact that the refugee has left their home  country
              and found safety in the  country  of  refuge,  perhaps  years
              previously, must be taken into account; but, so  far  as  the
              Convention issues are concerned, the way that that is done is
              not by changing the basic criteria for protection but by  the
              requirement  for  a  specially  strict  approach   to   their
              application, with the burden on the Secretary  of  State,  as
              enjoined in Hoxha (see para. 48 of  Hamblen  LJ's  judgment).
              It may also of  course,  separately,  and  depending  on  the
              particular facts, give the refugee grounds for  arguing  that
              his or her removal is in breach of their rights under article
              8 of the ECHR."

27. At paragraph 83, Underhill LJ specifically rejected the  submission  of
    Mr Vokes (on behalf of MS) that the proposed safe area of  the  country
    in question had to be a  "substantial"  part  of  it.   He  noted  that
    whilst, simply in terms of Mogadishu's land area,  that  was  no  doubt
    true "in other respects it is plainly not: on the contrary, it  is  the
    capital and the  largest  city  in  the  country  and  the  home  to  a
    substantial part of its population".

28. Newey LJ agreed with both judgments.

29. In his submissions to us, Mr Toal laid emphasis upon  the  opinions  of
    the House of Lords in R  (Hoxha)  v  Special  Adjudicator  and  Another
    [2005] UKHL 19, as well as pointing out that MA (Somalia) had  not,  in
    fact, been concerned with internal relocation.  So  far  as  Hoxha  was
    concerned, Mr Toal drew particular attention to the  following  passage
    on the opinion of Lord Brown:-

         "63. This provision, it shall be borne in mind, is one  calculated,
             if invoked, to redound to the refugee's disadvantage, not  his
             benefit. Small wonder, therefore, that  all  the  emphasis  in
             paras 112 and 135 of the Handbook is upon  the  importance  of
             ensuring that his recognised refugee status will not be  taken
             from him save upon a fundamental change  of  circumstances  in
             his home country.  As the Lisbon Conference put it in para  27
             of their conclusions: " ... the asylum authorities should bear
             the burden of proof that such changes are  indeed  fundamental
             and durable".

         64.  Many other UNHCR publications are to similar effect. A  single
             further instance will  suffice,  taken  from  the  April  1999
             Guidelines on the application of the cessation clauses:

                  "2.  The cessation clauses set out the only situations  in
                      which  refugee  status  properly   and   legitimately
                      granted comes to an end.  This  means  that  once  an
                      individual is determined to  be  a  refugee,  his/her
                      status is maintained until he/she  falls  within  the
                      terms of one of the cessation  clauses.  This  strict
                      approach is important since refugees  should  not  be
                      subjected to constant review of their refugee status.
                      In addition, since the application of  the  cessation
                      clauses in  effect  operates  as  a  formal  loss  of
                      refugee  status,  a  restrictive  and   well-balanced
                      approach should be adopted in their interpretation."

         65.  The reason for applying a "strict" and "restrictive"  approach
             to the cessation clauses in general and 1C (5)  in  particular
             is surely plain.  Once an asylum application has been formally
             determined and refugee status officially granted, with all the
             benefits both under the  Convention  and  under  national  law
             which that carries with it, the refugee has the assurance of a
             secure future in the host country and a legitimate expectation
             that he will not henceforth  be  stripped  of  this  save  for
             demonstrably good and sufficient reason.  That  assurance  and
             expectation simply does not arise in the earlier period whilst
             the refugee's claim for  asylum  is  under  consideration  and
             before it is granted.  Logically, therefore, the  approach  to
             the grant of refugee status under 1A (2)  does  not  precisely
             mirror the approach to its prospective  subsequent  withdrawal
             under 1C (5).

         66.  That said, however, it would seem to me  appropriate  that  in
             the initial determination of an asylum claim under 1A (2)  the
             decision-maker, in a case where plainly the applicant fled his
             home country as a genuine refugee from Convention persecution,
             should not too readily reach the view that he could now safely
             be returned to it.  ..."

30. This passage of the opinion is, however, plainly obiter.  The issue  to
    be decided by the House of Lords in Hoxha was whether Article 1C(5)  of
    the Refugee Convention had any application until it was  invoked  by  a
    state in order to withdraw refugee status.  The House held that it  did
    not and that, accordingly, the proviso to Article 1C(5) could not apply
    to an asylum seeker whose  claim  under  Article  1A(2)  had  not  been
    determined.

31. In no sense, therefore, can Hoxha be  regarded  as  binding  authority,
    which the Court of Appeal in MS (Somalia) should have followed, to  the
    effect that the cessation provision of Article 1C(5) must be  construed
    in the way set out in the UNHCR Guidelines.

32.  In  his  post-hearing  submissions  of  8  August,  on  the  issue  of
    cessation/revocation, Mr Toal submitted that it:

     "is important to note that no  argument  against  internal  relocation
    featuring in the cessation assessment was  positively  put  forward  in
    MS (Somalia).  Indeed, the point was conceded by the respondent to the
    appeal (see para 45 of MS where Counsel for the asylum seeker "conceded
    that it was wrong to hold that internal relocation could  in  principle
    lead to cessation")".

33. This leads Mr Toal to submit that MS "is  not  binding  authority  and
    provides  this  tribunal  limited  assistance   in   determining"   the
    claimant's appeal.

34. The fact that a legal issue may be conceded before a court does not, in
    any sense, affect the fact that, if that issue is, or  forms  part  of,
    the ratio of the resulting judgment of the court, the matter  has  been
    authoritatively  decided  by  that  court.    If,   applying   ordinary
    principles of stare decisis, the judgment would be binding on  a  lower
    court or tribunal, the fact  that  the  concession  was  made  will  be
    immaterial.

35.  Any other consequence would,  manifestly,  be  intensely  problematic.
    If,  for  example,  in  accordance  with  his   or   her   professional
    obligations, Counsel concedes a legal  issue  that  in  their  view  is
    unarguable, it would be bizarre if, by reason of that  concession,  the
    resulting judgment were to be deprived of the authority that  it  would
    otherwise have. A "bad" view of the law may otherwise be perpetuated.

36. We accept that the making of such a concession might in  practice  mean
    the court  is  not  presented  with  the  full  range  of  authorities,
    including those that might be binding upon it,  with  the  result  that
    there is a risk of the resulting judgment being per incuriam. But  that
    is not the position here. As we have explained, Hoxha was  not  such  a
    binding authority.

37. In MS, the court did not,  in  any  event,  regard  the  concession  as
    excusing it  from  the  need  to  explain,  in  some  detail,  why  the
    concession was rightly made.  That emerges plainly from  the  judgments
    of Hamblen LJ and Underhill LJ.

38.  It is also necessary to observe that the court in MS was well aware of
    the fact that the respondent in MA (Somalia) was not a person  who  was
    said to be able to avail himself of internal relocation.  This is clear
    from paragraph 47, where Hamblen LJ said that "this court should follow
    the mirror image approach endorsed in MA (Somalia), if and in so far as
    it is not bound to do so" (our emphasis).

39. In conclusion, we are bound by the judgments in MS  to  hold  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in the present appeal was  wrong  in  law  to
    conclude that the Secretary of State could not  revoke  the  claimant's
    refugee status by reason of the fact that there was a part  of  Somalia
    to which the claimant could  now  reasonably  be  expected  to  return.
    Although it is, of course, unnecessary to do so, we  would  merely  add
    that this would have been our conclusion in any event.

(b) Is MOJ & Ors  determinative  of  whether  humanitarian  conditions  upon
return to Mogadishu would breach the claimant's rights under  Article  3  of
the ECHR?

40. At the end of her decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge held,  as  we
    have already seen, that the claimant's deportation would be  in  breach
    of, inter alia, Article 2 (right to life) and Article 3 (prohibition on
    torture/inhuman  degrading  treatment  or  punishment)  of  the   ECHR.
    Neither of these Articles features expressly, however,  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's analysis.

41. We are, accordingly, forced to infer  that,  at  least  in  so  far  as
    Article 3 is concerned, the First-tier Tribunal Judge made the  finding
    that it would not be "a safe or reasonable internal relocation  option"
    for the claimant to go to Mogadishu, on the basis that he  would  there
    face a real risk of Article 3 harm.  In doing so, we further infer that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  drew  upon  the  following  statement,
    contained in the country guidance decision of MOJ:-

         "(xii)   The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those
                who originate from Mogadishu that may now  generally  return
                to live in the city without being subjected  to  an  Article
                15C risk or facing a real risk of destitution.  On the other
                hand, relocation to Mogadishu for a  person  of  a  minority
                clan with no formal links to the city, no  access  to  funds
                and no other form of  clan,  family  or  social  support  is
                unlikely to be realistic as, in  the  absence  of  means  to
                establish a home and some form of ongoing financial  support
                there will be a real risk of having no  alternative  but  to
                live in makeshift accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where
                there is a real possibility of having to live in  conditions
                that will fall below acceptable humanitarian standards."

42. We reject Mr Toal's suggestion that the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    sought permission to appeal against the Article  3  conclusion  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  As can be seen from the  grounds  which  we
    have set out above, the issue of Article 3 was at the forefront of  the
    Secretary of State's criticisms  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In particular, the grounds emphasised the judgments of
    the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v
    Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442.  The grounds contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should have "directed" herself to this case.

43. The claimant in that case was a convicted rapist, whom the Secretary of
    State wished to deport as  a  foreign  criminal.   The  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded the claimant would be at risk of finding  himself  destitute,
    if returned to Mogadishu, and would therefore be likely to end up in  a
    camp for internally displaced persons (an "IDP" camp), where, according
    to the country guidance in MOJ, conditions would be very poor.   Having
    regard to the particular  circumstances  of  the  claimant,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that his removal would violate Article 3.

44. In holding that the claimant's mental health condition was such that he
    faced a real risk of Article 3 harm, if returned to Somalia, the  court
    found that the Upper Tribunal had erred.  It had failed  to  apply  the
    very high threshold that the Strasbourg  Court  had  determined  to  be
    applicable in cases of this kind: D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 43;
    N v United Kingdom (2008) 47 EHRR 39 (paragraphs 14, 18 and 19).

45. So far as concerned the country guidance in MOJ, Burnett LJ (as he then
    was)  noted  paragraph  407  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision.   In
    particular, the guidance stated that a person  returning  to  Mogadishu
    after a period of absence would look to any nuclear family, as well  as
    clan members, in seeking help with re-establishing themselves  in  that
    city.  Amongst the factors to be considered  were  length  of  absence;
    family or clan association; financial resources; prospects of  securing
    a livelihood; remittances from abroad; and means of support during time
    spent in the United Kingdom.  As a general matter, the  Upper  Tribunal
    considered that it "will be for the person facing return  to  Mogadishu
    to  explain  why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access   the   economic
    opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the   "economic   boom",
    especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are taking
    jobs at the expense of those who had never been away".

46. The Upper Tribunal then said this:-

         "408.    It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family
                support who will not  be  in  receipt  of  remittances  from
                abroad and who have no real prospect of securing access to a
                livelihood on return who will face the prospect of living in
                circumstances falling below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
                humanitarian protection terms."

47. Burnett LJ held as follows:-

         "26. ... The conclusion at the end  of  paragraph  408  raises  the
             possibility of a person's circumstances falling below what "is
             acceptable in humanitarian  protection  terms."  It  is,  with
             respect, unclear whether that  is  a  reference  back  to  the
             definition of "humanitarian protection" arising  from  article
             15 of the Qualification Directive. These factors do not go  to
             inform any question under article 15(c).  Nor  does  it  chime
             with article 15(b), which draws on the language of  article  3
             of the Convention, because the fact that  a  person  might  be
             returned to very deprived living conditions, could  not  (save
             in extreme cases) lead to  a  conclusion  that  removal  would
             violate article 3.

         27.   The  Luxembourg  Court   considered   article   15   of   the
             Qualification Directive in  Elgafaji  v  Staatssecretaris  van
             Justitie [2009] 1 WLR 2100 and in particular  whether  article
             15(c) provided protection beyond that afforded by article 3 of
             the Convention.   The  answer  was  yes,  but  in  passing  it
             confirmed that article 15(b) was a restatement of  article  3.
             At para [28] it said:

                  "In that regard, while the  fundamental  right  guaranteed
                  under Article 3 of the ECHR  forms  part  of  the  general
                  principles  of  Community  law,  observance  of  which  is
                  ensured by the  Court,  and  while  the  case-law  of  the
                  European Court of Human Rights is taken into consideration
                  in interpreting the scope of that right in  the  Community
                  legal  order,  it  is,  however,  Article  15(b)  of   the
                  Directive which corresponds, in essence, to Article  3  of
                  the ECHR. By contrast, Article 15(c) of the Directive is a
                  provision, the content of which is different from that  of
                  Article 3 of the ECHR, and  the  interpretation  of  which
                  must, therefore, be carried  out  independently,  although
                  with due  regard  for  fundamental  rights,  as  they  are
                  guaranteed under the ECHR."

         28.   In  view  of  the  reference  in  the  paragraph  immediately
             preceding para 407 to the UNHCR evidence, the factors in paras
             407(h)  and  408  are  likely  to  have  been  introduced   in
             connection  with  internal  flight  or   internal   relocation
             arguments, which was a factor identified in para 1 setting out
             the scope of the issues before UTIAC.  Whilst  they  may  have
             some relevance in a search for whether a  removal  to  Somalia
             would give rise to a violation of article 3 of the Convention,
             they cannot be understood as a surrogate for an examination of
             the circumstances to determine whether  such  a  breach  would
             occur. I am unable to accept that if a  Somali  national  were
             able to bring himself within the rubric of para 408, he  would
             have established that his  removal  to  Somalia  would  breach
             article 3  of  the  Convention.  Such  an  approach  would  be
             inconsistent with the domestic  and  Convention  jurisprudence
             which at para 34  UTIAC  expressly  understood  itself  to  be
             following.

         29.  Having set out its guidance, UTIAC  then  turned  to  consider
             IDPs, about which each of the experts had given some evidence.
             It recognised that the label  was  problematic  because  there
             were individuals who are considered  as  internally  displaced
             persons who have settled in  a  new  part  of  Somalia  in  "a
             reasonable standard of accommodation" and with access to food,
             remittances from abroad or an  independent  livelihood.  UTIAC
             considered that the position would be  different  for  someone
             obliged to live in an IDP camp,  the  conditions  of  some  of
             which "are appalling", para 411. It continued by quoting  from
             evidence of armed attacks on IDP camps, of  sexual  and  other
             gender  based  violence  and  the  forcible   recruitment   of
             internally displaced children into violence,  albeit  that  it
             did not accept the evidence it quoted.  UTIAC  also  mentioned
             overcrowding, poor health conditions and (ironically) that the
             economic improvements in Mogadishu were leading  to  evictions
             from IDP camps in urban centres with vulnerable victims  being
             unable to seek refuge elsewhere.

         ...

         31.  I entirely accept that some of the observations  made  in  the
             course of the discussion of IDP camps may be taken to  suggest
             that if a returning Somali national can show that he is likely
             to end up having to establish himself in  an  IDP  camp,  that
             would be sufficient to engage the  protection  of  article  3.
             Yet such a stark proposition of  cause  and  effect  would  be
             inconsistent  with  the  article  3   jurisprudence   of   the
             Strasbourg Court and binding authority of the domestic courts.
             In my judgment the position is accurately stated in para  422.
             That  draws  a   proper   distinction   between   humanitarian
             protection and article 3 and recognises  that  the  individual
             circumstances of the person concerned must be considered.   An
             appeal to article 3 which suggests that the  person  concerned
             would face impoverished conditions of  living  on  removal  to
             Somalia should, as the Strasbourg Court indicated in Sufi  and
             Elmi at para 292, be viewed by reference to the test in the  N
             case.  Impoverished conditions which were the direct result of
             violent activities may be viewed differently  as  would  cases
             where the risk suggested is of direct violence itself.

         Conclusion

         32.  In para 19 above, I have expressed  my  conclusion  that  AS's
             circumstances are not such as could preclude  his  removal  to
             Somalia on article 3 grounds.  I should add that I also accept
             the submission advanced by Miss  Anderson  that  the  evidence
             could not, in any event, support a finding  of  fact  that  AS
             would find himself living in an IDP  camp.   The  prospect  of
             employment,  some  clan  support  and  the   availability   of
             remittances suggests that, despite his depression and PTSD, AS
             would have the financial wherewithal to establish  himself  in
             Mogadishu."

48. Mr Toal submits Burnett LJ's  conclusion  that  MOJ  does  not  provide
    support for the proposition that living in an IDP camp would give  rise
    to a generalised real risk to Article 3 harm,  was,  in  fact,  obiter.
    This is because, as we have just seen,  at  paragraph  32,  Burnett  LJ
    accepted the submission advanced by Counsel for the Secretary of  State
    that, on the evidence, the claimant would not find  himself  living  in
    such a camp.

49. Whilst, strictly speaking, Mr Toal may be right, the fact of the matter
    is that Burnett LJ (with whom the other members of  the  court  agreed)
    went into considerable detail in explaining what,  properly  construed,
    the Upper Tribunal's findings in MOJ in fact were  on  the  subject  of
    conditions in IDP camps.  His conclusion - that the Upper  Tribunal  in
    MOJ did not find, as country guidance, that a person who found  himself
    in an IDP camp was thereby likely to face Article 3 harm (having regard
    to the high threshold established by D v United Kingdom and N v  United
    Kingdom) - is, with respect, in any event correct.  So  much  was  made
    clear by Hamblen LJ at paragraphs 76 to 78 of MS (Somalia).

50. As with the previous issue, Mr Toal, in his  post-hearing  submissions,
    points out that Counsel in MS (Somalia) conceded the correctness of the
    findings in Said.  Our response is the same as in paragraph 34 above.

51. It is, however, necessary to engage with Mr Toal's submission regarding
    the present state of the country guidance  on  Somalia.  Mr  Toal  laid
    particular emphasis upon the findings of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    country guidance case of AMM and Others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;
    returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC).

52. For present purposes, the  essence  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance findings in AMM can be summarised as  follows.   The  Tribunal
    differed from the factual findings of the Strasbourg Court in Sufi  and
    Elmi v the United Kingdom [2011] ECHR 1045, which  had  held  that  the
    actions of the then warring parties had been the predominant course  of
    the  humanitarian  crisis  then  pertaining  in  southern  and  central
    Somalia, which meant the high threshold of Article 3 harm as  explained
    in D v United Kingdom and N v United Kingdom did not need  to  be  met.
    The Upper Tribunal nevertheless held that there was, at the  time  with
    which it was dealing, a generalised Article 3 risk, which met that high
    threshold, primarily because of the drought and resulting famine  which
    were then present in southern and central Somalia.

53. This is apparent from the following paragraphs:-

         "474.    We have considered in Part H  of  this  determination  the
             judgment of the ECtHR at [278] to [283] of Sufi and  Elmi  and
             its use of MSS v Belgium and  Greece.   In  essence,  the  use
             which the ECtHR made of that case was that because Greece  was
             responsible  for  the  Article  3  infringement  on  its   own
             territory, (not least because it had  detained  the  applicant
             but also because of the way of life to  which  it  effectively
             condemned  him  after  release),  there  was  no  need,   when
             assessing whether Belgium had breached Article 3  by  removing
             the applicant to Greece, to apply the "very exceptional"  test
             or standard found in the case of N v United Kingdom.
         475. At [282] of Sufi & Elmi, the Court found  that  if  "the  dire
             humanitarian  conditions  in  Somalia  were  solely  or   even
             predominantly attributable to poverty or to the  state's  lack
             of resources to deal with a  naturally  occurring  phenomenon,
             such as drought, the test in N v United Kingdom may well  have
             been considered  to  be  the  appropriate  one".   The  Court,
             however, found that the drought was only a contributory factor
             to the humanitarian crisis, which was "primarily  due  to  the
             direct and indirect actions of the parties to the conflict".
         476. As we have already held, whilst we consider it right  to  have
             close regard to the Court's findings of fact, to which it then
             applied its jurisprudence, we are in no sense bound by section
             2 of the 1998 Act or its attendant domestic  jurisprudence  to
             make the same findings of fact.
         477. On the evidence before us, we conclude  that  it  is  not  the
             actions of the parties to the conflict which have  caused  the
             state of famine  in  southern  and  central  Somalia  and  the
             present international humanitarian  crisis  but,  rather,  the
             worst drought there has  been  for  60  years.   Although  the
             effects of the drought have been noticeable for some time, and
             discussed in previous country guidance cases, the  predominant
             factor behind the decision of families to  leave  their  homes
             and trek long distances, in often appalling conditions, either
             to Mogadishu or to neighbouring countries,  has  been  because
             their livestock have perished, and their  subsistence  farming
             is no longer sufficient to support them.  It is impossible  to
             accept the suggestion that the parties to  the  conflict  have
             caused a breakdown in  infrastructure,  which  has  led  these
             families to leave.
         ...
         480. This does not, however, mean that,  because  they  are  not  a
             predominant cause, the direct  and  indirect  actions  of  the
             parties to the conflict fall to be  left  out  of  account  in
             deciding whether the humanitarian conditions in  southern  and
             central Somalia are such as to bring Article 3 into play.   On
             the contrary, as we have already indicated,  it  seems  to  us
             that those actions have a very real role in the assessment  of
             whether, in terms of the law as set out in N v United Kingdom,
             the present situation is one of those "very exceptional cases"
             in which humanitarian conditions trigger Article  3.   Looking
             at the evidence in this holistic way, we find that the present
             situation in southern and central Somalia is, indeed,  one  of
             those "very exceptional cases".
         ...
         486. Our conclusion on the humanitarian position  in  southern  and
             central Somalia (excluding Mogadishu) is as follows.  Like the
             ECtHR at [296] of Sufi & Elmi (but by a  different  route)  we
             have concluded that as a general matter a returnee  who  would
             find themselves in an IDP camp, following a return to southern
             and central Somalia at the present time, would be at real risk
             of exposure to treatment contrary to Article 3 on  account  of
             the humanitarian conditions there.
         ...
         490. Finally, it is necessary to make it clear that the generalised
             Article 3 risk, which exists  by  reason  of  the  famine,  is
             likely to be temporary in duration.  The international  effort
             seen in the past months  has  undoubtedly  begun  to  make  an
             impact; and it is to be hoped  and  expected  that,  once  the
             dangers of the  rainy  season  are  passed,  the  humanitarian
             position  will  reach  the  point  where  the  exceptional  "N
             situation" is over.  As  we  have  said  in  relation  to  the
             conflict in Mogadishu, judicial fact-finders will need to have
             close regard to whether the evidence shows a sufficient change
             to depart from our findings on this  particular  issue.   Even
             then, however, absent some  more  fundamental  change  in  the
             picture, there are still likely to be  Article  3  issues  if,
             notwithstanding the end of the famine, the potential  returnee
             is still reasonably likely to end up  at  the  bottom  of  the
             socio-economic ladder in an IDP camp."
54. Although Mr Toal attempted, with his  customary  skill,  to  rely  upon
    extracts from the country guidance decision in MOJ  in  order  to  show
    that that decision had not, in fact, superseded the above  findings  in
    AMM, it is, in our view, plain on any full  reading  of  MOJ  that  the
    Upper Tribunal in that case was well aware that the drought conditions,
    which had led to a UN-recognised famine in rural  areas  and  parts  of
    Mogadishu in 2011, no  longer  pertained.   The  nature  of  the  armed
    struggle was also markedly different.

55. We therefore agree with Mr  Jarvis's  submissions  on  this  issue  and
    respectfully decline to follow those of Mr Toal.  The largely naturally-
    caused events that led the Upper Tribunal in AMM to find that the  high
    threshold for Article 3 harm, as regards conditions in IDP  camps,  had
    been met, no longer applied at the time of MOJ.  Given  that  there  is
    nothing in MOJ or anywhere else that we have seen which suggests  human
    agency is responsible for the generalised conditions faced in IDP camps
    (as opposed to instances of specific harm), that high  threshold  needs
    to be met.  Insofar as MOJ might have been read to  suggest  otherwise,
    or insofar as it might otherwise be read as  indicating  a  generalised
    risk of Article 3 harm, Burnett LJ's  judgment  cogently  explains  why
    that is wrong.   Irrespective  of  whether  his  judgment  is  formally
    binding on us, it  is  fully-reasoned  and  compelling  and  should  be
    followed. In our view, it will be an error of law for a judge to refuse
    to do so.

56. We are reinforced in this conclusion by MI (Palestine) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1782.  In  his  judgment,
    Flaux LJ held that Burnett LJ in Said "evidently  considered  that  the
    country guidance case [viz MOJ] showed that the conditions in  Somalia,
    although harsh, could  no  longer  be  attributed  to  the  direct  and
    indirect actions of the parties to the former conflict so  that  the  N
    Test applied to the applicant's case and  he  could  not  satisfy  that
    test, hence the Secretary of State's appeal succeeded" (paragraph  18).



57. Mr Toal submitted that, in relation to paragraph 31 of Said, there  was
    "no  inconsistency  between  the  requirement  to  conduct  a  properly
    individualised assessment of an  applicant's  particular  circumstances
    and recognition that some predicaments shared by large groups of people
    violate the Article 3 rights of all the members of the group".  In this
    regard, Mr Toal relied upon the judgment of  the  Strasbourg  Court  in
    Salah Sheekh v the Netherlands (2207) App 1948/04.  In that  case,  the
    ECtHR held that a person who belonged to Asharaf clan would,  as  such,
    be at real risk of Article 3 ill-treatment and it was  unnecessary  for
    him or her to show any further reasons why, as an individual, he or she
    might be at risk.

58. Whilst this is, of course, correct,  it  does  not  carry  the  present
    claimant's case any further.  As a person who may be in  an  IDP  camp,
    the claimant would not, for the reasons we have given, be  as  such  at
    real risk of Article 3 harm.  In order to establish the  risk  of  such
    harm he would, therefore, have to show that his personal  circumstances
    meant he reached the requisite threshold.

59. Finally under this heading, for completeness we need to deal  with  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision to allow the appeal on  Article  2
    (right to life) grounds.  Just as her reasoning on Article 3 has had to
    be heavily inferred, we consider that her conclusion on Article  2  has
    to be treated as an aspect of her  (legally  erroneous)  reliance  upon
    paragraph (xii) of the country guidance in MOJ, as set out in paragraph
    49 of her decision.   We  therefore  conclude  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's challenge properly encompasses the judge's decision on  Article
    2.  Her decision to allow the appeal on Article 2 and Article 3 grounds
    is wrong in law, for the reasons we have set out above.

(c) Reasonableness of relocation to Mogadishu

60. On the issue of internal relocation, paragraph  49  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision does not require the inferential approach  we
    have had to apply in the case of Articles 2 and 3.  It is plain on  the
    face of the paragraph that, whatever else the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    may have been doing, she was considering, in terms, whether it would be
    "reasonable" for the claimant to relocate internally to Mogadishu.

61. Again, Mr Toal submits that the Secretary of State has  not  challenged
    this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  On any proper
    reading of the Secretary of State's  grounds,  however,  that  must  be
    wrong.  The grounds point out,  in  some  detail,  how  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is said to have ignored  the  question  of  whether  the
    claimant would "have a realistic prospect of securing a  livelihood  on
    return to Mogadishu, that is not based solely on  the  availability  of
    support  and  remittances".   Although  the  claimant  appeared  to  be
    unskilled, the grounds submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    "has failed to consider the prospect of unskilled or self  employment".
    Here, and  elsewhere,  reference  was  made  to  the  country  guidance
    findings in MOJ.  It was pointed out that the  appellants  in  MOJ  had
    been out of Somalia for in excess of ten years but both were found  not
    to have shown good reason as to why they could not  obtain  "low  level
    employment with an enhanced status of being a returnee  from  the  West
    with potential access to the Facilitate Return Scheme".

62.  The  fact  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's   findings   on
    reasonableness of internal relocation were under challenge  is  further
    made plain by the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge's  grant  of  permission,
    which, as previously noted, emphasised that the "burden  will  be  upon
    the [claimant] to show why he cannot relocate to Mogadishu".

63. The position that, in a revocation of refugee status case,  the  burden
    lies on the Secretary of State to show that internal  relocation  would
    be unreasonable and not unduly harsh does not, we find, affect the fact
    that the judge's findings were properly challenged by the Secretary  of
    State and that permission to bring that challenge has been  granted  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  The question, accordingly, is whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has erred in law on this matter.

64. We find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  failed  in  law  to
    undertake a proper analysis of the claimant's position in Mogadishu, so
    as to determine whether it would be unduly harsh and to be expected  to
    live there.

65. Given that internal relocation to Mogadishu  has,  since  MOJ,  been  a
    realistic possibility in general terms; and  since  -  subject  to  the
    requirements  of  "significant"  and  "non-temporary"  change   -   the
    possibility  of  internal  relocation  has  now  been   authoritatively
    established as  relevant  in  deciding  whether  an  individual  should
    continue to be treated as a  refugee,  it  may  be  helpful  to  remind
    ourselves of the law on internal relocation.

66. In R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ex  parte  Robinson
    [1998] QB 929, the Court of Appeal said:-

         "In determining whether it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
         claimant to relocate internally,  a  decision-maker  will  have  to
         consider all the circumstances of the case, against  the  backcloth
         that the issue is whether the claimant is entitled to the status of
         refugee.  Various tests have been suggested.  For example,  (a)  if
         as a practical matter (whether for financial, logistical  or  other
         good reason) the "safe" part  of  the  country  is  not  reasonably
         accessible; (b) if the claimant  is  required  to  encounter  great
         physical danger in travelling there or staying there; (c) if he  or
         she is required to undergo undue hardship in  travelling  there  or
         staying there; (d) if the quality of the internal protection  fails
         to meet basic norms of civil, political  and  socio-economic  human
         rights.  So far as the last of these considerations  is  concerned,
         the preamble to the Convention shows that the  contracting  parties
         were concerned to uphold the  principle  that  human  being  should
         enjoy fundamental rights and freedoms without  discrimination.   In
         the Thirunavukkarasu case,  109D.L.R.(4th)  682,  687,  Linden  JA,
         giving the judgment of the Federal Court of Canada said:-

             "stated in another way for clarity  ...  would  it  be  unduly
             harsh to expect this person, who is being  persecuted  in  one
             part of his country, to move to another less hostile  part  of
             the country before seeking refugee status abroad?"

         He went on to observe that while a claimant should not be compelled
         to cross battle lines or hideout n  an  isolated  region  of  their
         country, like a cave in the mountains, a desert  or  a  jungle,  it
         would not be enough for them to say  that  they  do  not  like  the
         weather in a safe area, or that they have no friends  or  relatives
         there, or that they may not be able to find suitable work there."

67. In Januzi and Another v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2006] UKHL 5, the House of Lords held that this country's law and  the
    interpretation of the Refugee Convention should not follow that of  the
    New Zealand Court of Appeal which, in Butler v Attorney General  [1999]
    NZAR 205, held that "meaningful national state protection which can  be
    genuinely  accessed  requires  provision  of  basic  norms  of   civil,
    political  and  socio-economic  rights"  (paragraph  32).   The  House,
    instead, laid emphasis on the following passage from  UNHCR  Guidelines
    in International Protection of 23 July 2003:-

         "Economic survival

         The socio-economic conditions in the proposed area will be relevant
         in this part of the analysis.  If the situation is  such  that  the
         claimant  will  be  unable  to  earn  a   living   or   to   access
         accommodation, or where medical  care  cannot  be  provided  or  is
         clearly inadequate, the area may not be a  reasonable  alternative.
         It  would  be  unreasonable,  including,  from   a   human   rights
         prospective, to expect  a  person  to  relocate  to  face  economic
         destitution or existence  below  at  least  an  adequate  level  of
         subsistence.  At the other end of the spectrum, a  simple  lowering
         of living standard or worsening  of  economic  status  may  not  be
         sufficient to reject  the  proposed  area  as  unreasonable.   ..."
         (paragraph 20).

68. The House also approved a passage from H. Storey "The  internal  flight
    alternative   test:   the   jurisprudence   re-examined"   (1998)    10
    International  Journal  of  Refugee  Law,  499;  in   particular,   the
    following:-

         "Bearing in mind the frequency with which  decision-makers  suspect
         certain asylum seekers to be simply economic migrants, it is useful
         to examine the relevance to IFA claims of  socio-economic  factors.
         Again, terminology differs widely, but  there  seems  to  be  broad
         agreement that if life for the individual claimant in an IFA  would
         involve economic annihilation, utter destitution or existence below
         a bare subsistence level (existenzminimum)" or denied "decent means
         of subsistence" that would be unreasonable.  On the  other  end  of
         the spectrum a simple lowering of living standards or worsening  of
         economic status would not.  What must be shown to be lacking is the
         real possibility to  survive  economically,  given  the  particular
         circumstances of the  individual  concerned  (language,  knowledge,
         education, skills, previous stay or employment there,  local  ties,
         sex,   civil   status,   age   and    life    experience,    family
         responsibilities, health; available or realisable  assets,  and  so
         forth).  Moreover, in the context of  return,  the  possibility  of
         avoidance of destitution by  means  of  financial  assistance  from
         abroad, whether from relatives, friends or even governmental or non-
         governmental sources, cannot be excluded" (paragraph 20).

69. The test or reasonableness/undue  harshness  is  not,  however,  to  be
    equated with the test of whether the individual would be likely to face
    Article 3 harm in the place of  proposed  relocation.   That  important
    point was reiterated by the House of Lords in Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007] UKHL 49.   Referring
    to his judgment in Januzi, Lord Bingham emphasised the  fact  that  the
    task for the decision-maker is to decide  on  the  available  material,
    where on the spectrum a particular case falls.  It would all depend  on
    a "fair assessment of the relevant facts" (paragraph 5).  Lord  Bingham
    continued:-

         "It is, or should be, evident that the enquiry must be directed  to
         the  situation  of  a  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant.  There is no warrant for excluding,  or  giving  priority
         to, consideration of the applicant's way of life in  the  place  of
         persecution.  There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority
         to, consideration of conditions generally prevailing  in  the  home
         country.  I do not underestimate the difficulty of making decisions
         in some cases.  But the difficulty lies in applying the  test,  not
         in expressing it."

70. With all this in mind, it is, in our view, manifest that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's assessment was materially flawed.   At  paragraph  50,
    she made reference to the fact that the claimant left Somalia  in  1991
    and had never lived in Mogadishu.  She expressed herself  as  therefore
    satisfied that he would not have a support network of family or friends
    to whom he could turn,  in  a  city  with  which  he  would  be  wholly
    unfamiliar.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also made  reference  to  Mr
    Ali's report regarding the position of  the  claimant,  coming  from  a
    minority clan.  As the grounds of challenge emphasised,  however,  what
    is particularly lacking from this analysis is any consideration of  the
    claimant's ability to secure employment in Mogadishu and the fact  that
    he would have the ability to call on up to �1,500 from the  Facilitated
    Returns Scheme in order to assist in his return.

71. We have looked at Mr Ali's report in order to see whether, if the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had made full  reference  to  it,  her  conclusions
    would be bound to have been the same.  We do  not  consider  that  they
    would.  Under the heading "Employment" Mr Ali refers to the claimant as
    not being able to "speak  Somali  fluently"  (our  emphasis).   It  is,
    therefore, clear that the claimant can, according to Mr Ali, speak some
    Somali.  Since it does not appear from his report that Mr Ali has  ever
    met the claimant or conversed orally with him, it is difficult  to  see
    how Mr Ali could have opined that  the  claimant's  actual  ability  to
    speak this language would "be a significant barrier"  to  the  claimant
    accessing employment in Mogadishu, where the bare  minimum  requirement
    of any job is speaking Somali.  Furthermore, Mr  Ali  appears  to  have
    discounted the usefulness to the claimant in Mogadishu of being able to
    speak English, confining that positive factor to those  seeking  a  job
    within NGO or the United Nations "which [the claimant]  does  not  have
    the skills for".  Again, this matter needed to be explored by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

72. Whilst considering there was a  possibility  that  the  claimant  could
    connect with his clan in Mogadishu, Mr Ali described the kind  of  work
    that the Bajuni do, as a minority clan, as  being  "low-level  informal
    jobs like digging, porter work, waste  management,  hairdressing,  shoe
    shinning and blacksmithing", although he thought that, given the Bajuni
    are a fishing community "they might not even be  able  to  assist  [the
    claimant] to get informal work of this kind".  As a fisherman,  Mr  Ali
    considered that  the  claimant  would  "have  a  very  limited  earning
    capacity and live very hand-to-mouth".

73. As can readily  be  seen,  this  evidence  needed  to  be  analysed  by
    reference to the law on internal relocation, as set out by the House of
    Lords and the Court of Appeal in the cases to which we  have  referred.
    From these, it is plain that having to take a low-paying or  low-status
    job is in  no  sense  determinative  of  whether  relocation  would  be
    unreasonable.

(d) Conclusions

74. For the reasons we have given, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge contains errors of law in respect of her  conclusion  on  whether
    the claimant's refugee status should be revoked;  and  on  whether  the
    claimant's return to Somalia would violate Article 2 and/or  3  of  the
    ECHR.  Her decision on those matters is set aside.

75. In re-making the decision in relation to Article 3 and (if advanced  by
    the claimant) Article 2 of the ECHR, the fact-finding tribunal will  be
    required to have regard to the relevant country guidance, as  described
    above and as authoritatively interpreted by the Court of Appeal in Said
    and MS (Somalia), in order to decide whether, if returned to Mogadishu,
    the claimant would face a real risk of Article 2/3 harm, having  regard
    to the claimant's personal circumstances,  but  bearing  in  mind  that
    (absent any significant change in the general  situation  in  Mogadishu
    between now and then) an Article 3 claim advanced in respect of general
    living conditions (as opposed to risk as a "direct  result  of  violent
    activities": paragraph 31 of Said) will need to meet the high test in D
    v United Kingdom and N v United Kingdom.

76. The decision on revocation of refugee status will need to be re-made on
    the basis that it will be for the Secretary of State  to  persuade  the
    fact-finding tribunal that, on all  the  current  evidence  before  it,
    there has been a "significant and non-temporary"  change,  such  as  to
    make it reasonable - having regard to all the relevant  factors  -  the
    claimant could reasonably and without  due  harshness  be  expected  to
    relocate to Mogadishu. As we have seen, a real risk of Article 2  or  3
    harm in Mogadishu  will  make  it  unreasonable  for  the  claimant  to
    relocate there; but a negative  finding  on  that  issue  will  not  be
    determinative of the issue  of  reasonableness/undue  harshness,  which
    must be addressed in the way described in Januzi and AH (Sudan).

77. The nature and extent of the fact-finding required are such that we are
    satisfied that the appropriate course is to remit these matters  to  be
    re-decided by the First-tier Tribunal.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                      Signed                     Date






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



