

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

   RK (entitlement to represent: s. 84) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00409(IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing                     |Determination                |
|pursuant to rule 34 of the                    |sent out on 21st September   |
|                                              |2011                         |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008|.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P R LANE


                                   Between

                                     RK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


(1) Section 84(1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  provides  that  no
person may provide immigration advice or immigration services unless  he  is
a qualified person.

(2) Section 82(2) provides that references to the provision  of  immigration
advice or immigration services are  to  the  provision  of  such  advice  or
services by a person in the United Kingdom "in  the  course  of  a  business
carried on (whether or not for profit) by him or by another person".

(3) Rule 48(1) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 provides that "an appellant ... may ... be represented  by  any  person
not prohibited from representing him by section 84 ... ".
(4) Accordingly, where a family friend was seeking (otherwise  than  in  the
course of  a  business)  to  represent  the  appellant  at  a  hearing,  the
Immigration Judge had no right to restrict the friend's involvement to  that
of a Mackenzie Friend on the basis that he was not  legally  qualified  (see
also HH (Sponsor as representative) Serbia [2008]UKAIT 00063).


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  Neither party has objected  to  the  findings  and  proposed  course  of
action proposed in the grant of permission of 4 July  2011,  which  were  as
follows.

2.  There is a clear error in the approach of the Immigration Judge, at  the
hearing of the appellant's asylum appeal, regarding the involvement at  that
hearing of Mr Chowdhury. Rule 48(1) of the  2005  Procedure  Rules  provides
that an appellant "may ... be represented by any person not prohibited  from
representing him by section 84 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999".
Since there is no suggestion that Mr Chowdhury, a family friend, in  seeking
to represent the appellant, was acting in the course of a business,  whether
or not for profit, he was not prohibited by  section  84  from  representing
the appellant (see section 82(2)). The Immigration Judge thus had  no  right
to restrict Mr Chowdhury's involvement to that of a Mackenzie Friend on  the
basis  that  he  "was  not  legally  qualified"   (paragraph   11   of   the
determination);  in  particular,  by  preventing  him  from  making   direct
submissions to the Tribunal.

3.  I am satisfied from the grounds that this error materially affected  the
presentation of the appellant's case, including  her  own  ability  to  give
evidence. As a result, the appellant was deprived of a fair  hearing  and  I
have decided, compatibly with the  Practice  Statements  of  February  2010,
that the determination should be set aside and the appeal  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.


                                 DIRECTIONS

1.  That Tribunal is hereby  directed  pursuant  to  section  12(3)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal de  novo
at a hearing before an  Immigration  Judge,  other  than  Immigration  Judge
Pycott.

2.  The parties are hereby directed pursuant to that section  to  serve  all
documentary material on which it is  intended  to  rely  (including  witness
statements) not later than 7 days before the forthcoming hearing.


                               Signed




                               Upper Tribunal Judge P R Lane
                               Immigration and Asylum Chamber

