
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AB (British citizenship: deprivation; Deliallisi considered) Nigeria [2016]
UKUT 00451 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 July 2015 (Error of Law) and 29 April   |                              |
|2016                                          |                              |
|Final Submissions: 8 June 2016                |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Naik and Ms B. Smith, Counsel, instructed by
Islington Law     Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

(1) As held in  Deliallisi  (British  citizen:  deprivation  appeal:  scope)
[2013] UKUT 00439 (IAC), in an appeal  under  section  40A  of  the  British
Nationality Act 1981 the Tribunal is required to  determine  the  reasonably
foreseeable consequences of deprivation.

(2)  Whilst the Tribunal considering a section 40A appeal  cannot  pre-judge
the outcome of any future legal challenge that  the  appellant  might  bring
against a decision to  remove,  following  deprivation,  the  Tribunal  must
nevertheless take a view as to whether,  from  its  present  vantage  point,
there is likely to be force in any future challenge: cf section  94  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  paragraph  353  of  the
immigration rules. The stronger the potential case, the less likely it  will
be that the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation will  include
removal.

(3) A person who had indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,
immediately before acquiring British citizenship, does  not  thereby  become
entitled to  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  upon  being  deprived  of  such
citizenship  under  section  40  of  the  1981  Act.  Leave  to  remain   is
effectively extinguished by becoming a British citizen, since the system  of
controls under the Immigration Act 1971 does not apply to British citizens.

(4) In a section 40A appeal, an  appellant  may  rely  on  the  ground  that
deprivation would have a disproportionate  effect,  as  regards  the  rights
flowing from citizenship of the EU, only  if,  on  the  facts,  there  is  a
"cross-border" element. The  finding  to  the  contrary  in  Deliallisi  was
reached per incuriam in the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  G1  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 867.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


A. The appellant's history

1.   The appellant was born in Nigeria in 1961.  She says her  parents  were
    killed in the Biafran war, in which she also suffered, being raped by a
    soldier  and  later  by  her  brother-in-law.   Each  time  she  became
    pregnant,  her  babies  were  taken  from  her  at  birth.    She   was
    subsequently raped at a police station.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom late 1987,  carrying  class
    A drugs.  She was detected, charged and convicted for drug trafficking.
     The appellant  claims  she  was  unaware  that  the  package  she  had
    contained drugs.  No one concerned in the present proceedings has  seen
    any sentencing remarks; but the appellant was sentenced to seven years'
    imprisonment.

3.   The appellant was sent to an open prison,  but  she  absconded.   After
    this she survived by begging and  sleeping  rough,  before  meeting  an
    Ivorian national, with whom (and whose children)  the  appellant  lived
    for three years.  After the Ivorian national disappeared, the appellant
    was left looking after his children.

4.   In 1991, the appellant claimed asylum in  the  United  Kingdom,  naming
    the Ivorian national and his children as her dependants.   She  claimed
    to be Ivorian.  The appellant  says  that  this  was  because  she  was
    frightened of returning to prison and then being deported to Nigeria.

5.   Around the same time, it seems, the appellant learned from  someone  at
    her church that the appellant's niece SA, and nephew, H, had arrived in
    the United Kingdom in 1991.  The appellant took in SA and H.   SA  gave
    birth to a son, S, when she was 15. S has learning difficulties,  which
    make living on his own a challenge, despite the fact that he is now  an
    adult.  SA later moved out of the appellant's home, followed by H.   SA
    took S with her.  In 1996, the Ivorian national reappeared and took his
    children away from the appellant.  Meanwhile, SA became  involved  with
    drugs and S was taken into care.

6.   Although the appellant's asylum claim had been  unsuccessful,  she  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain by the respondent  in  2003  in  her
    false identity.  The appellant enrolled for a nursing diploma and  also
    worked.  The appellant had previously  suffered  bouts  of  depression,
    whilst in the United Kingdom, and in 2003 she  received  antidepressant
    medication besides making twice-weekly visits to a psychiatrist for one
    year.  The appellant was, at this time, said to be suicidal.

7.   Around this time, SA (who  was  now  taking  heroin)  became  pregnant,
    giving birth to a daughter, Z, in February 2009.  SA was not allowed to
    have the baby with her, so Z lived with the appellant.

8.   In September 2009, SA, in  revenge  for  losing  Z  to  the  appellant,
    informed the police about the  appellant's  background,  including  her
    escape from prison.  The  appellant  was  sentenced  to  eight  months'
    imprisonment for the escape.  The sentencing judge noted that,  in  the
    intervening  twenty  years,  the  appellant  had  "very  much  redeemed
    yourself".  He noted that she had taken another identity, qualified  as
    a nurse and looked after two children.

9.   Whilst in prison, the appellant self-harmed and took an overdose.   She
    was said to have been kept on suicide watch on a regular basis.  During
    her imprisonment, S and Z  were  taken  into  foster  care.   Upon  her
    release, the appellant (having nowhere else to go) lived with H in  his
    studio flat for around a year.  In March 2011 she was moved to her  own
    accommodation and S came back to live with her until November 2012.   S
    then moved into independent supported accommodation, but  continued  to
    see the appellant on a regular basis.  The same was true of H.

10.  The appellant conducted lengthy  court  proceedings  in  a  bid  to  be
    allowed to foster Z but this was unsuccessful  and  Z  was  adopted  in
    2012.  So too was another daughter of SA, whom the appellant  had  also
    attempted, by legal proceedings, to foster.

11.   The  appellant  reported  herself  to  the  nursing  authorities   who
    suspended her from practising as a nurse for five years (until 2017).


B. Deprivation of citizenship: decisions and proceedings

12.  In 2010, the respondent informed the  appellant  of  her  liability  to
    deportation  as  a  result  of  the  drug  trafficking  offence.    The
    subsequent deportation proceedings have, however, been terminated.   In
    March 2013, the respondent wrote to the appellant  to  state  that  the
    appellant was to be deprived of her British citizenship as a result  of
    the deception employed by the appellant in  its  acquisition.   Shortly
    afterwards, the appellant was accommodated at the Maytree Sanctuary for
    those said to be "in suicidal  crisis".   She  was  later  admitted  to
    hospital for a "non-significant" overdose with "suicidal intent".


(a) 2013 appeal decision

13.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under section 40A  of
    the British Nationality Act 1981 against the respondent's  decision  to
    deprive her of British citizenship.   Following  a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 16 December 2013 before Judge Beg, the appellant's appeal  was
    dismissed.  Judge Beg heard oral evidence from H.   She  found  that  H
    (who is the appellant's nephew) and S (who is H's nephew) had  a  close
    relationship with the appellant.  She accepted that the  appellant  had
    been a mother figure to both, although they were now adults.

14.  Judge Beg also considered a report by  Lucy  Kralj,  a  psychotherapist
    and nurse.  Miss Kralj was of the opinion that separating the appellant
    from her loved ones and a professional support network system would  be
    highly detrimental to her mental health and safety.  Judge Beg accepted
    that the appellant had been diagnosed as suffering from "complex PTSD".
     The judge concluded  that  deprivation  would  not,  however,  in  the
    circumstances amount to a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.


(b) 2014 appeal decision

15.  In March 2014, the Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of Judge  Beg,
    following the finding of an error of law, and remitted  the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to  be  made  by  a  panel
    chaired by a Designated Judge.  By a decision dated 2 October 2014, the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Designated  Judge  Appleyard  and  Judge  Talbot)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

16.  For reasons that will become apparent, it is necessary  to  spend  some
    time on the findings of the panel.  At paragraph 26, the panel rejected
    the contention that the appellant had been the  victim  of  trafficking
    into  the  United  Kingdom.   They  were  also  concerned   about   the
    appellant's claim that she  was  unaware  of  what  was  in  the  drugs
    package, finding that the sentence of seven years' imprisonment  "would
    hardly have been imposed if the judge had  believed  that  she  was  an
    innocent party or had been wholly unaware of what she was doing".

17.  The panel considered that the key issue  was  the  appellant's  medical
    condition.  Whilst placing weight on the report of Miss Kralj  (who  is
    not a doctor) the panel also gave "considerable weight"  to  the  views
    expressed by Dr Kelland, who had  been  the  appellant's  GP  for  some
    fifteen years.  The panel found as follows:-

         "32. It is clear to us from all this evidence  that  the  appellant
             suffers  from  long-standing  psychological  problems  and   a
             diagnosis has been made on more than one occasion of  PTSD  as
             well as depression associated  with  clinical  concerns  about
             suicidality and self-harm.


          33. However, despite this clinical picture and  the  extraordinary
             series of distressing and traumatic events that the  appellant
             appears to have encountered throughout her  life,  there  have
             been extended periods when she appears to have functioned at a
             remarkably high level.  She has served as a mother to a number
             of children (including one who is seriously disabled) and been
             able to cope with a whole series of  family  crises  affecting
             her children.  Whilst dealing  with  family  responsibilities,
             she also studied and qualified as a nurse and she worked as  a
             nurse for a  number  of  years.   She  has  also  been  highly
             energetic in pursuing a series of family and custody  disputes
             and legal proceedings."


18.  The panel then turned to the issue of the  appellant's  current  mental
    state and the "associated risk that would follow  from  deprivation  of
    her British citizenship".  The panel contrasted the view of Miss Kralj,
    which they categorised as "most  dramatic",  and  which  described  the
    appellant as "one of the most vulnerable  patients  with  whom  I  have
    worked or whom I have assessed", with the "considerably more  measured"
    views of Dr Kelland.  The panel  considered  it  significant  that  the
    appellant was currently able to live on her own and did  not  have  any
    regular professional support other than from her GP.  There was also no
    evidence that the appellant depended on H or S for issues  of  personal
    care and daily living.

19.  At paragraph 35, the panel found that it:-

         "cannot ignore the fact that the appellant has faced the threat  of
         removal or deportation for a long time.  She has already  been  the
         subject of  two  deportation  orders  (which  have  only  now  been
         lifted).  Despite the spectre of deportation hanging over  her  for
         such a long period, she survived and  at  times  led  an  extremely
         active and successful life.  The evidence  from  her  GP  does  not
         indicate to us that her mental state has declined so seriously that
         the prospect of deportation would now have a catastrophic effect on
         her.  In the past she has reacted to profound setbacks such as  the
         loss of custody of her children by acting vigorously in the  family
         courts to contest these decisions".


20.  The panel addressed the evidence regarding suicidality  and  self-harm.
    The judges found it difficult to assess how serious or life-threatening
    the appellant's suicide attempts had been,  in  view  of  the  lack  of
    contemporaneous  evidence.   However,  in  regard  to  the  appellant's
    support systems, particularly from the GP,  the  panel  concluded  that
    deprivation would not put the appellant at real risk of Article 3  harm
    in relation to suicide risk.  The panel concluded that  it  was  not  a
    "reasonably foreseeable consequence of the deprivation  decision  (even
    if the deprivation decision were followed by  a  fresh  deportation  or
    removal decision) that the  appellant  is  likely  to  commit  suicide"
    (paragraph 35).

21.  So far as concerned H and S, the panel concluded that  the  appellant's
    relationship with them, despite  the  fact  that  they  were  now  both
    adults, was such that a  family  life,  in  Article  8  terms,  existed
    between them and the appellant.  The appellant also enjoyed a protected
    private life, given the length of time she  had  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the ties she had established here.

22.  The panel assessed the issue of proportionality, in  Article  8  terms,
    by  reference  to  the  provisions  of  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (inserted by the Immigration Act 2014).
     The panel came to the  conclusion  that,  in  all  the  circumstances,
    deprivation of the appellant's British citizenship would not constitute
    a disproportionate interference  with  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant, H or S.  The appeal was, accordingly, dismissed.


(c) Setting aside the 2014 appeal decision

23.  Permission to appeal against the panel's decision was  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but granted by the Upper Tribunal on 18 March 2015.
     In an "error of law" decision promulgated  on  31  July  2015,  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge found that the panel had erred in applying
    the provisions of Part 5A to the appeal.  Part 5A is relevant  only  to
    the  consideration  by  courts  and  tribunals  of  appeals  and  other
    challenges to decisions of the respondent taken under  the  Immigration
    Acts.  The decision under section 40 of  the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981 to deprive the appellant of  her  British  citizenship  is  not  a
    decision taken under the Immigration Acts.

24.  Before Deputy Judge Davidge, the respondent contended that  this  error
    was not material because it would not have been likely to impact on the
    outcome.  The Deputy Judge disagreed, concluding that  it  was  "simply
    impossible to discern from the decision what, in  the  event  that  the
    erroneous self-direction fell away ... the decision in respect  of  the
    exercise of discretion would have been.  This is not one of those cases
    where it can be said that the error if corrected could  not  have  made
    any difference to the outcome".

25.  Accordingly, the Deputy Judge set the decision aside, requiring  it  to
    be re-made, this time, in the Upper Tribunal.  The  Deputy  Judge  did,
    however, reject the other bases of challenge of the panel's decision:

         "10. In short, the error of law is limited  to  the  terms  of  the
             assessment of proportionality, in  the  context  of,  and  its
             interrelation with, the exercise of  discretion.   That  error
             does not infect the findings of fact and they are preserved".



C.   The present proceedings


26.  In the event, the  need  to  re-make  the  decision  having  regard  to
    present circumstances has led  to  the  filing  by  the  parties  of  a
    considerable amount of additional evidence and  submissions.   Problems
    concerning the obtaining of up-to-date specialist  medical  reports  on
    the appellant, together  with  the  need  for  the  representatives  to
    research and make submissions on  the  effect  of  deprivation  on  the
    appellant's entitlement to housing, benefits and NHS  treatment,  meant
    that the substantive rehearing could not  take  place  until  29  April
    2016.  Following that, both parties made  further  written  submissions
    concerning matters with which they had been unable properly to deal  at
    that hearing.  These submissions were filed on 8 June 2016.

27.  I am grateful to Counsel and to Mr Jarvis for the helpful and  thorough
    manner in which they have presented their respective cases.


(a) Nephew H

28.  At the hearing on 29 April I heard oral evidence from H, who  spoke  to
    his most recent statement (28 January 2016).  H  described  how,  after
    the appellant had been  released  from  her  most  recent  sentence  of
    imprisonment, she had come to live with him in his studio flat.  Having
    lost all her friends, the appellant became a  recluse.   Looking  after
    the appellant cost H his own friends, as well as  his  girlfriend.   He
    described the appellant as being  unstable,  sometimes  exploding  into
    anger when the appellant thought about what SA had done.

29.  In her present accommodation, the appellant  has  interacted  with  the
    family upstairs, particularly the baby, to whom  she  is  a  godmother.
    The appellant, however, still has episodes of wandering in the  street,
    wearing little or nothing at all.

30.  H described the appellant  as  being  "for  many  years"  unwell  "even
    before  she  went  to  prison".   She  had  previously  suffered   from
    depression.  At present, the appellant has a home treatment team  which
    comes to look after her on a daily basis.  Her neighbours upstairs also
    look after the appellant.  Last Christmas  H  enjoyed  Christmas  lunch
    with the appellant, S, and two of her friends.

31.  The appellant's present accommodation is, according to H, in  a  "state
    of disrepair.  I cannot explain how bad it is".  There is a  particular
    problem with damp.  H believes  that  the  prospect  of  the  appellant
    returning to live with him  in  his  studio  flat  would  be  extremely
    problematic.  He considers that "Hackney would still have to house  her
    somewhere".  If she lost her  citizenship,  H  considers  that  if  the
    appellant were "given some sort of leave which means that she would not
    be deported", then although  the  appellant  "would  be  devastated  by
    this", the family "at least ... would know where we all  stand  and  we
    can try to get on with our lives.  The fact that it is  always  hanging
    over us is really hard to take and knowing that if she  lost  then  the
    Home Office would start deportation proceedings".

32.  H said that when the appellant looks back on her life  "a  black  cloud
    takes over".  H became visibly distressed, when  giving  oral  evidence
    about the appellant's wandering the streets, semi-clothed.  H confirmed
    that the appellant's other nephew, S, is currently back living with the
    appellant.  H considers that S's social workers have "closed  the  book
    on him".  H is not  sure  that  he  could  look  after  S.   In  cross-
    examination, H agreed with Mr Jarvis that the appellant had experienced
    depression for a long time.  H said that she was "always worrying about
    something".  Asked about the  appellant's  current  problems  with  her
    accommodation,  H  said  that  a  Mr  McDonald  was  looking  into  the
    appellant's case and he also understood  that  an  organisation  called
    Women in Prison was assisting the appellant.


(b) Medical evidence

33.  In connection  with  the  hearing,  the  appellant's  proposed  medical
    witness, Dr Price, had written  (2  February  2016)  to  Islington  Law
    Centre to explain that the failure to produce a medical report  on  the
    appellant within the required timescale was entirely his fault, due  in
    part to his ill-health, and that Dr Price felt that he  "must  withdraw
    and I am no longer able to provide the report".  Owing to  "the  severe
    and enduring nature of her  problems",  Dr  Price  stated  that  health
    professionals were in the process of transferring the appellant's  care
    from Dr Price's primary care liaison team to the more long-term care of
    the "recovery team", run by Dr Fisher,  who  would  be  able  to  offer
    "ongoing care" to the appellant.

34.  Dr  Price  considered  that  it  had  been  difficult  to  address  the
    appellant's "psychological concerns whilst legal matters are unresolved
    as it has been understandably difficult for [the appellant] to focus on
    recovery under the circumstances.  She remains in a constant  state  of
    anxiety and uncertainty".  The appellant remained "vulnerable  much  of
    the time but also  has  heightened  periods  of  crisis  when  she  has
    required additional support  from  myself,  her  GP  and  the  hospital
    psychiatric home-treatment team as an alternative  to  admission".   Dr
    Price considered that additional stressors included the threat  or  the
    possibility of her losing benefits or housing, which he felt would have
    a significantly detrimental effect upon the appellant's  mental  health
    "possibly triggering crisis".  Removal from friends and other  informal
    support networks should be avoided and a separation from family  "would
    almost certainly have a disastrous effect".  The  appellant  wanted  to
    work and provide for her family "although her legal situation  prevents
    her from doing so".  She did not wish to be a burden to the  state  and
    had demonstrated her ability to successfully function  in  work  albeit
    "in unusual circumstances".

35.  Dr Price's "biggest concern would  be  a  serious  attempt  at  suicide
    should the appellant be facing what to  her  would  be  the  unbearable
    prospect of deportation".  She feels that she  would  be  "murdered  by
    others" if returned to Nigeria.  Dr Price considered that  this  was  a
    "firm conviction" which is "not the  result  of  any  abnormal  thought
    processes or as the result of her mental illness; but that for  her  at
    least this  represents  a  reality".   Dr  Price  did  not  regard  the
    appellant's suicidal threats as having "the flavour of  a  manipulative
    or care-eliciting action which is clinically very worrying".

36.  Dr Price's final view is that:

           "ideally she should remain in the UK where she  has  resided  for
          many years, but without the threat of deportation and all that she
          understandably feels this would entail for her.  This would  allow
          her to have the  opportunity  of  recovery  from  what  is  now  a
          prolonged  period  of   psychiatric   ill-health   in   a   stable
          environment.  I have no doubt that she would engage fully with her
          treatment plan if left alone to do so, and without constant threat
          and anxiety, she would almost certainly have a good prognosis.   I
          have no doubt that she would seek to gain suitable  employment  at
          the first opportunity and in my opinion would be very unlikely  to
          reoffend".

37.  Dr Fisher's report (1 March  2016)  states  that  he  is  a  Consultant
    Psychiatrist at the East London  NHS  Foundation  Trust.   He  met  the
    appellant for the first time on 23 February 2016 and for a second  time
    on 15 April 2016.  He described the appellant as arriving on time, well
    kempt and well groomed, although appearing a  little  passive,  with  a
    monotonous, repetitive and sometimes robot-like tone.

38.  Dr Fisher  refers  to  the  appellant  having  had  "three  significant
    suicide attempts" and being currently housed by the London  Borough  of
    Hackney in temporary accommodation pending  being  given  a  "permanent
    property".  The appellant still has contact with H and S.   Dr  Kelland
    describes S as most likely having a learning disability.

39.  Dr  Fisher  described  the  appellant  as  presenting  as  "a  slightly
    prematurely aged female patient who was very rare in mimic and  reduced
    in  psychomotor  activity".   He  considered  her  to  have  a   severe
    impairment with upper  perception  and  concentration.   Her  mood  was
    subjectively very low  and  objectively  low,  with  constant  suicidal
    ideation.  The appellant frequently feels  confused  but  has  a  "very
    strong belief in God and this helps her".  The appellant has never  had
    a proper relationship; "her main psychosexual experiences were that  of
    being raped".

40.  Dr Fisher could not find any delusional beliefs or  thought  disorders.
    He considered that the appellant would fulfil the criteria for moderate
    to severe depression with suicidality, and the criteria for personality
    change after a catastrophic event,  according  to  DSM4-post  traumatic
    stress syndrome.  PTSD had been diagnosed by  "Dr  Lucy  Kralj"  (sic),
    with whose report Dr Fisher agreed.

41.  Dr Fisher noted  that  the  appellant  "still  retained  some  positive
    outlook and still has faith in God and thinks that things can turn  out
    better".   The  prospect  of  being  returned  to  Nigeria   would   be
    devastating for her.

42.  Any "loss of status  and  benefits"  would,  in  Dr  Fisher's  opinion,
    result in "significant risk" to the appellant's mental health.   It  is
    likely that thoughts of self-harm would increase.  Should she lose  her
    accommodation and housing, it is unlikely that the appellant "would  be
    able to maintain any will to live in the future and it is  very  likely
    that she will harm herself should she lose benefits and status  in  the
    United Kingdom".  One of the few reasons the appellant  has  found  the
    will to live is her usefulness to S and H and her  ability  to  receive
    love from them.  Furthermore, the appellant has been  looked  after  by
    her GP for fifteen  years  "very  successfully"  and  has  also  formed
    relationships with the community mental health team "and  it  would  be
    very difficult for her to form new relationships  somewhere  else.   As
    the  main  suicide  prevention  is   forming   positive   and   hopeful
    relationships, this  is  of  utmost  importance  to  her".   Dr  Fisher
    considered that the  appellant's  "identification  with  being  British
    helps her maintain a sense of wellbeing and security".

43.  As noted in paragraph 40 above, in his  report  on  the  appellant,  Dr
    Fisher referred to Miss Kralj as a doctor.   This  point  was  remarked
    upon by Mr Jarvis, who questioned whether Dr Fisher was aware that Miss
    Kralj was not,  in  fact,  qualified  as  a  doctor.   Roopa  Tanna,  a
    solicitor with the Islington Law Centre, confirms in her  statement  of
    29 April 2016 that she is aware, from her own knowledge, that Dr Fisher
    knew of Miss Kralj's status and that the reference in his report to her
    being a doctor was a simple error.

44.  On 9 May 2016, the appellant filed a summary of  recent  mental  health
    events, as recorded by Dr Kelland, the  appellant's  long-standing  GP.
    What is striking from this material is the high and committed level  of
    care that Dr Kelland has provided to the appellant over the years.   It
    confirms  the  accounts  of  the  appellant  wandering   the   streets,
    inappropriately dressed, as  well  as  underlining  the  way  in  which
    impending legal hearings have an adverse effect  upon  the  appellant's
    state of mind.

45.  Dr Kelland has been closely involved in the  suicidal  aspects  of  the
    appellant's  condition.   His  notes  of  25  April  2016  record   the
    appellant's lawyer as calling wanting to know how many suicide attempts
    the appellant had made since September 2014.  Dr Kelland's response was
    that there were "five  episodes  documented  -  some  debatative  (sic)
    serious attempts".

46.  The record for 7 March 2016 describes the appellant as indicating  that
    her family was well and that she was "seeing them every  weekend".   Dr
    Kelland adjusted the appellant's medication and explained to  her  that
    in view of the severity and chronicity of her illness, her  care  would
    be transferred to Dr Fisher at the CMHT.

47.  The record for 9 October 2015 concerns Dr Kelland making a  home  visit
    to the appellant, who  had  taken  tablets.   The  appellant's  [great]
    nephew, S,  was  in  the  house.   Dr  Kelland's  record  reads  "Frank
    disc[losure] - multiple similar episodes - but no real intent says  she
    will not do it and will see me  on  Monday  says  she  just  wanted  to
    disc[uss] issues w [ith] me".

(c) Bethan Harris's Opinion: benefits, health care and housing in the  event
    of deprivation

48.   Ms  Bethan  Harris,  a  barrister  specialising  in  social   housing,
    community care and Court of Protection work, produced an Opinion  dated
    22 April 2016.  She considers that,  if  deprived  of  citizenship  and
    lacking leave to remain in the United Kingdom, the appellant would  not
    qualify  for  homelessness  assistance  under  the  Housing  Act  1996.
    Although in the normal course of events, she would  be  housed  pending
    the outcome of enquiries, were she  to  be  evicted  from  her  current
    accommodation and lack immigration status, the appellant would  not  be
    provided with temporary accommodation pending the completion  of  those
    enquiries.

49.  According to Ms Harris, the accommodation position under the  Care  Act
    2014 would be problematic, as regards the appellant.  A local authority
    has  a  duty  to  meet  a  person's  care  and  support   needs   where
    "eligibility"  criteria,  as  set  out  in   the   Care   and   Support
    (Eligibility) Regulations, are met; otherwise the local authority has a
    power to meet a person's care and support needs (Care  Act  2014,  ss18
    and 19).  Section 21 of  the  Care  Act  2014  provides  that  a  local
    authority may not meet the needs for care and support of  an  adult  to
    whom section 115  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999  applies
    (exclusion from benefits) and whose needs for  care  and  support  have
    arisen solely because  the  person  is  destitute  or  because  of  the
    physical effects (or anticipated physical effects) of being  destitute.



50.  Section 21, according to Ms Harris, performs the same function  as  was
    previously performed by section 21(1A) of the National  Assistance  Act
    1948.  Case law in relation  to  that  provision  demonstrates  that  a
    person subject to immigration control whose need for care  and  support
    was to any material extent made more acute by some  circumstance  other
    than the mere lack of accommodation and funds  was  not  excluded  from
    support  by  reason  of  their  immigration  status.   This   so-called
    "destitution plus" test was explained by the  Supreme  Court  in  SL  v
    Westminster  CC  [2013]  UKSC  27.   A  need  for  care   and   support
    nevertheless needed to be identified.

51.  According to Baroness Hale in M v Slough Borough  Council  [2008]  UKHL
    58, "care and attention" (which Ms Harris considers a useful  guide  to
    the meaning of the present social care  need)  means  "looking  after",
    such as by providing assistance with household tasks. The provision  of
    medical care is, however, expressly excluded.

52.  In SG v Haringey BC [2015] EWHC 2579, the High Court held that for  the
    local authority to be required to provide accommodation as a  means  of
    meeting a care and support need, the care that is needed must  be  such
    that it is normally provided in the home or will effectively be useless
    if the person has no home.  Only two  services  in  the  long  list  of
    support services provided for  SG  (who  suffered  from  severe  mental
    health problems) were found to be accommodation-related in this  sense.
    The two services did not include advice and  assistance  by  SG's  care
    coordinator, or counselling.

53.  Where paragraphs 1 and 3 of Schedule 3  to  the  NIAA  2002  apply,  Ms
    Harris's opinion is that there will be no duty on a local authority  to
    provide support under  the  Care  Act  2014  unless  its  provision  is
    necessary for the purpose of avoiding a breach of a person's Convention
    rights.  Paragraphs 1 and 3 would apply if the appellant  were  without
    immigration status.  In Limbuela v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] UKHL 66, the House of Lords held that  the  issue  of
    whether a person's lack of accommodation and  funds  gives  rise  to  a
    breach of Article 3 of the ECHR depends on a determination  of  whether
    the entire package of work restrictions and deprivations is  so  severe
    as to be properly described as inhuman and  degrading  treatment.   The
    threshold will normally be crossed where a person is obliged  to  sleep
    in the street or is seriously hungry or  unable  to  satisfy  the  most
    basic requirements of hygiene.  In determining the  answer,  individual
    factors such as age, sex and health are relevant.  In  Birmingham  City
    Council v Clue [2010] EWCA Civ 460 the Court of Appeal held that,  when
    applying Schedule 3 to the NIAA 2002,  the  local  authority  must  not
    consider the merits of an outstanding application by a person for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  Except in a hopeless or abusive case,
    the duty to avoid a breach of that person's Convention rights does  not
    entitle the local authority to decide how the Secretary of  State  will
    determine an application or, in effect, to determine the application by
    making it impossible for the applicant to pursue it.

54.  Ms Harris' view is that "the process  of  seeking  accommodation  under
    Care Act 2014, if [the  appellant]  were  lacking  immigration  status,
    would not be straightforward.  There are a number of points that  could
    cause difficulties and a positive outcome cannot be assumed".

55.  The first potential difficulty is that the appellant is not at  present
    assessed as needing care and  support  services.   The  fact  of  being
    mentally ill does not necessarily imply a  need  for  social  care,  as
    opposed to a need for access to the Health Service.  Secondly, in order
    to obtain accommodation under the Care  Act  2014,  an  "accommodation-
    related" need must  be  identified.   Ms  Harris  considers  that  this
    concept has been interpreted quite narrowly by the courts.

56.  Ms Harris  acknowledges  the  argument  that  the  local  authority  in
    question would need to take into account that  if  the  appellant  were
    without accommodation, her condition would worsen in a way  that  would
    then give rise, not only to greater need for health services, but  also
    inevitably in due course to a  need  for  "looking  after"  that  would
    amount to social care and which could only be met by the  provision  of
    accommodation.  Accordingly, in order to anticipate such deterioration,
    the local authority  would  need  to  provide  support.   Against  this
    argument, however, Ms Harris thinks the local authority might take  the
    view that the threshold for the human rights-based last resort  support
    of a social care type was not met in the case of the  appellant,  since
    the appellant should investigate other means of potential  support  and
    exhaust these first, whilst pursuing an application for leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom, before the local authority could be required  to
    support her with accommodation.

57.  On a related point, Ms Harris believes  that,  in  the  context  of  an
    assessment of the appellant's  needs  for  human  rights-based  support
    under the Care Act 2014, the local authority could raise the  issue  of
    whether the appellant might qualify for so-called "hard cases"  support
    under section 4 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 and might expect
    her to pursue that route instead.  Whilst accepting that  there  is  an
    argument that the  availability  of  support  under  the  1999  Act  is
    irrelevant to whether the duty to provide support arises under the Care
    Act 2014 (an issue raised in  paragraph  15  of  SG  v  Haringey),  the
    difficulty the appellant may face is that  the  local  authority  might
    assess her situation as not giving rise to a need  for  Care  Act  2014
    social care support, unless and until her condition has deteriorated.


D. Legal matters


(a)  The  task:  determining  the  reasonably  foreseeable  consequences  of
    deprivation

58.  Before embarking on an analysis of the evidence,  it  is  necessary  to
    establish the legal parameters.  With one exception, to  which  I  will
    turn in due course, Ms Naik submitted that the correct basis was as set
    out by the Upper Tribunal in Deliallisi (British  citizen:  deprivation
    appeal: scope) [2013] UKUT 00439 (IAC).  In  that  case,  the  Tribunal
    held that an appeal under section 40A of  the  1981  Act  requires  the
    Tribunal to consider whether the  Secretary  of  State's  discretionary
    decision to deprive a person of British citizenship should be exercised
    differently.  That consideration will involve (but not be  limited  to)
    ECHR Article 8 issues, as  well  as  whether  deprivation  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with a person's EU rights.   In  carrying
    out its task, the Tribunal is under no obligation to  assume  that  the
    person concerned will be removed from the United Kingdom in consequence
    of the deprivation decision.  The Tribunal  is,  however,  required  to
    determine the reasonably foreseeable consequences of deprivation  which
    may, depending on the facts, include removal.

59.  Mr Jarvis told me that the Secretary of State does not consider that  a
    deprivation appeal can ever encompass the possibility of  removal.   He
    did not, however, elaborate upon this view and I see no reason why,  as
    a matter of law,  the  reasonable  forseeability  test,  elucidated  in
    Deliallisi, should be circumscribed in this or, indeed, any other  way.



60.  Having said that, it seems to me the facts  of  the  present  case  are
    indicative of why, in practice, the reasonably foreseeable consequences
    of deprivation are often unlikely, as  a  general  matter,  to  include
    removal.  Even in a case where, unlike  Deliallisi,  the  Secretary  of
    State has not expressed an intention to grant leave,  immediately  upon
    deprivation  taking  place,   the   factual   matrix   (including   the
    availability of rights of challenge to possible future decisions of the
    Secretary of State) will often preclude the Tribunal  from  identifying
    removal as a reasonably foreseeable consequence of deprivation,  viewed
    from the vantage point of the hearing of the deprivation appeal.

61.  In the present case, Mr Jarvis accepts  that,  as  matters  stand,  the
    respondent may not grant the appellant  leave,  following  deprivation.
    He also is clear that the respondent may  begin  steps  to  secure  the
    appellant's deportation.  Ms Naik submits that the appellant would have
    a compelling Article 8 case for  resisting  removal.   Both  sides  are
    agreed that the formal resolution of these issues (if they arise)  will
    be the subject of separate, future proceedings.


(b) British citizenship and indefinite leave to remain


(i) Deliallisi

62.  I said I would return to the issue that the appellant says was  wrongly
    decided by the Tribunal in Deliallisi.  This concerns its finding  that
    the person who, immediately before  becoming  a  British  citizen,  had
    indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the   United   Kingdom,   does   not
    automatically become entitled to such leave,  upon  being  deprived  of
    such citizenship.

63.  As she had in Deliallisi, Ms Naik acknowledged  that,  if  the  present
    appellant's submissions regarding the re-emergence of indefinite  leave
    to remain were correct, this would  weaken  the  appellant's  case  for
    resisting deprivation of her British citizenship.

64.  In Deliallisi, the Tribunal addressed the issue as follows:-

         "45. The following provisions of the 1971 Act are relevant:


             '1.  General principles


                  (1)  All those who are in this Act expressed to  have  the
                      right of abode in the United Kingdom shall be free to
                      live and to come and go into  and  from,  the  United
                      Kingdom without let or hindrance except such  as  may
                      be required under and in accordance with this Act  to
                      enable their right to be established  or  as  may  be
                      otherwise lawfully imposed on any person.


                  (2)  Those not having that right may live, work and settle
                      in the United Kingdom by permission  and  subject  to
                      such Regulation and control of their entry into, stay
                      in and  departure  from  the  United  Kingdom  as  is
                      imposed by this Act ...


             2.   Statement of right of abode in United Kingdom


                  (1)  A person is under this Act to have the right of abode
                      in the United Kingdom if -


                      (a)  he is a British citizen; or


                      (b)  he is a Commonwealth citizen who -


                           (i)  immediately before the commencement  of  the
                               British   Nationality   Act   1981   was   a
                               Commonwealth citizen  having  the  right  of
                               abode in the United  Kingdom  by  virtue  of
                               section 2(1)(c) or section 2(2) of this  Act
                               as then in force; and


                           (ii) has not ceased to be a Commonwealth  citizen
                               in the meanwhile.


                  (2)  In relation to Commonwealth  citizens  who  have  the
                      right of abode in the United  Kingdom  by  virtue  of
                      subsection  (1)(b)  above,  this  Act,  except   this
                      section and section 5(2), shall apply as if they were
                      British  citizens;  and  in  this  Act   (except   as
                      aforesaid)  'British  citizen'  shall  be   construed
                      accordingly.


             2A.  Deprivation of right of abode


                  (1)  The Secretary of State may by  order  remove  from  a
                      specified person a  right  of  abode  in  the  United
                      Kingdom which he has under section 2(1)(b).


                  ...


                  (4)  While an order under subsection  (1)  has  effect  in
                      relation to a person -


                      (a)  section 2(2) shall not apply to him; and


                      (b)  any certificate of entitlement  granted  to  him
                           shall have no effect.


             3.   General provisions for Regulation and control


                  (1)  Except as otherwise provided by or  under  this  Act,
                      where a person is not a British citizen -


                      (a)  he shall not enter  the  United  Kingdom  unless
                           given leave to  do  so  in  accordance  with  the
                           provisions of, or made under, this Act;


                      (b)  he may  be  given  leave  to  enter  the  United
                           Kingdom (or, when already there, leave to  remain
                           in the United Kingdom) either for  a  limited  or
                           for an indefinite period;


                      (c)  if he is given limited leave to enter or  remain
                           in the United Kingdom, it may be given subject to
                           all or any of the following conditions, namely -


                           (i)  a condition restricting  his  employment  or
                               occupation in the United Kingdom;


                           (ii) a condition requiring him  to  maintain  and
                               accommodate himself, and any  dependants  of
                               his, without recourse to public funds;


                           (iii)    a condition requiring  him  to  register
                               with the police;


                           (iv) a condition requiring him to  report  to  an
                               immigration  officer  or  the  Secretary  of
                               State; and


                           (v)  a condition about residence.


                      ...


             5.   Procedure for, and further provisions as to, deportation


                  (1)  Where a person is under section  3(5)  or  (6)  above
                      liable to deportation, then subject to the  following
                      provisions of this Act the  Secretary  of  State  may
                      make a deportation order against him, that is to  say
                      an order requiring him to leave and  prohibiting  him
                      from entering the United Kingdom; and  a  deportation
                      order against a person shall invalidate any leave  to
                      enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  given  him
                      before the order is made or while it is in force.


                  (2)  A deportation order against a person may at any  time
                      be revoked by a further order  of  the  Secretary  of
                      State, and shall cease to have effect if he becomes a
                      British citizen.'


         46.  As can be  seen,  the  general  provisions  in  the  1971  Act
             regarding leave to enter and remain are expressly  stated  not
             to apply where a person is  a  British  citizen.   We  do  not
             consider that it is compatible with the scheme of that Act  to
             regard indefinite leave to remain (or any other sort of leave)
             as having some sort of vestigial existence, whilst the  person
             concerned remains a British citizen.  A person cannot be  both
             a British citizen and concurrently subject to indefinite leave
             to remain.  Upon becoming such a citizen, the appellant became
             a person to whom section 1(1) applied.  As Mr Deller  put  it,
             the appellant's indefinite leave to remain  simply  ceased  to
             exist.


         47.  Unlike the position in respect of a Commonwealth  citizen  who
             has a right of abode by reason of section 2(2)(b), and who may
             be deprived of that right  under  section  2A,  the  1971  Act
             contains  no  provision  regarding  deprivation   of   British
             citizenship.  Furthermore, section 2A(4)  indicates  that  the
             revocation of an order depriving a  person  of  the  right  of
             abode will automatically bring  the  person  back  within  the
             ambit of section 2(2) and that any certificate of  entitlement
             will again be effective.  One looks in vain for any comparable
             provision regarding indefinite leave to remain  for  a  person
             who had it before becoming a British citizen.


         48.  We do not consider that the appellant can gain any  assistance
             from section 5(2), which provides  that  a  deportation  order
             shall cease to have effect if the person subject  to  such  an
             order becomes a British citizen.  The relationship between the
             final words of section 1(1)  and  section  5  is  such  as  to
             require the position to be made clear.   The  drafter  of  the
             1971 Act evidently took the view that it  was  unnecessary  to
             say that indefinite leave to remain ceases to have effect upon
             acquisition of British citizenship because that  was  obvious,
             given the scheme of the legislation.


         49.  In support  of  her  proposition,  Ms  Naik  referred  to  the
             judgments of the Court of Appeal in Fitzroy George v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1362.   In
             that case,  the  Court,  by  a  majority,  found  that  where,
             pursuant to section 5(1) of the 1971 Act, a deportation  order
             against a person has invalidated that person's leave to  enter
             or remain, the subsequent revocation of the deportation  order
             has the effect of reviving the earlier grant of leave (in that
             case, ILR).


         50.  We do not consider that Fitzroy George assists the appellant's
             argument.  Fitzroy George was at all material times  a  person
             subject to the general provisions for regulation and  control,
             set out in section 3 of the 1971  Act.   At  no  time  had  he
             enjoyed the right of abode,  as  described  in  section  1(1).
             That is not the position with the present appellant who,  upon
             becoming a British citizen, was removed from  the  1971  Act's
             'regulation and control of entry into, stay in  and  departure
             from the United Kingdom' (section 1(2)).


         51.  In further support of her argument  on  this  issue,  Ms  Naik
             sought to invoke section 76 of the 2002  Act.   This  provides
             that the Secretary of State may revoke a  person's  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if that  person
             is liable to deportation but  cannot  be  deported  for  legal
             reasons.  The existence of this section (and section 5 of  the
             1971 Act) does not, however, mean Parliament has legislated to
             the effect that indefinite leave to remain can cease  only  on
             deprivation under section 76 (or section 5 of the  1971  Act).
             Section 76 and  the  corresponding  provisions  in  section  5
             contain procedures for terminating indefinite leave to remain,
             whilst such leave subsists.  They do not purport  to  offer  a
             comprehensive guide as to whether a person has such  leave  in
             the first place.


         52.  Ms Naik, in oral submissions, said that a British citizen  who
             is also a citizen  of  another  country  would,  in  practice,
             retain his or her indefinite leave to remain  'stamp'  in  the
             passport of that other country.  Whilst that  may  be  so  (we
             express no view), the continued physical presence of  a  stamp
             in  a  foreign  passport  cannot  be  taken  to   govern   the
             interpretation of the 1971  Act.   We  reiterate  that  it  is
             incoherent with the legislation to assume indefinite leave  to
             remain can remain extant, in the case of a  person  who  is  a
             British citizen, or that, without express statutory provision,
             such leave automatically  reappears  on  deprivation  of  that
             citizenship.


         53.  Accordingly, for the purposes of these  proceedings,  we  find
             that,  were  the  appellant  to   be   deprived   of   British
             citizenship, he would not fall  to  be  treated  as  a  person
             having indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             This, of course, has a  direct bearing on the consequences for
             the appellant of deprivation and, in particular,  necessitates
             an examination of the respondent's policies; in particular, as
             set out in the NIs.  Conversely, if we are  wrong,  our  error
             could not be material to the outcome of this appeal, unless we
             were to allow it."




(ii) Fitzroy George in the Supreme Court

65.  What the Tribunal said in Deliallisi about the case of  Fitzroy  George
    now has to be read in the light of the Supreme Court judgment  in  that
    case (R (George) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
    UKSC 28).  The Supreme Court overturned the judgment of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, finding that the revocation of the claimant's deportation order
    did not revive his indefinite leave to remain.

66.  So far as relevant, section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971  provides  as
    follows:-

         "5.-(1)  Where a person is under section 3(5) or (6)  above  liable
                to deportation, then subject to the following provisions  of
                this Act the Secretary of State may make a deportation order
                against him, that is to say an order requiring him to  leave
                and prohibiting him from entering the United Kingdom; and  a
                deportation order against  a  person  shall  invalidate  any
                leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  given  him
                before the order is made or while it is in force.


             (2)  A deportation order against a person may at  any  time  be
                revoked by a further order of the Secretary  of  State,  and
                shall cease to have effect if he becomes a British citizen."

67.  At paragraph 29, the Supreme Court (per Lord Hughes) decided the  issue
    of the interpretation of section 5 as follows:-

         "29. The terms of section 5 of the 1971 Act are, as words,  capable
             either of importing revival of  leave  or  of  not  doing  so.
             Revival is not their  natural  meaning,  because  the  natural
             meaning is that revocation takes effect when  it  happens  and
             does not undo events occurring  during  the  lifetime  of  the
             deportation order.  Revival is a significant and  far-reaching
             legal concept, and it is much more likely that it  would  have
             been specifically provided for if it had been intended".

68.  Ms Naik relies on this passage  of  the  judgment  in  support  of  her
    submission that specific words are needed in  the  immigration  primary
    legislation, to prevent indefinite leave to  remain  from  disappearing
    (without any prospect of revival), upon a  person  becoming  a  British
    citizen.  It seems to me, however, that paragraph 29  of  Lord  Hughes'
    judgment supports the respondent's position on this issue.  Whether  or
    not one assumes indefinite leave to remain has ceased to exist upon its
    holder becoming a British citizen, the  suggestion  that  it  reappears
    following deprivation of citizenship is at least  as  "significant  and
    far-reaching [a] legal concept"  as  revival  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain after revocation of a deportation order.  Accordingly, what Lord
    Hughes said in paragraph 29 is, in my view, pertinent in the  situation
    with which we are concerned; and one looks in  vain  for  any  specific
    provision supporting the appellant's contention.


(iii) Munir

69.  Ms Naik  prays  in  aid  Munir  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] UKSC 32 for the proposition that immigration law,  as
    set out in the  Immigration  Acts  and  instruments  made  under  them,
    "should be taken to be complete and exhaustive".  That this is so  does
    not, however, help Ms Naik to overcome the crucial  point,  articulated
    in Deliallisi, which is that the general system of immigration  control
    contained in the Immigration Act 1971 and other Immigration Acts  -  in
    particular, the granting or refusing of leave  to  enter  or  remain  -
    simply does not impact upon a person who is a British citizen.  In  any
    event, in  Munir  at  paragraph  31,  the  Court  noted  the  important
    provision in section 3(1) of the 1971 Act "that a person who is  not  a
    British citizen shall not enter the United Kingdom unless  given  leave
    to do so who 'in accordance with the provisions of, or made under, this
    Act'" (my emphasis).  The underlined words are, thus, the answer to  Ms
    Naik's point. They are a "complete" and exhaustive pronouncement on the
    scope of the system of leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.


(iv) Legislation

70.  Ms Naik refers to article 13 of the Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
    Remain) Order 2000.  Article 13 deals with the circumstances  in  which
    leave to enter or remain does not lapse when its holder travels outside
    the common travel area.  Ms Naik submits that article  13  demonstrates
    that an express statutory provision is necessary in order  "to  curtail
    or otherwise bring to an end" indefinite leave  to  remain.   Again,  I
    agree; but, once more, the point does not advance the appellant's case.
     It is plainly the case that persons who remain subject to  immigration
    controls should be told in the legislation in what circumstances  their
    leave (of whatever kind) may lapse.   It  is  quite  another  thing  to
    contend that persons, who by reason of their British citizenship,  have
    been completely freed from the system of section 3 leave,  need  to  be
    told  that  their  indefinite  leave  has  been  extinguished  by   the
    acquisition of that citizenship.

71.  Although Ms Naik did not rely upon it, the  appellant  might  point  to
    section 5(2) of the 1971 Act as casting doubt upon the  position  which
    the Tribunal took in Deliallisi and which I take in the  present  case.
    As we have seen, section 5(2) provides  in  terms  that  a  deportation
    order shall cease to have effect if  the  person  concerned  becomes  a
    British citizen.  If the scheme of controls in the 1971 Act etc. ceases
    to have any relevance to a person who becomes a British citizen, then a
    deportation order would, on this  view,  automatically  cease  to  have
    effect, since it is part of those controls.  It is, however, plain that
    a deportation order is of a special nature, in that it has a continuing
    effect.  Not only does it require a person to leave the United Kingdom;
    it also prohibits the person from re-entering during  the  currency  of
    the order.  Given that section 3(5) and (6) of the 1971  Act  refer  to
    persons who are not British citizens as being  "liable  to  deportation
    from the  United  Kingdom",  I  conclude  the  legislature  thought  it
    necessary to make plain that a deportation order  ceases  to  have  all
    legal effect if a person becomes a British citizen. Such a  person,  if
    outside the United Kingdom, can, accordingly, re-enter it.

72.  Ms Naik  relies  upon  section  39  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  This  amended  the  provisions  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 relating to  the  acquisition  of  citizenship  by
    naturalisation.  Paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to the  1981  Act  describes
    the requirements for naturalisation as a British citizen under  section
    6(2).  For the purposes of paragraph 3, paragraph 4A (inserted  by  the
    2009 Act) provides that a person has qualifying immigration status  if,
    amongst other things, he or she  has  "probationary  citizenship  leave
    based on a relevant family association".

73.  Ms Naik submits  that  the  existence  of  the  section  39  amendments
    (although not yet in force) does "not sit with an  implied  lapsing  of
    ILR on grant of British citizenship, rather it  suggests  that  certain
    types of leave  defined  there  will  so  become  otiose  on  grant  of
    citizenship".

74.  I agree with Mr Jarvis that  there  is  no  inconsistency  between  the
    section 39 amendments to the 1981 Act and  the  principle  that  actual
    British citizenship extinguishes indefinite leave to remain.   Plainly,
    "probationary citizenship leave" is still intended to be  leave  within
    the ambit of section 3 of the 1971 Act.  It is not to be  equated  with
    British citizenship.


(v) Dual citizenship

75.  Finally on this issue, Ms Naik returns to an argument she  deployed  in
    Deliallisi, based on the concept of dual citizenship.  Ms  Naik  refers
    to the respondent's guidance on the right of abode which states:-

         "2.1 If you have the right of abode in  the  United  Kingdom,  this
             means that you are  entirely  free  from  the  United  Kingdom
             immigration control.  You do not need to obtain the permission
             of an Immigration Officer to enter the United Kingdom and  you
             may live and work here without restriction.


          2.2 However, you must prove your claim by production of either:


             (a)  a United Kingdom passport describing  you  as  a  British
                  citizen or a British subject with a right of abode; or


             (b)  a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode in the
                  United Kingdom issued by or on behalf of the Government of
                  the United Kingdom".


76.  This passage frankly contradicts  the  appellant's  position.   As  has
    already been said, a British citizen does not require leave to enter or
    remain pursuant to section 3 and the Immigration Rules.  The fact that,
    as a British citizen, I need to show  my  passport  to  demonstrate  my
    freedom from controls is an entirely different matter.

77.  Ms Naik cites Fransman: British Nationality (Third Edition) as  stating
    that before 21 December 2006 it was possible for an individual to  hold
    a United Kingdom passport and have a Certificate of Entitlement to  the
    Right of Abode in the United Kingdom endorsed in  a  foreign  passport.
    The fact that that may have been so, however, is, with respect, nothing
    to the point.  It does not in any sense suggest that a British  citizen
    remains entitled to indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom,
    if he or she previously possessed such leave.

78.   For  these  reasons,  I  reject  the  appellant's  contention  that  a
    foreseeable consequence of her being deprived of British citizenship is
    that she automatically becomes entitled to indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, by reason of her previously holding such  leave.
    This, of course, means that  I  approach  the  question  of  reasonable
    forseeability on the basis that the respondent has not  confirmed  that
    she  will  grant  the  appellant  any  period   of   leave,   following
    deprivation, and that the respondent  is  not,  as  a  general  matter,
    committed to avoiding any period of so-called  "limbo"  following  such
    deprivation.

79.  In determining  what  is  reasonably  foreseeable,  I  consider  it  is
    relevant that the appellant may well (subject to issues  of  legal  aid
    and finance generally) be minded to challenge by way of judicial review
    any refusal by the respondent, after any deprivation, to  confirm  that
    she has indefinite leave to remain on the above basis (see paragraph 97
    below).


(c) The European dimension and the G1 case

80.  In  Deliallisi  the  Tribunal  considered  what  it  described  as  the
    European dimension to an appeal under section 40A of the 1981 Act:-

         "G.  THE EUROPEAN DIMENSION


             39.  Even if the tribunal concludes that the issue of  Article
                  8 ECHR proportionality does not arise  in  the  particular
                  appeal, it will  still  be  necessary  to  decide  whether
                  deprivation of British citizenship 'observes the principle
                  of proportionality so far as concerns the consequences  it
                  entails for the situation of the person concerned  in  the
                  light  of  a  European  Union  law,  in  addition,   where
                  appropriate, to examination of the proportionality of  the
                  decision  in  the  light  of  national  law'  (Rottmann  v
                  Freistaat Bayers [2010] EUECJ C-135/08 (02  March  2010)).
                  In that case, a citizen  of  Austria  had  exercised  free
                  movement rights so as to settle in  Germany.   He  applied
                  for and obtained naturalisation in that country but,  when
                  it was discovered he had failed to disclose, in connection
                  with his naturalisation application, that he  was  subject
                  to  criminal  investigations  in  Austria  concerning   an
                  alleged  fraud,  the  German  authorities  took  steps  to
                  withdraw   his   German   nationality.    Upon    becoming
                  naturalised in Germany, Mr Rottmann had  lost  citizenship
                  of Austria, pursuant  to  the  nationality  laws  of  that
                  country.


             40.  For our purposes, the relevant findings of the  CJEU  are
                  as follows:-


                  '55. In such a case, it  is,  however,  for  the  national
                      court to ascertain whether the withdrawal decision at
                      issue in the main proceedings observes the  principle
                      of   proportionality   so   far   as   concerns   the
                      consequences it entails  for  the  situation  of  the
                      person concerned in the light of European Union  law,
                      in addition, where appropriate, to examination of the
                      proportionality of  the  decision  in  the  light  of
                      national law.


                   56. Having regard to the  importance  which  primary  law
                      attaches to the status of citizen of the Union,  when
                      examining a decision withdrawing naturalisation it is
                      necessary,  therefore,  to  take  into  account   the
                      consequences that the decision entails for the person
                      concerned and, if relevant, for the  members  of  his
                      family with regard to the loss of the rights  enjoyed
                      by every citizen of the Union.  In this respect it is
                      necessary to establish, in particular,  whether  that
                      loss is justified in relation to the gravity  of  the
                      offence committed by that person,  to  the  lapse  of
                      time between  the  naturalisation  decision  and  the
                      withdrawal decision and to whether it is possible for
                      that person to recover his original nationality.


                   57. With regard, in particular, to that  last  aspect,  a
                      Member State whose nationality has been  acquired  by
                      deception cannot be  considered  bound,  pursuant  to
                      Article   17EC,   to   refrain    from    withdrawing
                      naturalisation merely because  the  person  concerned
                      has not recovered the nationality of his Member State
                      of origin.


                   58. It  is,  nevertheless,  for  the  national  court  to
                      determine whether, before such a decision withdrawing
                      naturalisation takes effect, having regard to all the
                      relevant circumstances, observance of  the  principle
                      of proportionality requires the person  concerned  to
                      be afforded a reasonable period of time in  order  to
                      try to recover the nationality of his Member State of
                      origin.


                   59. Having regard to the foregoing,  the  answer  to  the
                      first question and to the first part  of  the  second
                      question must be that it is not contrary to  European
                      Union law, in particular to  Article  17  EC,  for  a
                      Member State to withdraw from a citizen of the  Union
                      the   nationality   of   that   State   acquired   by
                      naturalisation  when  that   nationality   has   been
                      obtained by deception, on condition that the decision
                      to    withdraw    observes    the    principle     of
                      proportionality.'


             41.  At  19.2  of  Fransman's  British  Nationality  Law  (3rd
                  Edition) the author notes that:


                      'Rottmann  concerned  a  case  where  a  person   had
                      exercised free  movement  rights  to  move  from  his
                      Member State of origin to a  host  Member  State,  in
                      other words that there  was  a  cross-border  element
                      engaging  EU  law  in  addition  to  the   subsequent
                      acquisition and thereafter loss of the nationality of
                      the host Member State.  The case  did  not  test  the
                      proposition of whether the acquisition  by  deception
                      and subsequent loss of  the  nationality  of  another
                      Member State  is  within  the  scope  of  EU  law  in
                      circumstances where the  person  remains  within  the
                      Member  State  of  origin  during   the   period   of
                      acquisition and loss and does not move to that  other
                      state.'


             42.  In the light of Zambrano  (European  Citizenship)  [2011]
                  EUECJ C-34/09 (08 March 2011), we  do  not  consider  that
                  Rottmann can be said  to  be  of  no  application  to  the
                  circumstances of the  present  case,  merely  because  the
                  present appellant has not engaged EU free movement laws by
                  moving to another EU State.  It  is  clear  from  Zambrano
                  that the CJEU requires importance to be  attached  to  the
                  rights and  benefits  derived  from  EU  Citizenship,  not
                  merely as regard free  movement.   Nevertheless,  where  a
                  person affected by a deprivation decision has made  actual
                  use of rights flowing from EU citizenship, in  particular,
                  the right to work in another EU State, then the effect  of
                  removing  such  citizenship  may  well  have   a   greater
                  practical impact, compared with the  position  where  such
                  rights  have  not  been  exercised.   Depending   on   the
                  circumstances, that degree of impact may  well  require  a
                  greater  degree  of  justification  on  the  part  of  the
                  national  authorities,  as   regards   their   deprivation
                  decision."


81.  A case  which  is  clearly  of  direct  relevance  in  determining  the
    European parameters of a section 40A appeal is G1 v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 867.  G1 does  not  feature  in
    the decision of the Tribunal in Deliallisi.  As a member of  the  panel
    in that case, I cannot recall that it was cited in argument.

82.  G1 involved a naturalised British citizen, originally from  Sudan,  who
    was deprived of his British citizenship and excluded from returning  to
    the United Kingdom, on the basis that the  respondent  considered  that
    both actions would be conducive to the public good.  G1 was said by the
    respondent to be involved in terrorism-related activities and  to  have
    links to a number of Islamic extremists.

83.  G1 contended that the application of EU law entitled him to  attend  in
    person his appeal in the United Kingdom.   The  appellant's  contention
    "lies in the fact that because the loss of national citizenship entails
    the loss also of EU citizenship (conferred by Article 9 of  the  treaty
    on European Union and Article 20(1) of TFEU), the  deprivation  of  the
    citizenship of a national of an EU member state "falls within the ambit
    of EU law".  He relied principally on the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in Rottmann v Bayern [2010]  ECR  1-1449"
    (Laws LJ at paragraph 30).

84.  The Court had this to say:-

         "36. By its first  question  and  the  first  part  of  the  second
             question, which may appropriately be  examined  together,  the
             national court seeks in essence to  ascertain  whether  it  is
             contrary to European Union law, in particular  to  article  17
             EC, for a member state to withdraw from a citizen of the Union
             the nationality of that State acquired by  naturalisation  and
             obtained by deception in as much as that  withdrawal  deprives
             the person concerned of the status of citizen of the Union and
             of the benefit of the rights attaching  thereto  by  rendering
             him stateless, acquisition of that nationality  having  caused
             that person to lose the nationality of  his  member  state  of
             origin.


         37.  All the governments that submitted observations to the  Court,
             the Freistaat  Bayern  and  the  Commission  of  the  European
             Communities argue that the rules on the acquisition  and  loss
             of nationality  fall  within  the  competence  of  the  member
             states.  Some of them conclude that  a  decision  to  withdraw
             naturalisation such as that at issue in the  main  proceedings
             cannot fall within the ambit of European Union law.   In  that
             connection,  they  make  reference  to  Declaration  No  2  on
             nationality of a member state, annexed by the member states to
             the final act of the Treaty on European Union.

         38.  The German and Austrian Governments also argue that  when  the
             decision withdrawing the naturalisation of  the  applicant  in
             the main proceedings was adopted,  the  latter  was  a  German
             national, living in Germany, to whom an administrative act  by
             a  German  authority  was  addressed.   According   to   those
             governments, supported by the Commission, this is,  therefore,
             a purely internal situation not in any way concerning European
             Union law, the latter not being applicable  simply  because  a
             member state has adopted a measure in respect of  one  of  its
             nationals.  The fact that, in a situation such as that in  the
             main proceedings, the person concerned exercised his right  to
             freedom of movement before his naturalisation cannot of itself
             constitute a cross-border element capable of  playing  a  part
             with regard to the withdrawal of that naturalisation.


         39.  It is to be borne in mind here that, according to  established
             case law, it is for each member state, having  due  regard  to
             Community law, to lay down the conditions for the  acquisition
             and loss of nationality: see Micheletti's case (Case C-369/90)
             [1992] ECR I-4239, para 10; Belgian State v  Mesbah  (Case  C-
             179/98 [1999] ECR I-7955, para 29; and  Chen  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department (Case C-200/02  [2005]  QB  325,
             para 37).


         40.  It is true that Declaration No 2 on nationality  of  a  Member
             State, annexed by the member states to the final  act  of  the
             Treaty on European Union, and the decision  of  the  heads  of
             state and government, meeting within the European  Council  at
             Edinburgh on 11  and  12  December  1992,  concerning  certain
             problems raised by Denmark on the Treaty  of  European  Union,
             which were  intended  to  clarify  a  question  of  particular
             importance to the member states, namely, the definition of the
             ambit ratione personae of the provisions of European Union law
             referring to the concept of national, have to  be  taken  into
             consideration as being instruments for the  interpretation  of
             the EC Treaty, especially for the purpose of  determining  the
             ambit ratione personae of that Treaty.


         41.   Nevertheless,  the  fact  that  a  matter  falls  within  the
             competence of the member states does not alter the fact  that,
             in situations covered by  European  Union  law,  the  national
             rules concerned must have due regard to the  latter:  see,  to
             that effect, Criminal  proceedings  against  Bickel  (Case  C-
             274/96) [1998]  ECR  I-7637,  para  17  (as  regards  national
             provisions in the sphere of criminal legislation and the rules
             of criminal procedure); Garcia Avello v Belgian State (Case C-
             148/02) ECR  I-11613,  para  25  (as  regards  national  rules
             governing a person's name);  Schempp  v  Finanzamt  M�nchen  V
             (Case C-403/03)[2005] ECR I-6421, para 19 (as regards national
             rules relating to direct taxation); Kingdom of Spain v  United
             Kingdom (Supported by Commission of the  European  Communities
             intervening) (Case C-145/04) [2006] ECR I-7917,  para  78  (as
             regards national rules determining  the  persons  entitled  to
             vote and to stand as candidates in elections to  the  European
             Parliament)).


         42.  It is clear that the situation of a citizen of the Union  who,
             like the applicant in the main proceedings, is  faced  with  a
             decision  withdrawing  his  naturalisation,  adopted  by   the
             authorities of one member state, and placing him, after he has
             lost  the  nationality  of  another  member  state   that   he
             originally possessed, in a position capable of causing him  to
             lose the status conferred by article  17  EC  and  the  rights
             attaching thereto falls, by  reason  of  its  nature  and  its
             consequences, within the ambit of European Union law.


         43.  As the court has several  times  stated,  citizenship  of  the
             Union is intended to be the fundamental status of nationals of
             the member states: Grzelczyk v Centre  public  d'aide  sociale
             d'Ottignies-Louvain-la-Neuve (Case C-184/00) [2002]  ICR  566,
             para  31;   Baumbast  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department (Case C-413/99) [2003] ICR 1347, para 82).


         44.  Article 17(2) EC attaches to that status the rights and duties
             laid down by the  Treaty,  including  the  right  to  rely  on
             article 12 EC in  all  situations  falling  within  the  scope
             ratione materiae of Union law: see Mart�nez Sala  v  Freistaat
             Bayern (Case C-85/96) [1998] ECR I-2691, para 62, and  Schempp
             v Finanzamt M�nchen V (Case C-403/03) [2005] ECR  I-6421  para
             17)".


85.  I agree with Mr Jarvis that the  effect  of  G1  is  clear.   Unless  a
    section 40A deprivation appeal has a cross-border element, EU  law  has
    no part to play in the appeal's determination.  To the extent that  the
    Tribunal find otherwise in Deliallisi, its  decision  was  reached  per
    incuriam.

86.  Ms Naik sought to circumvent the problem  of  G1  by  recourse  to  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in Pham v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2015] UKSC 19.  In that case, which involved the  issue  of
    whether a person from Vietnam would be rendered stateless by  depriving
    him of British citizenship, the Supreme Court considered the  judgments
    in Rottmann and G1.  At paragraphs 58 and  59  Lord  Carnwath  said  as
    follows:-

         "58. It seems clear that the issue of EU law would raise  difficult
             issues, even before reaching the question of  a  reference  to
             the  European  court.   I  see  considerable  force   in   the
             criticisms made by Laws LJ of some of  the  reasoning  in  the
             Rottmann case [2010] QB 761.  In particular he raises the more
             fundamental issue of competence (para 54 above): that  is,  in
             his words, 'whether the European Communities Act 1972  or  any
             successor statute had conferred any authority on the Court  of
             Justice to exercise such a jurisdiction'.  In the light of his
             judgment, this is an issue which would need to be  considered,
             in the Court of Appeal or this court, before it  would  become
             appropriate to consider a reference to the European Court.


          1. However, before that stage is  reached,  in  my  view,  it  is
             important that SIAC, as the tribunal  of  fact,  should  first
             identify the respects, if any, in which a  decision  on  these
             legal issues  might  become  necessary  for  disposal  of  the
             present case.  Mr Southey relies in general terms  on  the  EU
             requirement of proportionality,  but  he  has  not  shown  how
             (whatever its precise scope in EU  law)  it  would  differ  in
             practice in the present case from the issue of proportionality
             already before SIAC under  the  Human  Rights  Convention,  or
             indeed from principles applicable under domestic law".

87.  At paragraph 84, Lord Mance said:-

         "84. In the present context, it is clearly very arguable that there
             are under the Treaties jurisdictional limits to European Union
             competence in relation to the grant or withdrawal by a  member
             state of national citizenship. Fundamental though its  effects
             are where it exists, citizenship of the  Union  is  under  the
             Treaties a dependant or derivative concept - it depends on  or
             derives from national citizenship ...".


    With respect to Ms Naik, these passages make it quite evident that  the
    ratio of G1 remains intact, so far as  it  concerns  the  inability  of
    European law, in a case  having  no  cross-border  dimension,  to  have
    purchase upon a section 40A appeal.  I can see no reason to distinguish
    G1  from  the  present  case  on  the  basis  that  G1  concerned   the
    respondent's power to deprive G1 of citizenship on the ground  that  it
    would be conducive to the public good because of alleged involvement in
    terrorism-related activities.  Likewise, the fact that G1 was  excluded
    from the United Kingdom seems  to  me,  for  present  purposes,  to  be
    immaterial.




E. The reasonably foreseeable consequences of  depriving  the  appellant  of
British citizenship

88.  This is the third occasion on which  a  substantive  judicial  decision
    has been made on the appellant's section 40A  appeal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision of October 2014, although set aside because of  the
    erroneous application of Part 5A of the 2002 Act, contains  a  detailed
    analysis of the evidence that was before the  Tribunal,  regarding  the
    appellant's medical condition and the likely effects  on  it  of  being
    deprived of citizenship.


(a) Mental health

89.  In summary, I do not consider that any of  the  more  recent  evidence,
    which I have seen and heard, casts any doubt upon  the  conclusions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, as set out at paragraphs  32  and  33  of  its
    determination:-

         "32. It is clear to us from all this evidence  that  the  Appellant
             suffers  from  long-standing  psychological  problems  and   a
             diagnosis has been made on more than one occasion of  PTSD  as
             well as depression associated  with  clinical  concerns  about
             suicidality and self-harm.


         33.  However, despite this clinical picture and  the  extraordinary
             series of distressing and traumatic events that the  Appellant
             appears to have encountered throughout her  life,  there  have
             been extended periods when she appears to have functioned at a
             remarkably high level.  She has served as a mother to a number
             of children (including one who is seriously disabled) and been
             able to cope with a whole series of  family  crises  affecting
             the children.  Whilst dealing  with  family  responsibilities,
             she also studied and qualified as a nurse and she worked as  a
             nurse for a  number  of  years.   She  has  also  been  highly
             energetic in pursuing a series of family and custody  disputes
             and legal proceedings".


90.  There can  be  no  doubt  in  anyone's  mind  that  the  appellant  has
    significant mental health issues.  Insofar as they can  be  attributed,
    wholly or partly, to external  factors,  the  immigration  difficulties
    that the appellant has only relatively recently faced are  plainly  not
    the major ones.  Although  there  are  doubts  concerning  the  precise
    sequence of events that led to her arrival in the United  Kingdom,  the
    appellant undoubtedly had a traumatic  early  life  in  Nigeria,  as  a
    result of the Biafran war, if nothing else.  The sad sequence of events
    that led to the custody battles the appellant fought and (in  the  case
    of Z) lost have also had an evident impact upon her mental health.

91.  I entirely understand that, against this background, the mental  health
    professionals involved with the appellant's care would much prefer  the
    appellant to be free from any worries  on  the  immigration  front  and
    (insofar as the two are  related)  on  the  accommodation  front  also.
    Looked at overall, however, I do not accept that  the  consequences  of
    deprivation upon the appellant's  mental  health  would  be  reasonably
    likely to be as dramatic as Ms Naik contends.

92.  Whilst I give due weight to the views of Drs Price and  Fisher  and  of
    Ms Kralj, I agree  with  Mr  Jarvis  that  the  best  overall  evidence
    regarding the appellant's mental issues,  in  particular  her  suicidal
    ideation, is to be found in the  materials  emanating  from  her  long-
    standing GP, Dr Kelland.  This evidence shows  the  appellant  has  not
    evinced a clear intention actually to end her own life.  The  notes  Dr
    Kelland  made  in  respect  of  an  incident  on  9  October  2015  are
    indicative: "Frank disc[ussion] - multiple similar episodes  -  but  no
    real intent says she will not  do  it  ...  says  she  just  wanted  to
    disc[uss] issues w[ith] me".

94.  It is also significant that the appellant is plainly receiving  a  high
    and committed standard of care from both Dr Kelland and, more recently,
    Dr Fisher and the mental health team.  Even if the appellant were to be
    left for any period of time without status,  following  deprivation  of
    citizenship, she would be entitled to emergency medical  care  and  the
    strong likelihood is that Dr  Kelland  would,  furthermore,  decide  to
    remain as her GP.


(b) The respondent's likely actions

95.  Although my findings on this issue are broadly in  line  with  that  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  determining   the   reasonably   likely
    consequences of deprivation, it is plainly important to  consider  what
    the respondent is, in fact, likely to do in  those  circumstances.   Mr
    Jarvis says that the respondent can do one of  three  things:  grant  a
    period of leave; initiate deportation; or  do  nothing.   Although  the
    respondent's current policy, on its face,  enables  her  to  adopt  the
    third such course, a policy must, of its nature, be able to be departed
    from, if the circumstances  so  require.   In  the  present  case,  any
    decision which would be likely to result  in  the  appellant  suffering
    significant disruption in the current mental health care  that  she  is
    receiving could well lead to a disproportionate interference  with  her
    Article 8 rights.  The respondent can, I find, be  reasonably  expected
    to be fully aware of this and to respond accordingly.

96.  I find that, in  all  the  circumstances  of  this  (unarguably  highly
    unusual) case, the respondent is - despite her policy - not  reasonably
    likely to leave the appellant in a "limbo" state  for  any  significant
    length of time, if at all.  The respondent's choices would,  thus,  lie
    in either granting limited leave to remain or pursuing deportation.  In
    the former case, the appellant would lose the freedom from  immigration
    control that comes with  citizenship.   However,  she  would  otherwise
    remain  in  a  stable  position,  both  as  regards  health  care   and
    accommodation (as to which, see further below).  I was  unpersuaded  by
    the evidence of H that remaining British would be as beneficial to  the
    appellant, in terms of her overall circumstances  and  outlook,  as  he
    claimed it to be.  Of much greater significance  to  the  appellant,  I
    find, is her ongoing relationship with H and with S, with whom she  now
    lives.   The  appellant's  history  shows  plainly   that   she   draws
    substantial validation from being in a position to look  after  others.
    S's decision  to  move  in  with  the  appellant  is,  accordingly,  of
    considerable significance.

97.  I accept that, as matters stand, the appellant fears  that  deprivation
    of citizenship will be followed by  deportation  action  and  that  the
    respondent has refused to rule that out.  I do not,  however,  consider
    that the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom, in consequence of
    deprivation, can be said to be reasonably  foreseeable.   The  view  is
    occluded by the following matters.

98.  As I have already mentioned, the appellant's case is that, as a  matter
    of law, she will enjoy indefinite leave to remain, upon being  deprived
    of British citizenship.  Whilst I  fully  acknowledge  the  appellant's
    limited means, and I am aware of the problems she may face as a  person
    who, in the eyes of the respondent at least, lacks leave,  her  history
    shows that she has been  able  to  mount  legal  proceedings,  both  as
    regards her immigration position and  as  regards  custody  issues.   I
    therefore consider it is likely that the appellant will  seek  directly
    to test her contention regarding indefinite leave to  remain.  For  the
    reasons I have given at paragraphs 68 to 77 above, I consider that such
    a challenge will fail. Nevertheless, whilst it is, of course,  possible
    for the respondent to deport someone  who  has  indefinite  leave,  the
    issue is likely at least to be a complicating factor.


(c) Removal to Nigeria not reasonably foreseeable

99.   The much more significant point is that, regardless of the outcome  of
    any hypothetical proceedings regarding the appellant's indefinite leave
    to remain, it is simply not possible to conclude  that  deprivation  is
    reasonably likely to lead to the respondent's  actually  deporting  the
    appellant to Nigeria.  I agree with Ms Naik and Mr Jarvis  that  it  is
    not for the Tribunal, in the  present  proceedings,  to  pre-judge  the
    outcome of any appeal that the appellant may bring against  a  decision
    to deport her.  It would, nevertheless, be  wrong  to  make  a  finding
    regarding the reasonably foreseeable consequences of  deprivation  that
    ignores this aspect.  The Tribunal must take a view as to whether, from
    its present vantage point, there is likely to be force in any challenge
    to deportation that  the  appellant  can  be  expected  to  bring.  The
    stronger the case, the less likely  it  will  be  that  the  reasonably
    foreseeable consequences of deprivation will include removal  from  the
    United Kingdom. There is nothing novel or problematic in the  Secretary
    of State, a court or a tribunal being required to take a  view  of  the
    strength of future, hypothetical appeal proceedings: see eg section  94
    of the 2002 Act and paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

100. Following the changes to the appeal regime effected by the  Immigration
    Act 2014 there is, of course, no appeal as  such  against  deportation.
    What the appellant  would  need  to  do  is  make  a  human  rights  or
    protection claim (or both) and appeal any refusal of that  claim.   The
    appellant contends that she would not be  able  to  meet  the  cost  of
    making an application for leave on human rights grounds.  The  relevant
    IDI (Fee Waiver for FLR(FP) & FLR(O) Forms (April 2015)), however, does
    not purport to cover the entire range of  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant might raise a human rights claim by reference to  Article  8;
    nor does it cover protection claims, which, in view of the  appellant's
    asserted history, cannot be ruled out.   In  any  event,  even  if  the
    appellant were to fail to qualify for a fee waiver, by reference to the
    IDI, because she is not considered "destitute" within the terms of  its
    policy, I find that  it  is  likely  she  would  be  able  to  make  an
    application, by paying any requisite fee.  She has family in the United
    Kingdom who, albeit with difficulty, would be likely to  help  her  and
    she has also shown an ability to access relevant support mechanisms.

101. Based on the appellant's difficulties in Nigeria; the  length  of  time
    she has spent in the United Kingdom; her  relationship  with  H  and  S
    (which the First-tier Tribunal rightly found went beyond ordinary adult
    family relationships); her mental health problems; her  training  as  a
    nurse; and the expiry next year of the ban on her working  as  such,  I
    conclude that the appellant would have a strongly arguable human rights
    claim which, if rejected by the  respondent,  would  have  at  least  a
    realistic prospect of success before the First-tier Tribunal.

102. I therefore find that it is not a  reasonably  foreseeable  consequence
    of the appellant's deprivation of her British citizenship that she will
    be deported or otherwise removed to Nigeria.  Despite her mental health
    difficulties,  the  appellant  is  plainly  able  to   understand   the
    consequence of this finding, which can be reinforced by those  advising
    her and caring for her mental health needs.  As a  result,  it  is  not
    reasonably foreseeable that the appellant will regard the loss  of  her
    British citizenship as leading inexorably to her return to Nigeria.  On
    the contrary, such a scenario is highly unlikely.


(d) Benefits and accommodation

103. Although I have set out in some detail Ms  Harris's  opinion  regarding
    the appellant's access to accommodation and benefits, mention must also
    be made of  the  written  statement  on  these  issues,  together  with
    relevant legislation, guidance and case law, prepared by Mr  Jarvis  on
    behalf of the respondent, pursuant to the Tribunal's  directions.   The
    contribution of each has been extremely valuable.

104. The detailed articulation of the  parties'  respective  submissions  on
    these issues has served to identify the key matters.  The  basic  point
    that emerges from an analysis of  the  relevant  legislation  is  that,
    complex though it may appear that legislation has been  framed  with  a
    view to ensuring that the United Kingdom does  not  violate  the  human
    rights of those who have accommodation and/or care needs, which require
    to be met from the public purse.

105. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the Care Act 2014 provides for  a
    local authority to have power to  meet  a  person's  care  and  support
    needs, even though the authority may not be under any duty  to  do  so.
    Like any public law power, section 19 needs to be exercised rationally,
    with proper regard to the circumstances of any particular case.

106. As Ms Harris notes, SL v  Westminster  CC  articulates  a  "destitution
    plus" test, which is  of  relevance  in  interpreting  the  restriction
    contained in section 21 of the 2014 Act, whereby a local authority  may
    not meet the needs of an adult to whom section  115  of  the  1999  Act
    applies: essentially, because the adult is subject to  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 and is in the United Kingdom without the necessary leave.

107.  The  mechanisms  accordingly  exist  for  the  appellant  to   receive
    accommodation and care, following deprivation of her citizenship,  even
    if she finds herself without any leave to remain.  If and to the extent
    that this is not, in fact, the case,  the  likelihood  grows  that  the
    respondent would,  in  practice,  grant  leave  so  as  to  remove  the
    restriction imposed by section 115.

108. I nevertheless accept that there may be a  period  of  uncertainty  for
    the appellant, as regards her accommodation position, in the  event  of
    the deprivation of her British citizenship, although I  find  that  the
    respondent is unlikely to leave the appellant  in  immigration  "limbo"
    for a significant period.  In assessing the effect on the appellant  of
    this uncertainty,  regard  needs  to  be  had  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's  current  accommodation  position,  as  described  at   the
    hearing, is far from ideal.  Everyone concerned (including Dr  Kelland)
    describes the appellant's accommodation as dire, largely as a result of
    damp problems.

109. Again, S's decision to live with the appellant is a  positive  feature,
    so far as her future accommodation position  is  concerned.   Whilst  I
    accept that S's needs cannot, in law, be conflated with  those  of  the
    appellant, at least for the purposes of the Care Act  2014,  S  has  an
    entitlement to accommodation in his own right.  The local authority  is
    likely, in my view, to regard S's presence in the appellant's household
    as a situation which it  would  be  both  beneficial  to  S  and  cost-
    effective to maintain.





(e) Significance of delay

110. The appellant has raised the  issue  of  the  delay  in  depriving  the
    appellant of her citizenship, as a factor that may  serve  to  diminish
    the public interest in bringing that about.  I  do  not  consider  that
    there is any merit in this submission.  The delay is, I  consider,  due
    to the appellant resolutely pursuing her case, both in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (twice) and in the Upper Tribunal.  I  make  no  criticism  of
    that; but it  does  not  enable  her  to  categorise  the  respondent's
    behaviour as "dysfunctional" in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 terms.

111. These, then, are the reasonably foreseeable consequences  of  depriving
    the appellant of her British citizenship.  Are they such as  to  compel
    the  conclusion  that   deprivation   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights?


F. The public interest

112. The appellant came to the United Kingdom, carrying class  A  drugs  for
    supply to others.   She  was  sentenced  to  a  significant  period  of
    imprisonment, which must have reflected both  the  seriousness  of  the
    crime and the absence of any significant mitigating factor put  forward
    on her behalf.  The appellant then escaped from prison  and  assumed  a
    new identity.  Although  she  subsequently  trained  as  a  nurse,  she
    deceived the nursing authorities  as  to  her  identity  and  the  true
    position only became known as a  result  of  her  niece  informing  the
    respondent, in the course of a custody dispute.

113.  I  consider  that  the  public  interest  in  ensuring  that   British
    citizenship is given only to those  who  meet  the  relevant  statutory
    requirements would be severely undermined  if  the  appellant  were  to
    retain her citizenship.  The public interest in deprivation is, in this
    case, extremely strong.


G. Striking the balance

114. I do not doubt that the appellant will initially see deprivation  as  a
    further blow in her plainly troubled life.   For  the  reasons  I  have
    given, however, I do  not  consider  that  the  reasonably  foreseeable
    consequences of deprivation are as serious as have  been  contended  on
    her behalf.  In particular, the medical evidence not only  fails  by  a
    wide margin to reach the threshold for Article 3; I also find that  the
    appellant is highly unlikely to respond to deprivation with  a  serious
    attempt at suicide.  The foreseeable consequences of deprivation do not
    include removal  to  Nigeria  or  being  left  without  leave  for  any
    significant period of time. They do include the appellant continuing to
    have access to relevant mental health care and Dr Kelland continuing as
    her GP. Although a move from present accommodation may, in  any  event,
    be required, the appellant's accommodation needs are highly  likely  to
    continue to be met, in a way that enables her to continue to live  with
    S and derive validation from  her  ability  to  look  after  him.   The
    appellant will also continue to have  a  strong  relationship  with  H.
    Next year, the ban on her working as a nurse can  be  lifted,  bringing
    with it a sense of hope for the future.

115.  Weighing the public interest against  the  appellant's  interests,  in
    the light of  my  findings  regarding  reasonable  foreseeability,  the
    public interest prevails and no disproportionate interference with  the
    appellant's rights will be caused  by  depriving  her  of  the  British
    citizenship that she acquired through deception.


H. Re-exercising discretion

116.  I  must  also  consider  whether  to  re-exercise   the   respondent's
    discretion  differently.   Understandably,  Ms  Naik  put  forward   no
    separate submission in this  regard.   Standing  back,  I  can  see  no
    additional factor that is  brought  into  play  by  this  discretionary
    decision, which has not already been covered in my ECHR analysis.   Nor
    can I see any reason to view any such factor in a different light.


I. Decision

117. This appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                               Signed




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane








