
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 18 and 19 May 2015                         |On 30 October 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

                                   Between


                                     AA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Bazini (Counsel) and  Mr  C.  Cole  (Solicitor)
                    instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  D.  Blundell  (Counsel)  instructed   by   the
                    Government Legal Department

                              COUNTRY GUIDANCE

Note: References to Iraq herein are to the territory of Iraq  excluding  the
autonomous Iraqi Kurdish Region ("IKR") unless otherwise stated.

A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE  QUALIFICATION
DIRECTIVE

1.    There is at present a state of  internal  armed  conflict  in  certain
parts of Iraq, involving government security  forces,  militias  of  various
kinds, and the Islamist group known as ISIL. The  intensity  of  this  armed
conflict in the so-called "contested areas", comprising the governorates  of
Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min),  Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is  such
that, as a general matter, there are substantial grounds for believing  that
any civilian returned there, solely  on  account  of  his  or  her  presence
there, faces a real risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence
amounting to  serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
Qualification Directive.

2.    The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the  "Baghdad  Belts"
(the urban environs around Baghdad City) is also of the intensity  described
in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a  generalised  Article  15(c)
risk. The parts of the Baghdad Belts concerned are those forming the  border
between the  Baghdad  Governorate  and  the  contested  areas  described  in
paragraph 1.

3.    The degree of armed conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq  (including
Baghdad City) is not  such  as  to  give  rise  to  indiscriminate  violence
amounting  to  such  serious  harm  to  civilians,  irrespective  of   their
individual characteristics, so as to engage Article 15(c).

4.    In accordance with the principles set out in Elgafaji  (C-465/07)  and
QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  620,
decision-makers in Iraqi cases should assess the individual  characteristics
of the person  claiming  humanitarian  protection,  in  order  to  ascertain
whether those characteristics are such as to put that person  at  real  risk
of Article 15(c) harm.

B.  DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

5.    Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)  will  be
to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad.  The  Iraqi  authorities
will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to  enter  Iraq  only
if P is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to  P,
or a laissez passer.

6.    No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not  in  possession
of one of these documents.

7.    In the light of the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)  and
Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1276,
an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by  reference  to
any alleged risk of harm arising from an  absence  of  Iraqi  identification
documentation, if the Tribunal  finds  that  P's  return  is  not  currently
feasible, given what is known about the state of P's documentation.



C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

8.    It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the return  of  P
to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk of harm arising  from  an
absence  of  Iraqi  identification  documentation  will   require   judicial
determination.

9.    Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one of the  ways  in
which it is possible for an Iraqi national in the United Kingdom  to  obtain
a passport or a laissez passer.  Where the Secretary of  State  proposes  to
remove P by means of a passport or laissez passer, she will be  expected  to
demonstrate to the Tribunal what, if any, identification  documentation  led
the Iraqi authorities to issue P with the passport or laissez passer (or  to
signal their intention to do so).

10.   Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer or  expired  passport,
P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of  return  by  reason  of
not having a current passport or other current form of Iraqi  identification
document.

11.   Where P's return to Iraq is found by the Tribunal to be  feasible,  it
will generally be necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able
to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID  is  generally
required in order for an Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance  from  the
authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical  treatment.   If  P
shows there are no family or other members likely  to  be  able  to  provide
means  of  support,  P  is  in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any  funds  provided
to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's return have  been
exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID.

12.   Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should  as  a
general matter be able to obtain one from the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office
for P's home Governorate,  using  an  Iraqi  passport  (whether  current  or
expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a passport, P's  ability  to
obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
the book holding P's information (and that of P's family).  P's  ability  to
persuade the officials that P is the person named on the  relevant  page  is
likely to depend on whether P has family members or  other  individuals  who
are prepared to vouch for P.

13.   P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely  hampered  if  P
is unable to go to the  Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's  Governorate
because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is  occurring.  As
a result of the violence, alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and
Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence  does
not demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad,  is  in
practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need of them. There is,  however,
a National Status Court in Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply  for  formal
recognition of identity. The precise operation of this  court  is,  however,
unclear.

D. INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IRAQI KURDISH REGION)

14.  As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  a
person from a contested area to relocate to  Baghdad  City  or  (subject  to
paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly  harsh  for  P  to
relocate to Baghdad, the  following  factors  are,  however,  likely  to  be
relevant:

    (a) whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see  Part  C
    above);

    (b) whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot  are  less  likely  to
    find employment);

    (c) whether P  has  family  members  or  friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
    accommodate him;

    (d) whether P is a lone female (women face  greater  difficulties  than
    men in finding employment);

    (e) whether P can find a  sponsor  to  access  a  hotel  room  or  rent
    accommodation;

    (f) whether P is from a minority community;

    (g) whether there is support available for P bearing in mind  there  is
    some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are provided with the
    support generally given to IDPs.

16.   There is not a real risk  of  an  ordinary  civilian  travelling  from
Baghdad airport to the southern  governorates,  suffering  serious  harm  en
route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

E. IRAQI KURDISH REGION

17.   The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if P originates from  the
IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with the  IKR  authorities.  The
authorities in the IKR do not require  P  to  have  an  expired  or  current
passport, or laissez passer.

18.   The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article 15(c) risk  to
an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

19.   A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can  obtain  entry  for
10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a  further  10
days. If K finds employment, K can remain for longer, although K  will  need
to register with the authorities and provide details of the employer.  There
is no evidence that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove Kurds  from  the
IKR whose permits have come to an end.

20.   Whether K, if returned to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be  expected  to
avoid any potential undue harshness in that city by travelling to  the  IKR,
will be fact sensitive; and is likely to involve  an  assessment  of  (a)the
practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to  Irbil  by  air);
(b)the likelihood of K's  securing  employment  in  the  IKR;  and  (c)  the
availability of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.

21.   As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a home area  in
Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

22.   This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq

                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

|                                                     |Paragraph numbers     |
|Glossary                                             |                      |
|Introduction                                         |1-5                   |
|Evidence - A Summary                                                        |
|Written evidence of Dr Fatah                         |6-11                  |
|Oral evidence of Dr Fatah                            |12-29                 |
|Evidence from Amnesty International                  |30-35                 |
|Home Office Country Information Guidance             |36-43                 |
|UNHCR's position paper                               |44                    |
|Existing Country Guidance                            |45-49                 |
|The submissions - A Summary                                                 |
|Appellant's skeleton argument                        |51-58                 |
|Appellant's oral submissions                         |59-67                 |
|Respondent's skeleton argument                       |68-74                 |
|Respondent's oral submissions                        |75-82                 |
|Art 15(c) of the Qualification Directive                                    |
|Legal Framework                                      |83-86                 |
|Decision and Conclusions                             |87-100                |
|The Contested Areas                                  |101-106               |
|Babil Governorate                                    |107-111               |
|IKR                                                  |112-113               |
|The Southern Governorates                            |114-117               |
|Baghdad city                                         |118-137               |
|The Baghdad Belts                                    |138-146               |
|Internal relocation                                                         |
|Legal Framework                                      |147-149               |
|Places of return                                     |150                   |
|Relocation to Baghdad                                |151-172               |
|Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK                    |173-177               |
|Obtaining a CSID in Iraq                             |178-187               |
|Conditions in Baghdad                                |188-203               |
|Country Guidance                                     |204                   |
|Conclusion of Appellant's appeal                     |205-210               |

|Documentary evidence before the Upper Tribunal       |Appendix A            |


                                  GLOSSARY

CSID  -     Civil Status Identity Document

DTM   -     Migration Displacement Tracking

GoI   -     Government of Iraq

IBC   -     Iraq Body Count

IDP   -     Internally Displaced Person

IED   -     Improvised Explosive Device

IKR   -     Iraqi Kurdish Region

INC   -     Iraqi Nationality Certificate

IOM   -     International Organisation for Migration

IRC   -     International Rescue Committee

ISF   -     Iraqi Security Forces

ISIL  -     Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant

MODM  -     Ministry of Displacement and Migration

MoI   -     Ministry of Interior

NRC   -     Norwegian Refugee Council

PACS  -     Protection and Assistance Centres

PARCS -     Protection, Assistance and Reintegration Centres

PDS   -     Public Distribution System

UNAMI -     United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq

USAID -     United States Agency for International Development

VARRP -     Voluntary Assisted Return and Reintegration Programme

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. Each member of the panel has contributed to this decision.  The  appeal
    comes before us by order of Davis LJ sealed on the 25 October 2012, who
    remitted it:


        "... for reconsideration pursuant to paragraph 12 of schedule 4  to
        the Transfer of Functions of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
        Order 2010 and section 14 of the Tribunals Courts  and  Enforcement
        Act 2007".

 2. This case has been identified to give country guidance on Iraq in light
    of circumstances in that country that have arisen since the decision in
    HM and others (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC) ("HM2").
    Our consideration has been limited to  the  issue  of  whether  Article
    15(c)  of   Council   Directive   2004/83/EC[1]   ("the   Qualification
    Directive") prevents the removal of Iraqi nationals, and in  particular
    the Appellant,  to  Iraq  on  the  basis  that  they  are  entitled  to
    subsidiary protection.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Iraq who entered the United Kingdom on 7
    January 2009, aged 17. He applied for  asylum  on  the  following  day,
    having first  been  arrested.  This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 18 June 2009 and on the same date a decision was made  to
    remove the Appellant to Iraq pursuant to section 10 of the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999. The Appellant appealed this decision to the Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal on Refugee Convention, humanitarian protection
    and human rights grounds, but his appeal was dismissed  by  Immigration
    Judge Batiste in a determination dated 7 September 2009. On 27  January
    2010 Burnett J (as he then was) ordered the Tribunal to reconsider  the
    Appellant's appeal. Thereafter, on  the  23  June  2010,  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Wynne set aside the determination of  Immigration  Judge
    Batiste on the basis that:


         "... the IJ's treatment of the expert  evidence  was  contradictory
         because the IJ preferred the expert on factual matters to the  COIS
         report  but  approached  the  report  with   "a   great   deal   of
         circumspection" and placed "very limited weight" on it. Thus the IJ
         rejected aspects of the  expert  evidence  whilst  accepting  other
         parts of it without adequate reasons for adopting this approach.


         ... because the Appellant was at the relevant time under the age of
         18, the IJ was wrong in taking into account what he is  alleged  to
         have said at his age assessment by social workers.


         ... the IJ's rejection of the Appellant's  humanitarian  protection
         claim under Article 15c of the Qualification  Directive  is  flawed
         for inadequate reasoning"


 4. The re-making of the decision on the Appellant's appeal  was  adjourned
    and came back before Judge Wynne on 22 February 2011, on which occasion
    the Appellant gave further oral evidence.  Judge  Wynne  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds in  a  determination  dated  1  April
    2011. In doing so it was accepted that: (i) the Appellant lived in  the
    family home in Dubis, Kirkuk until he left Iraq at the end of  2008  to
    travel to the United Kingdom; (ii) the Appellant's father died in 2006;
    and, (iii) the Appellant's cousin is a lorry driver who remains  living
    in Iraq, and is based in Kirkuk. Judge Wynne did not accept  the  truth
    of the Appellant's evidence that:  (i)  his  father  had  been  a  high
    ranking Ba'ath official, (ii) his uncle had been a Ba'ath  official  of
    lesser rank than his father and, (iii) his family (mother and  sisters)
    had left Iraq for Syria.

 5. The original grounds seeking permission to appeal  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal related solely to Judge Wynne's assessment of the credibility of
    the evidence given by the Appellant. Moses  LJ  refused  to  grant  the
    Appellant permission in relation  to  such  grounds.  However,  shortly
    thereafter the Court of Appeal handed down its judgment in the case  of
    HM (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ
    1536. This prompted the Appellant to amend his grounds to rely upon the
    terms of that judgment. Laws  LJ  subsequently  granted  permission  to
    appeal in relation to the amended ground only and, as identified above,
    Davis LJ later allowed the appeal, without a hearing,  and  the  matter
    was remitted to the Upper Tribunal for "reconsideration". Paragraphs  6
    and 7 of the Statement of Reasons attached to the  order  of  Davis  LJ
    read:


         "6. The Respondent accepts that this appeal should be  remitted  to
         the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration under article 15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive only...


         7. For this reason, the parties  are  agreed  that  the  matter  be
         remitted back to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal for re-hearing of the appeal by the Tribunal."

The Evidence - A Summary

 6. The Appellant produced written evidence from Dr Rebwar Fatah, contained
    in reports dated 27 February 2015, 8 April 2015  and  1  May  2015.  Dr
    Fatah also gave oral evidence before us. In addition  to  the  evidence
    provided by Dr Fatah, there was also a  considerable  amount  of  other
    documentary evidence before us, a schedule  of  which  is  attached  as
    Appendix A hereto.  The  Appellant  was  not  called  to  provide  oral
    evidence. We have had regard to all of the  material  before  us,  both
    written and oral, when coming to our conclusions.

Written Evidence of Dr Fatah

 7. Dr Fatah was awarded a BSc and MSc by the University of  London  and  a
    PhD by University College London and worked in commercial and strategic
    positions from 1989-2001 for British Telecom, Fujitsu, Nortel  Networks
    and 186K. Since 2000 he has been working as an expert producing country
    reports, nationality assessments and  document  authentication  reports
    for solicitors' firms in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  Netherlands,  the
    United States and Norway. He has also acted  as  a  consultant  to  the
    Commissioner General for Refugees and Stateless Persons of Belgium  and
    with the Finnish League for Human Rights. He speaks Kurdish Sorani  and
    Arabic in addition to English.


 8. Since 2000, he has completed approximately 2,000 expert reports  (these
    include reports for four country guidance cases) as well  as  over  100
    scientific, technical and  commercial  conference  papers.  He  is  the
    founder of the Middle East Consultancy Service ("MECS").  This  service
    has provided in-depth research for  UNHCR,  International  Organisation
    for Migration-Iraq, Transparency International and  Risk  Advisory.  He
    travels to Iraq and IKR on a regular basis and was most recently  there
    between 31 August and 16 September 2014 and 29 January and  6  February
    2015.


 9. In his 90 page report, dated 27 February 2015, Dr Fatah  addresses  the
    general security situation in Iraq  in  some  detail,  with  particular
    reference to the 'disputed territories', Baghdad,  the  south  and  the
    IKR. He thereafter provides in depth evidence in relation to the  issue
    of relocation within Iraq, focusing on Baghdad  and  the  IKR  and,  in
    particular, the economic and humanitarian situation in those areas  and
    the obtaining of identity documentation.


10. In his report of 8 April 2015 Dr Fatah provides  detailed  evidence  on
    the demography and  security  situation  in  Baghdad,  with  particular
    consideration being given to whether non-state militia are  present  in
    Baghdad, whether they have de facto control of any civilian urban areas
    within the Baghdad governorate; whether they target civilians  and,  if
    so, how and who.   Thereafter he  addresses  issues  relating  to  road
    travel in the south of Iraq and the  circumstances  prevailing  in  the
    southern governorates.  Dr Fatah then sets out a summary of the contact
    he, or his organisation, has with, inter alia, the Ministry of Interior
    of Iraq, the Ministry of Displacement and Migration, an Iraqi MP, UNHCR-
    Iraq, the  International  Organisation  for  Migration,  the  Norwegian
    Refugee Council and USAID Iraq Access  for  Justice  -  identifying  in
    particular the role that these organisations play in Iraq.  He  finally
    turns, in his second report, to further consider relocation to the  IKR
    and, in particular, the mechanics of entry into  and  residence  within
    that region.


11. In the latter of his three reports Dr Fatah addresses  the  nature  and
    extent of Baghdad's "Central Archive" of civil records.

Oral Evidence of Dr Fatah

12. In oral evidence Dr Fatah attested  to  the  accuracy  of  his  written
    reports and expanded further on matters set out therein. He referred to
    the evidence already provided as to the documents an Iraqi national  is
    required to produce to the Iraqi consulate in London in order to obtain
    a laissez-passer.   A  laissez-passer  is  not  a  recognised  form  of
    identity document in Iraq. A  recognised  Iraqi  identity  document  is
    required in order to move around Iraq and access services there.


13. Dr Fatah was referred to the conclusions found in paragraph 91  of  the
    Tribunal's decision in MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012]  UKUT
    00126 (IAC) i.e. that a healthy adolescent or adult  Iraqi  would  have
    memorised or have access to the book, page, and volume  number  of  the
    location of their family record. He  disagreed  with  this  conclusion,
    although he accepted that some people  would  remember  these  details.
    Iraqi nationals do not need to recall such details because they have to
    produce the actual identity document when they wish to  rely  upon  it.
    Each member of a person's immediate family i.e. wife  and  children  is
    listed on the  same  pages.  The  2014  Landinfo  report  Iraq:  Travel
    documents and other  identity  documents,  relied  upon  by  Dr  Fatah,
    explains that before marriage an individual will appear on pages in the
    family record with his or  her  parents  and  siblings  and  after  any
    marriage he or she will be listed on pages including his or her  spouse
    and any of their own children. Therefore, immediate family members will
    have the same file and page number in the family records. If a person's
    family record is moved to a different file and/or page, the old  record
    identifies this fact, as well as details of where any new record is  to
    be found.  The Civil Status Identity  Document  ("CSID")  is  the  most
    important document and is a gateway to all other identity documents.


14. Obtaining a replacement CSID requires production of evidence confirming
    identity. If a person has no documents to  prove  his  identity  it  is
    possible to make a request to the National  Status  Court  to  issue  a
    verdict as to that person's identity.  This  requires  such  person  to
    produce two witnesses, each of whom must have a CSID, who would have to
    convince a judge of the person's identity and the fact that he/she  has
    lost their CSID. The documentary record of this verdict can  thereafter
    be produced to the Civil Status Office.  This could take  "three  weeks
    or longer" depending on the area. The Baghdad office is busy.


15. Moving on to the economic situation in Iraq, Dr Fatah observed that the
    price of oil has crashed - oil revenue forming a  significant  part  of
    Iraq's GDP.  ISIL either destroys  or  controls  output  from  the  oil
    fields in the contested areas. The other industries  in  the  contested
    areas have also disappeared.


16. ISIL have now taken control of Ramadi. It can reach places as close  as
    20 km from Baghdad. Over 100,000 people have fled  from  Ramadi.  These
    IDPs are being put into documentation centres by the Iraqi  authorities
    and are required to prove who they are. IDPs are supported by local and
    international agencies as well as the  Iraqi  authorities.  This  is  a
    significant burden on such agencies.


  Under cross-examination


17. Dr Fatah maintained that the most unstable area of Iraq is the line  of
    conflict south of the IKR border.  He agreed: (i) that the violence  in
    Mosul 'ebbs and flows'; (ii) that the categorisation of  the  level  of
    violence in particular areas of Iraq identified in  his  reports  (i.e.
    high, medium, low or less than low) was undertaken by reference to  the
    number of civilian deaths and injuries in those  areas;  (iii)  Baghdad
    has a population of between 6 and  7  million  people;  and,  (iv)  the
    population of an area is a relevant consideration in the assessment  of
    the intensity of violence in such area. He further observed that it  is
    attractive to an insurgent group  to  penetrate  into  Baghdad  because
    there are areas, such as market places, in which  thousands  of  people
    can be killed in one incident - thus creating fear and media attention,
    which they seek. Dr Fatah also accepted that  there  is  an  underlying
    level of criminality in Baghdad, much as there is in all  major  cities
    around the world. He was unaware of any figures relating to this.


18. Dr Fatah continued by confirming that ISIL has never been in control of
    Baghdad, but that  they  do  have  influence  in  some  neighbourhoods.
    Baghdad has a majority Shia population, although there are Sunni  areas
    - these being identified in his first report. The curfew in Baghdad was
    lifted on 7 February 2015. There was no consistent wave of violence  as
    a consequence of  the  lifting  of  the  curfew.  Although  there  were
    incidents on 10 February 2015, these could not be linked to the lifting
    of the curfew.


19. Dr Fatah was asked whether he thought Landinfo to be  a  reputable  and
    reliable  organisation  -  he  confirmed  he  did.   He   agreed   that
    communications, transport, trade and  industry  go  on  functioning  in
    Baghdad - as he said, "Life goes on." The roads in and to the south  of
    Baghdad are not targeted by militia groups, but the checkpoints are.


20. Turning to the issue of documentation - if a person wishes to obtain  a
    laissez-passer  that  person  must  convince  the  consulate  of  their
    nationality and identity. A person in the UK can use a family member or
    lawyer with a power of attorney in Iraq as a proxy in order  to  obtain
    identity documentation. For example, a  family  member  or  lawyer  can
    attend court in Iraq on a person's behalf to confirm  such  a  person's
    family record details.


21. Dr Fatah also said that if an individual had lost or  wanted  to  renew
    his CSID in London, he would need to provide the Iraqi Embassy with the
    relevant reference numbers  for  his  CSID  before  it  would  issue  a
    replacement. He was specifically asked whether the parents of a  person
    in London without a CSID could go to the Iraqi authorities, with  their
    identity documentation, and obtain confirmation that the family  record
    shows that they have a child and the date of the birth of  such  child.
    He saw no procedural problems with this. He cautioned, however, that it
    would be speculation to conclude that the consulate  would  necessarily
    accept the  identity  of  a  person  in  London  as  a  consequence  of
    production to them of the type of confirmation  previously  identified.
    The Iraqi family records confirm only that there is a person with  such
    details.


22. The process and documents required to obtain CSID from the consulate in
    London is set out in the report of  27  February  2015  [paragraph  232
    therein]. Notarised colour copies of a person's parents', or sibling's,
    documents would probably suffice to prove a person's identity - "It  is
    necessary to prove who you are beyond reasonable doubt". Dr Fatah noted
    that if a person in the UK did not have a CSID and  had  no  family  in
    Iraq it would be possible for a friend of that person, with a CSID  and
    a power of attorney, to go to court in Iraq and vouch for such person's
    identity.

23. Dr Fatah agreed that there  is  evidence  of  a  'central  archive'  in
    Baghdad - the issue is how comprehensive the archive  is.  The  Kurdish
    authorities claim not to have sent any records to Baghdad since 1991.


24. As regards the IKR, there are flights there from Baghdad  every  second
    day and flights directly from London. Dr Fatah accepted that he had not
    interviewed anyone at Erbil airport when providing his  opinion  as  to
    the requirements of entry into the IKR. He thought  the  imposition  of
    entry requirements for the IKR to be arbitrary and dependent  upon  the
    person manning the entry point. He had spoken to an Iraqi national  who
    had not been asked  for  a  sponsor  when  travelling  to  the  IKR  in
    February/March 2015 but who had recently been informed that  a  sponsor
    was required. He believed that persons entering IKR to study require  a
    sponsor and that Arabs are not wanted in  the  IKR  -  the  UNHCR  also
    agreed that single Arabs have problems entering the IKR.  A  Kurd  from
    outside the IKR can obtain entry for 10 days  as  a  visitor  and  then
    renew this for a further 10 days. If such  a  person  finds  employment
    they can remain for longer, although they will have  to  register  with
    the authorities providing details of the employing  company's  name.  A
    work permit can also be renewed,  however,  if  a  person  loses  their
    employment they will have to leave the IKR. Dr Fatah was not  aware  of
    whether the IKR authorities proactively remove Kurds from the IKR whose
    permits have come to an end.


  Under re-examination


25. Dr Fatah averred that the ability to renew a visit permit for  the  IKR
    is event driven and dependent  on  the  particular  Asayish[2]  officer
    considering the application. He did not think that  the  laissez-passer
    used by a person to return from the UK to Baghdad could be used for  an
    onward trip to the IKR. The laissez-passer is a document valid for  one
    trip and is likely to  be  taken  by  the  authorities  on  arrival  in
    Baghdad.


26. In response to questions from the Tribunal, Dr Fatah confirmed that  on
    return to Iraq a current or expired  Iraqi  passport  can  be  used  to
    obtain a CSID.


27. Dr Fatah also said that in order to obtain a  laissez-passer  from  the
    Iraqi consulate a person would need to  demonstrate  their  nationality
    and identity and that consideration of the evidence would be on a  case
    by case basis. He also said that he presumed that the individual  would
    have to produce a photocopy of a previous passport and  a  report  from
    the police confirming that it had been lost or  stolen,  a  CSID  or  a
    nationality certificate. Landinfo, in  its  2014  report,  confirm  the
    same. It would not be sufficient for an individual  to  simply  provide
    the page and file number for his CSID.


28. After the hearing, and in response to questions raised by the Tribunal,
    Dr Fatah provided the following additional evidence by way of an e-mail
    dated 19 May 2015. He had visited Arbat IDP camp on  the  outskirts  of
    Sulaymaniya in the KRG. The camp was divided according  to  ethnic  and
    religious  groups.  It  was  expanding.  The  number  of  children  was
    exceptionally  high,  there  being  2300  families  there.  There  were
    physical dangers in the camp such as a big pond  with  no  barriers  to
    protect the children. The camp is funded  by  local  and  international
    agencies. There is another camp in the  same  district  housing  Syrian
    refugees. As a consequence the public services in the  area  are  under
    great  pressure.  The  IDPs  are  not  subject  to  the  normal  'visa'
    requirements because  they  are  controlled  and  registered  with  the
    Asayish. Entry and exit to the camp is controlled. IDPs are allowed  to
    leave the  camp  to  work,  see  friends  and  walk  around.  Dr  Fatah
    understands that returned asylum seekers are not treated as IDPs.


29. Dr Fatah thereafter identified that USAID has  provided  evidence  that
    each displaced family in Iraq is provided with one million Iraqi  Dinar
    by the government unless the family is headed by a  women  over  35  in
    which case 500000 dinar  is  provided;  single  people  receive  200000
    Dinar. A CSID, INC or passport is required in  order  to  register  for
    these monies. Cash benefits are only provided to the head of  household
    and family relationships must be documented. In the  IKR  IDPs  need  a
    copy of either their CSID,  INC  or  passport  in  order  to  obtain  a
    residency letter, without which the IDP may not be able to register for
    the monies or other services. IDPs are not permitted to  travel  within
    the IKR because residency cards are only applicable in the  governorate
    of issue. All government procedures in the IKR are being delayed due to
    the large number of IDPs.


Amnesty International

 30. Amnesty International also provided a report,  dated  14th  May  2015,
     which was written for the specific purposes of the instant  case,  and
     which made observations  about  the  current  situation  in  Iraq.  In
     paragraphs 12 and 13 of its  report  Amnesty  International  state  as
     follows regarding the information  that  led  it  to  the  conclusions
     summarised below:


      "The information to be  provided  in  this  matter  is  sourced  from
         Amnesty International's Iraq Team, part  of  the  Middle  East  and
         North Africa Programme, which carries  out  research  and  advocacy
         work on countries in the  region  including  Iraq.  The  Iraq  Team
         consists of experienced research and campaigning staff who  conduct
         research both in the field, where possible, and from  AI's  various
         offices. The Team receives  information  from  a  wide  variety  of
         sources. These sources include state and officially sanctioned,  or
         permitted  sources,   such   as   online   newspapers   and   state
         broadcasters; a wide range of  websites  and  blogs;  human  rights
         activists,  including  lawyers  and  community  workers  and   from
         detainees and their families. Other  sources  include  journalists,
         refugees, diplomats, religious bodies  and  humanitarian  agencies.
         The team monitor online news outlets  and  newspaper  websites  and
         other media outlets...


      Amnesty's crisis senior  researcher...has  conducted  on  the  ground
         research during the current crisis and documented a wide  range  of
         human rights abuses..."


 31. In summary, Amnesty International concluded that: "[t]he areas held or
     contested by IS[3] contain very substantial  dangers  of  killing  and
     other human rights abuse of the utmost gravity, including torture  and
     sexual violence.  Baghdad  city  continues  to  be  one  of  the  most
     dangerous cities on  earth,  with  mass-casualty  terrorist  incidents
     perpetrated both by IS supporters  and  armed  militias,  as  well  as
     kidnappings  and  murders  by  such  militias  against  Sunnis,  other
     minority groups and those perceived  as  likely  to  be  worth  ransom
     money". It expressed serious concern "at the prospect of  Iraqis  from
     the contested zones being returned to Iraq on the basis that it  would
     be reasonable for them to relocate to Baghdad or the IKR."


 32. The report noted in particular that "while Amnesty  International  had
     been expressing serious concerns regarding the human rights conditions
     in Iraq for many years, the events of the last year have rendered  the
     country one of the most dangerous in the world". It  added  that  "the
     rise of the armed group calling itself Islamic State (IS) across  both
     Iraq and Syria has led to extraordinary levels of  violence  occurring
     across the country and on a daily basis". It then reviewed reports  by
     the UNHCR,  the  US  Institute  for  the  Study  of  War  and  various
     newspapers relating to the areas in Iraq currently held  by  ISIL  and
     added that it regarded the situation as  highly  volatile,  fluid  and
     subject to change at very short notice. Reference is made to Amnesty's
     own reports on the scale of human rights abuses by ISIL and  the  mass
     exodus of Shi'a Muslims, Christians  and  other  minorities  from  the
     areas captured by ISIL. In particular, it noted that in September 2014
     it was reported that "the group that calls itself the ISIL has carried
     out ethnic cleansing  on  a  historic  scale  in  northern  Iraq".  In
     addition it is noted that the UN Assistance Mission in Iraq had  found
     evidence of numerous examples of targeted executions  carried  out  by
     ISIL and the use of mass graves.


 33. Amnesty International also observed that  "IS  operatives,  supporters
     and allied groups (chiefly sectarian  Sunni  militia)  have  regularly
     perpetrated attacks [outside the contested areas], chiefly through the
     use of Vehicle Borne Improvised Explosive Devices (VBIED),  Improvised
     Explosive Devices (IEDS), bombings, suicide bombings,  mass  shootings
     and targeted assassinations".   A review was undertaken of  the  known
     statistics for the number of Iraqis killed  and  wounded  in  February
     2015 and observation was made that  Baghdad  was  the  worst  affected
     governorate with 1,165 civilian casualties. In  addition,  the  report
     listed a variety of attacks in many areas  of  Baghdad  in  May  2015,
     which involved IEDs, VBIEDs, beheadings, shootings and rocket  attacks
     - it being stated  that  "perpetrators  appear  to  vary  but  include
     individuals resident in the city allied to  IS  or  in  sympathy  with
     them,  members  of  clandestine  militia  and  terrorist  groups;  and
     sectarian militias and members or sympathisers of IS  who  succeed  in
     entering the city from IS held territory". As  a  result,  checkpoints
     have been set up around entrance points to Baghdad and  militiamen  at
     one such checkpoint told a  person,  whom  they  were  unaware  was  a
     representative of Amnesty International,  that  "if  we  catch  'those
     dogs' [Sunnis] coming down from the Tikrit area we  execute  them;  in
     those areas they are all working with  DA'ESH  (ISIL).  They  come  to
     Baghdad to commit terrorist crimes. So we have to stop them." It  also
     noted that  it,  "along  with  many  other  independent  international
     observers, have documented for  months  the  use  of  retaliatory  and
     sectarian attacks by government  forces  and  Shi'a  militias  against
     Iraq's Sunni population and other minority groups".


 34. The report continues by noting  that  the  Jamestown  Foundation  have
     provided an outline of the  leading  Shi'a  militia  groups  currently
     operating in Iraq, which says that "it is estimated that  close  to  a
     million  volunteers  answered  Sistani's  call  [for  Iraqis  to  form
     militias to fight ISIL] and signed  up  in  the  following  weeks  and
     months. Some of the most important militias under the Hashd al-Sha'abi
     include  the  Badr  Organization,  Saraya  al-Salam,  Asa'ib,  Harakat
     Hezbollah al-Nujaba, Saraya Taleaa al-Khorasani and Kata'ib Imam Ali".
     It added that "Hashd al-Sha'abi is assisted by Iran via General  Qasem
     Soleimani,  the  head  of  Iran's  elite  Quds  Force,  the   overseas
     paramilitary wing  of  the  Islamic  Revolutionary  Guard  Corps".  In
     addition, it observed that "Hashd al-Sha'abi is funded  by  the  Iraqi
     government, which not only provides the fighters'  salaries  but  also
     its military capabilities". The report went on to  identify  that  the
     Shi'a militias "were  substantially  responsible  for  preventing  the
     complete overrun of Iraq by ISIL forces  after  the  collapse  of  the
     Iraqi army in the summer  of  2014.   They  have  since  been  heavily
     engaged in the anti-ISIL fighting alongside ISF troops. However,  they
     have also been documented to have engaged  in  large  scale  sectarian
     violence against Iraq's Sunni population both in areas outside  of  IS
     control and in recently 'liberated' areas". It is later observed  that
     "while the rise of IS and the brutality  of  its  behaviour  has  been
     widely documented in the international press, this concurrent rise  in
     sectarian murder by Shi'a militias and  Iraqi  government  forces  has
     received less mainstream attention".


 35. The report continues by identifying that there has been  a  "[p]attern
     of Shi'a militia attacks, justified by the perpetrators as retribution
     and  retaliation  for  IS  activities  but  frequently  motivated   by
     sectarian  hatred  and  ordinary   criminality,   has   continued"   -
     subsequently adding that "[w]hile the majority  of  sectarian  killing
     appears to be between the adherents to the  Sunni  and  Shi'a  Islamic
     faiths, Amnesty  shares  the  concerns  of  many  other  international
     observers that sectarian violence  appears  to  be  spreading  through
     other communities, as the ongoing conflict appears to be breaking down
     what remains of the inter-communal bonds within the Iraqi state  as  a
     whole."


Home Office Country Information

  1. In paragraph 1.3.34 of its Country Information and  Guidance  -  Iraq:
     the security situation in the 'contested' areas of Iraq (August 2014),
     22/08/2014 it is concluded that the contested areas of  Iraq,  include
     Kirkuk, Diyala, Anbar, Salah  al  Din  and  Ninewah  governorates  and
     should be considered as areas  of  internal  armed  conflict  for  the
     purposes of any risk assessment. It is further stated  that  "although
     all cases must be considered on their individual merits, based on  the
     current objective evidence, decision makers are advised  that  in  the
     vast majority of cases, the combined individual  and  collective  risk
     factors are such that return to a contested area would be in breach of
     Article 15 of the Qualification Directive and  therefore  a  grant  of
     Humanitarian Protection would be appropriate  if  internal  relocation
     was not possible".

 36. At paragraph 1.4.1 of its  later  Country  Information  note  -  Iraq:
     Internal relocation (and technical  obstacles),  24/12/2014  the  Home
     Office conclude that current return arrangements from the UK to  Iraq,
     either via Erbil or Baghdad, do not breach  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.
     However, at paragraph 1.4.3 thereof it  also  stated  that  "a  person
     returned to Iraq who was unable to replace their Civil Status ID  Card
     or Nationality Certificate would likely face significant  difficulties
     in accessing services and a  livelihood  and  would  face  destitution
     which is likely to reach the Article 3 threshold".


 37. In its April  2015  guidance  Iraq:  Security  situation  in  Baghdad,
     southern governorates and the Kurdistan Region of  Iraq,  ,  the  Home
     Office state that:

      (i)   The security situation has deteriorated in Baghdad,  Babil,  and
           the  southern  governorates,   while   the   situation   remains
           relatively stable in the IKR. However,  the  situation  has  not
           deteriorated to such an extent that it has reached a level where
           it can be said  that  in  general  the  situation  for  ordinary
           civilians in these governorates breaches Article  15(c)  of  the
           Qualification Directive.
      (ii)  Decision makers should consider  whether  there  are  particular
           factors relevant to the person's individual circumstances  which
           might nevertheless place them at enhanced risk, particularly  in
           Baghdad and Babil governorates;
      (iii) The security situation remains fluid and decision makers  should
           take into account up-to-date country  information  in  assessing
           the risks faced by applicants;
      (iv)  Internal relocation may be a viable option but only if the  risk
           is not present in the place of relocation and it  would  not  be
           unduly harsh to expect a person to relocate. Each case  must  be
           considered on its individual merits.

 38. In relation to Baghdad in  particular  it  is  concluded  that  "there
     currently exists a state of internal armed conflict between  ISIL  and
     the Government of Iraq and its  allies  in  Iraq,  with  the  violence
     principally in northern, central  and  western  areas  of  Iraq",  and
     "although recent successes by Kurdish,  GoI  and  US-Coalition  forces
     have pushed back ISIL from territories it  occupied  in  mid-2014  and
     degraded its military capabilities, ISIL remains in control  of  parts
     of the country, although not in Baghdad governorate. ISIL continues to
     perpetrate attacks in Baghdad governorate, with an  ultimate  goal  of
     securing its so-called 'Caliphate state' in Iraq and Syria".

 39. It further said that "there are a  range  of  armed  actors  currently
     operating in Baghdad governorate, including Shiite and Sunni militias,
     extremist Islamic groups including ISIL, organised criminal  gangs  as
     well as Iraqi security forces. However, there  were  no  reports  that
     ISIL, or other Sunni extremist groups, exercise de  facto  control  in
     any district of Baghdad City or Baghdad Governorate".


 40. As to the southern  governorates,  it  is  opined  that  the  security
     situation in the governorates of Basra, Kerbala, Najaf, Muthanna, Thi-
     Qar, Missan, Quadissiya and Wassit remained relatively stable in  2014
     and that in general return there would not give rise to  a  breach  of
     Article 15(c). Similarly, in relation to the IKR,  it  said  that  the
     security situation in the governorates of Erbil, Sulamaniyah and Dahuk
     was stable in 2014 with low levels of violence.


 41. Finally in relation to Babil the Respondent concludes in  her  Country
     Information and Guidance titled 'Iraq: Security situation in  Baghdad,
     southern governorates and the Kurdistan Region  of  Iraq  (KRI)'  that
     "there has been a deterioration in the  security  situation  in  Babil
     governorate since 2012 and 2013" and that  "the  government  maintains
     control over the majority of the governorate, including  the  northern
     part of Babil around Jurf  Al-Sakhr,  which  was  previously  an  ISIL
     strong-hold from which it launched attacks on the surrounding area and
     manufactured car bombs. By the end of 2014 ISIL's presence in Jurf  A-
     Sakhr had been cleared, with insurgents  routed  further  north.  This
     military success had improved  the  security  situation  considerably.
     However there remained a risk of further violence, both  from  renewed
     armed conflict and as a result of IEDs left behind by insurgents".

 42. At paragraph 1.3.25 it is further said that "while levels of  violence
     have increased in Babil compared to previous  years,  conditions  have
     not deteriorated to the extent that a  person  returning  there  would
     face a breach of Article 15(c)".  However,  it  adds  that  "while  in
     general a return to Babil would not  breach  Article  15(c),  decision
     makers  must  also  consider  whether  there  are  particular  factors
     relevant  to  the  person's  individual  circumstances   which   might
     nevertheless place them at risk. Such factors include -  but  are  not
     limited to - the person's age, gender,  health,  ethnicity,  religion,
     sect, disability and profession. Some persons,  especially  those  who
     reside in areas where they are a minority, may face a heightened  risk
     of indiscriminate violence".

UNHCR's position paper

43. The UNHCR's view on returns to Iraq is set out in its position paper of
    27 October 2014, the conclusion to which reads:

     "[27] As the situation in Iraq remains highly fluid and  volatile,  and
        since all parts of the country are reported to have  been  affected,
        directly or indirectly, by the ongoing crisis,  UNHCR  urges  States
        not to forcibly return persons originating from Iraq until  tangible
        improvements  in  the  security  and  human  rights  situation  have
        occurred. In the current circumstances, many  persons  fleeing  Iraq
        are likely to meet the 1951 Convention criteria for refugee  status.
        When, in the context of an adjudication of an individual case  of  a
        person originating from Iraq, 1951 Convention criteria are found not
        to apply, broader refugee criteria  as  contained  in  the  relevant
        regional instruments or complementary forms of protection are likely
        to apply. In the current circumstances, with  massive  new  internal
        displacement  coupled  with  a  large  scale  humanitarian   crisis,
        mounting  sectarian  tensions  and  reported  access   restrictions,
        particularly into the  Kurdistan  Region  of  Iraq,  UNHCR  does  in
        principle not consider it appropriate for  States  to  deny  persons
        from Iraq international protection on the basis of applicability  of
        an internal flight alternative or relocation alternative."

Existing Country Guidance

44. The core of the current country guidance relating to the  circumstances
    in Iraq dates back to the decision in HM  and  Others  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG [2010] UKUT 00331 (IAC) ("HM1") in which the Tribunal concluded
    (i) that enforced returns to Iraq could take place because  the  degree
    of indiscriminate violence did not reach such a high level in any  part
    of Iraq so as to  show  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
    civilian returned there would face a real risk within  the  meaning  of
    Article 15(c); and, (ii) even if such a risk were to be shown to  exist
    in some areas of Iraq, internal relocation  would  achieve  safety  and
    would not in all circumstances be unduly harsh.


45. HM1 was successfully appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal;  however,  the
    court did not consider it necessary to deal with any of the substantive
    grounds but rather allowed the appeal  on  purely  procedural  grounds.
    There then followed two further country guidance decisions relating  to
    Iraq:  MK (promulgated on 23 April 2012) and  HM2  (promulgated  on  23
    November 2012).


46. The headnote to MK reads:

            "(1) Since the lack of documentation relating  to  identity  in
            the form of the  Civil  Status  ID  (CSID),  Iraqi  Nationality
            Certificate (INC) and Public  Distribution  System  (PDS)  card
            (food ration card) is not ordinarily an insuperable problem, it
            is not a factor likely to make  return  to  any  part  of  Iraq
            unsafe or unreasonable.


                (a) The CSID is an important document, both in its own right
                and as a gateway to obtaining  other  significant  documents
                such the INC and the PDS. An inability to replace  the  CSID
                is likely to entail inability to access the INC and PDS.


                (b) Although the general  position  is  that  a  person  who
                wishes to replace a lost CSID is required to return to their
                home area in  order  to  do  so,  there  are  procedures  as
                described in this  determination  available  which  make  it
                possible (i) for Iraqis abroad to secure the issue of a  new
                CSID to them through the offices of the local Iraqi Embassy;
                (ii) for Iraqis returned to Iraq without a  CSID  to  obtain
                one without necessarily having to travel to their home area.
                Such  procedures  permit  family  members  to  obtain   such
                documentation from their home areas on an applicant's behalf
                or allow for a person to be given a  power  of  attorney  to
                obtain  the  same.  Those  who  are  unable  immediately  to
                establish their identity can ordinarily obtain documentation
                by being presented before a  judge  from  the  Civil  Status
                Court, so as to facilitate return to their place of origin.


            (2)  (a) Entry into and residence in the KRG can be effected by
                any  Iraqi  national  with  a  CSID,  INC  and  PDS,   after
                registration with the Asayish (local  security  office).  An
                Arab may need a sponsor; a Kurd will not.


                (b) Living conditions in  the  KRG  for  a  person  who  has
                relocated there are not without difficulties, but there  are
                jobs, and there is access to free  health  care  facilities,
                education, rented  accommodation  and  financial  and  other
                support from UNHCR.


            (3) Despite bureaucratic difficulties with registration and the
            difficulties faced by IDPs, it is wrong to say that  there  is,
            in general, no internal flight alternative in Iraq, bearing  in
            mind in particular the levels of governmental and  NGO  support
            available.


            (4) Whilst the situation for women in Iraq is, in general,  not
            such as to give rise to a real risk of persecution  or  serious
            harm, there may be particular problems affecting female  headed
            households where family support is lacking and jobs  and  other
            means of support may be harder to come by. Careful  examination
            of the particular circumstances of the individual's  case  will
            be especially important."

47. In HM2 the Tribunal concluded as follows:


          i. "Whilst the focus of  the  present  decision  is  the  current
             situation  in  Iraq,  nothing  in  the  further  evidence  now
             available indicates that the conclusions that the Tribunal  in
             HM1 reached about country conditions in Iraq were wrong.


         ii. As regards  the  current  situation,  the  evidence  does  not
             establish  that  the   degree   of   indiscriminate   violence
             characterising the current armed conflict taking place in  the
             five central governorates in  Iraq,  namely  Baghdad,  Diyala,
             Tameen (Kirkuk), Ninewah, Salah Al-Din,  is  at  such  a  high
             level that substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing
             that any civilian returned there would solely  on  account  of
             his presence there face a real risk of being subject  to  that
             threat.

        iii. Nor does the evidence establish that there is a real  risk  of
             serious harm under Article 15(c) for civilians who  are  Sunni
             or Shi'a or Kurds or have  former  Ba'ath  Party  connections:
             these characteristics do not in themselves amount to "enhanced
             risk categories" under Article 15(c)'s  "sliding  scale"  (see
             [39] of Elgafaji).

         iv. Further evidence that has become available since the  Tribunal
             heard MK (documents - relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT  126
             (IAC) does not warrant any departure from its  conclusions  on
             internal relocation alternatives in the KRG or in  central  or
             southern Iraq save that the  evidence  is  now  sufficient  to
             establish the existence of a Central Archive maintained by the
             Iraqi  authorities  retaining  civil   identity   records   on
             microfiche, which provides a further way in which a person can
             identify themselves and obtain a copy of their  CSID,  whether
             from abroad or within Iraq.

          v. Regarding the issue of  whether  there  would  be  a  risk  of
             treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR arising from returns from
             the UK to Baghdad International Airport (BIAP):


              a. If a national of Iraq who  has  failed  to  establish  that
                 conditions inside Iraq are unsafe is compulsorily  returned
                 to Baghdad International Airport (BIAP) on either a current
                 or expired  Iraqi  passport,  there  is  no  real  risk  of
                 detention in the course of BIAP procedures (except possibly
                 in respect of those who are the subject of a judicial order
                 or arrest warrant). Nor is there such  a  risk  if  such  a
                 person chooses to make a voluntary return  with  a  laissez
                 passer document which can be issued by the Iraqi embassy in
                 the UK.


              b. If, however, such a person is compulsorily returned to BIAP
                 without either a current or expired Iraqi passport, he  may
                 be at risk of detention in the course  of  BIAP  procedures
                 and it cannot be excluded  that  the  detention  conditions
                 might give rise to a real risk  of  treatment  contrary  to
                 Article 3 ECHR. Such a risk is however, purely academic  in
                 the UK context because under the current UK returns  policy
                 there will be no compulsory return of persons lacking  such
                 documents."

48. The decisions in HM2 and MK were both the  subject  of  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal, being heard together and referenced as HF  (Iraq)  and
    others [2013] EWCA Civ 1276. The appeals against the decisions  in  HM2
    were dismissed and although the court allowed the  appeal  against  the
    decision in MK it  rejected  the  arguments  directed  at  the  country
    guidance set out therein.

The Submissions - A Summary

49. The parties submitted detailed skeleton arguments, which  we  summarise
    below. Each supplemented their skeleton argument with oral submissions.


Appellant's skeleton argument


50. In his skeleton argument Mr Bazini observed the Respondent's acceptance
    that the "contested areas of Iraq should be considered as  meeting  the
    circumstances  of  internal  armed  conflict".  As  a  consequence,  he
    identified the core issue before the Tribunal to be  that  of  internal
    relocation from the contested areas to either Baghdad or to  the  Iraqi
    Kurdish Region.


51. It is said that the situation in Baghdad represents  an  Article  15(c)
    risk for an ordinary civilian; there being an enhanced  risk  for:  (i)
    persons without established connections to Baghdad;  (ii)  Kurds;  and,
    (iii) Christians. There is  no  established  Kurdish  neighbourhood  in
    Baghdad.


52. It was asserted that a pivotal issue in the assessment of whether it is
    reasonable for an Iraqi national to relocate is whether such person has
    Iraqi identity documents; a CSID being the gateway to  other  important
    documentation such an  Iraqi  Nationality  Certificate  ("INC")  and  a
    Public Distribution System ("PDS") card.  Without  a  CSID  it  is  not
    possible for a person to access either services or a livelihood.


53. Reference is made to Dr Fatah's report of 27 February 2015 to the steps
    required to obtain a new CSID by a person living outside of Iraq. It is
    said that this includes the need to provide the reference number  of  a
    lost CSID. An original CSID and INC are required  to  obtain  an  Iraqi
    passport. Applications to obtain a laissez-passer are,  and  have  been
    since November 2014, assessed on a case-by-case basis.

54. A person cannot be expected to travel from Baghdad to their  home  area
    in order to obtain a CSID and other documents, if the home  area  is  a
    contested area. Evidence set out in Dr Fatah's addendum report of 1 May
    2015 identifies the difficulties that will be met by a  person  seeking
    to obtain a replacement CSID and/or INC in Baghdad, if that  person  is
    not from Baghdad.


55. As to internal relocation  to  Baghdad,  it  was  submitted  that  this
    governorate is statistically the most violent,  there  having  been  an
    increase in violence in the governorate  in  2014  and  early  2015.  A
    person "will struggle" in Baghdad if  not  an  Arabic  speaker  and  if
    he/she has no social network to  assist  in  accessing  employment  and
    housing.


56. It was further asserted that if a person is returned to  Erbil  in  the
    IKR and that person is not from the IKR, then such person will  not  be
    allowed to exit the airport absent production of a CSID and INC. In any
    event the IKR authorities  do  not  allow  persons  from  the  disputed
    territories to transfer a food ration card to the IKR. Without  a  CSID
    and INC a person will have difficulties in accessing services  provided
    by the state and its partners, in addition it is IKR policy to maintain
    as much Kurdish presence as possible in the disputed territories so  as
    to strengthen its claim to those areas.   There  are  other  'elements'
    which also govern the authorities entry policy to the IKR:  (i)  "Event
    driven nature" - there  being  greater  difficulties  faced  by  single
    travellers because of the conflict and restrictions have also been  put
    in place to stem the flow of  IDPs,  (ii)  "Ethno-religious  nature"  -
    members of particular communities (such as Sunni Arabs) being tarred by
    association with ISIL and (iii) "Arbitrary nature" -  policies  applied
    at checkpoints are unpredictable. In any event, unemployment is high in
    IKR and IDPs struggle to find work,  public  sector  salaries  are  not
    being paid and there has been a suspension of  investment  in  economic
    projects.

57. As regards the Appellant, he  will  not  be  able  to  obtain  identity
    documentation in Baghdad and, in  any  event,  he  cannot  access  food
    rations  there  because  these  can  only  be  accessed  in  the   home
    governorate or by returning to the home  governorate  and  transferring
    access elsewhere.


Appellant's oral submissions

 58. Mr Bazini observed that the Appellant has  been  found  to  come  from
     Dubis in the Kirkuk Governorate, which is now  one  of  the  contested
     areas. He accepted that the Immigration Judge had found that there was
     no reliable evidence that the Appellant's mother and siblings had left
     Iraq and, also, that the Appellant had a cousin based  in  Kirkuk.  He
     submitted, however, that given the change of circumstances  in  Kirkuk
     since the date of the  judge's  determination  it  is  now  reasonably
     likely that the Appellant's family members are not in  Iraq,  are  not
     contactable and would not be able to assist him.


 59. Mr Bazini commended to us the  inclusive  approach  to  Article  15(c)
     adopted by the Tribunal in HM2; observing the Tribunal's reference  at
     [271] to the need for a qualitative as well as a quantitative approach
     when assessing the levels of indiscriminative  violence  in  Iraq.  He
     further alluded to the Tribunal's identification that "one  aspect  of
     the inclusive approach is an appreciation that there  are  threats  to
     the physical safety and integrity of civilians beyond  those  measured
     in the  civilian  casualty  rate"  at  [114]  -  submitting  that  the
     situation in Iraq is now very different to that referred  to  in  HM2,
     with much of the violence aimed at civilians in order to  bring  about
     fear in the community.


 60. It was further submitted that the appeal should not be  determined  on
     the basis that a person would be returning to Iraq with a CSID, or the
     necessary documentation to obtain one, because to do so would  not  be
     consistent  with  the  proper  application  of  Article   8   of   the
     Qualification Directive.


 61. He continued by submitting that Sunnis had been pushed to the west  of
     Baghdad and are at greater  risk.  There  is  no  established  Kurdish
     community in Baghdad, making Kurds vulnerable.  There had been a rapid
     increase in the level of  indiscriminate  violence  in  Iraq  and  the
     economic growth rate had dropped by 2.4 or 2.6%  -  the  drop  in  oil
     prices being significant. As a consequence, IDPs are facing  shortages
     of food, accommodation and medical care.


 62. As to the issue of re-documentation, it was said that little was known
     about the Central Archive in Baghdad, including how long it would take
     to obtain documentation from there; if indeed it can  be  obtained  at
     all.  Reference was made to evidence provided by UNHCR-Iraq  cited  in
     Dr Fatah's second report [paragraph 144 therein] - it  being  observed
     that as many as 45% of IDPs surveyed reported that at least one family
     member was missing their CSID, and that 48% were  missing  their  INC.
     Only 10% of persons missing documents had tried  to  replace  them  in
     their area of displacement, with 35% successfully  doing  so.  It  was
     suggested by Mr Bazini that it should be inferred from  this  evidence
     that it is not easy to replace missing status documents.


 63. The Tribunal's attention  was  thereafter  drawn  to  passages  in  Dr
     Fatah's reports in furtherance of the submission that it is  difficult
     for IDPs to obtain new status documents. In relation  to  the  Central
     Archive, it was observed that there was no information  regarding  how
     the archive works, how many people work in  the  archive  office,  the
     output of the office, the success rate of those seeking documents from
     there and how the need to obtain information from the contested  areas
     might hinder their work.

 64. Assuming that the Appellant is able to obtain a CSID from Baghdad  the
     process of doing so would, suggested Mr Bazini, take over a month.  He
     submitted that in such circumstances the situation the Appellant would
     be living in prior to receipt of the CSID would amount to a breach  of
     Article 3.  There was very little evidence about  what  the  Appellant
     would be entitled to under the Assisted Voluntary Return  scheme.  The
     leaflet produced by the Secretary  of  State  indicated  only  that  a
     person may be entitled to support and assistance and does not  explain
     how the money had to be spent. It was also observed that Dr Fatah  had
     confirmed that the Appellant would need $800 - $1,000 a  month to stay
     in a hotel or to rent a room


 65. Neither the UNHCR nor Amnesty International support the possibility of
     internal relocation in Iraq. The  security  situation  in  Baghdad  is
     poor.  The  percentage  of  the  population  injured  or   killed   in
     governorates other than Baghdad is generally lower  than  in  Baghdad.
     Amnesty  International  are  of  the  opinion  that  Baghdad  is  very
     dangerous.  ISIL are only 70 km from Baghdad and  the  population  are
     living in fear. Abductions occur throughout the  city.  Kurds  receive
     threats from Shi'a militias.


 66. Turning to the IKR, the Tribunal's attention  was  drawn  to  evidence
     provided by Dr Fatah to the effect that food prices and  the  cost  of
     living had increased in the IKR, civil servants salaries had not  been
     paid for a month there and there  are  3  million  IDPs  in  temporary
     shelters. The aid agencies only have limited funds. The conditions for
     an IDP in the IKR are unduly harsh.


Respondent's skeleton argument

67. The Respondent accepts that the overall security situation in Iraq  has
    deteriorated  since  HM2.  Mr  Blundell  summarised  the   Respondent's
    position on the issue of whether an Article 15(c) risk exists  in  Iraq
    in the following terms

  i) There currently exists a state of internal armed conflict between  the
     GoI and ISIL, with violence principally in the northern,  central  and
     western areas of the country;
 ii) In parts of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk (Tameen), Ninewah and  Salah  Al-din
     governorates, which are occupied  by  ISIL  or  where  there  is  open
     conflict between GoI and ISIL (the contested  areas),  the  Respondent
     accepts  that  Article  15(c)  would  apply  to  a  civilian  with  no
     distinguishing characteristics  ("an  ordinary  civilian")  simply  by
     virtue of his/her presence there;
iii) In Babil governorate, the security situation has deteriorated but  not
     to such an extent that an ordinary  civilian  would  face  an  Article
     15(c) risk there;
 iv) In the  governorates  of  Basra,  Kerbala,  Najaf,  Muthana,  Thi-Qar,
     Missan,  Qadissiya  and  Wassit  ("the  southern  governorates"),  the
     security situation has remained relatively stable  and  would  not  be
     sufficient to demonstrate  an  Article  15(c)  risk  for  an  ordinary
     civilian:
  v) In Baghdad city and Baghdad governorate  the  security  situation  has
     deteriorated but not to such an  extent  that  an  ordinary  civilian,
     merely on account of his presence there, would face an  Article  15(c)
     risk; and,
 vi) The situation in the IKR remains stable and does  not  engage  Article
     15(c).
vii) Status as a Sunni, Shia or Kurd is not, of itself, sufficient to  give
     rise to an Article 15(c) risk in any  of  the  governorates  in  which
     there is otherwise no Article 15(c) risk for ordinary civilians.

68. As regards internal relocation to Baghdad for those who can demonstrate
    an Article 15(c) risk in their home area,  the  Respondent  submits  as
    follows in relation to the security situation in Baghdad:

              i) There is a 0.05% civilian death rate, 0.12% civilian injury
                 rate and, therefore, a  0.17%  civilian  casualty  rate  in
                 Baghdad. These figures do not indicate a serious  risk  for
                 an ordinary civilian;
             ii) There has been  a  significant  net  migration  of  260,000
                 persons into Baghdad by displaced persons  -  the  evidence
                 demonstrating that Sunnis in particular are moving  to  the
                 capital.  This  is  a  strong  indication  that,  from  the
                 perspective of Iraqis, the security situation in Baghdad is
                 not seen as posing a risk of serious harm;
            iii) The night time curfew in Baghdad has recently been  lifted,
                 thus supporting the fact that there  is  no  Article  15(c)
                 risk there;
             iv) The evidence confirms that no particular groups are at risk
                 in Baghdad and there are no particular hotspots;
              v) To the extent that  there  are  incidents  of  violence  in
                 Baghdad governorate, the situation in Baghdad city is  more
                 stable than in the surrounding Baghdad Belts.  The  attacks
                 in Baghdad city are of a more limited nature than those  in
                 the suburbs.
             vi) The situation in Baghdad  Belts  does  not  engage  Article
                 15(c), although it is accepted that it does carry a  higher
                 risk than the city itself.


 69. At paragraph 50 of the skeleton argument,  the  Respondent  reproduces
     the following passage from her December 2014 Guidance Note:


      "A person returned to Iraq who was  unable  to  replace  their  Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate would be likely  to  face
         significant difficulties in accessing services and a livelihood and
         would face destitution which is  likely  to  reach  the  Article  3
         threshold."


70. The Respondent further identifies that returns  to  Baghdad  will  only
    take place if a person has either a current passport, expired  passport
    or a laissez-passer, which will involve pre-clearance  with  the  Iraqi
    authorities and hence confirmation of Iraqi  identity.  The  Tribunal's
    attention was thereafter drawn to the December 2014 Country Information
    Guidance Note on Iraq.

71. On the issue of the existence of a  Central  Archive  in  Baghdad,  the
    Respondent agrees that Dr Fatah's third report provides a fair  summary
    of the position. It is possible  in  certain  circumstances  to  obtain
    replacement civil documentation in Baghdad. There are  two  alternative
    offices for civil status affairs - in Baghdad and Najaf  -  where  IDPs
    from Mosul, Anbar and Salahaddin can obtain replacement  documentation.
    An individual appellant would have to demonstrate why they did not have
    their documents, how they were able to leave Iraq without them and  why
    they had been unable to reacquire these documents from the  UK.  It  is
    asserted, however, that consideration of the position of  'undocumented
    returns' is academic because a person will be returned to Baghdad  with
    a passport, expired passport, or laissez-passer - the latter  requiring
    a person's identity to be proven to the Iraqi consulate  before  it  is
    issued.


72. The Respondent's position on internal relocation to the IKR is  as  set
    out at paragraphs 1.3.58 to 1.3.61 of the December CIG i.e. that it  is
    not unreasonable or unduly harsh for persons originating  from  outside
    the IKR to internally relocate there. Persons of Kurdish  ethnicity  do
    not require a sponsor to enter the IKR and would not be perceived as  a
    security risk. It is accepted that where a person  has  no  established
    links to the IKR and is of Arab  or  Turkmen  ethnic  origin,  internal
    relocation will be difficult even if identity documents are in order. A
    sponsor may be required and  entry  may  be  refused  due  to  security
    concerns.


73. In relation to the Appellant, the Respondent accepted that there  would
    be an Article 15(c) risk to him in the Kirkuk region but submitted that
    it would not be unreasonable for him to relocate to either Baghdad, the
    southern governorates or the IKR.


Respondent's oral submissions

74. The concession made in the Respondent's skeleton  argument  as  to  the
    Article 15(c) risk to ordinary  persons  in  the  contested  areas  was
    maintained.


75. Mr Blundell submitted that when considering whether  an  Article  15(c)
    risk arose in areas other than the 'contested  areas',  the  Tribunal's
    focus should be on the intensity of the violence. Whilst accepting that
    the Tribunal's approach must be holistic/inclusive he asserted that the
    data relating to the numbers of  civilians  injured  or  killed  should
    serve as a "gateway" to such an analysis. Reliance was  placed  on  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in QD (Iraq) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home  Department  (United  Nations  High  Commissioner   for   Refugees
    intervening) [2009] EWCA Civ 620 at [21] in this regard.


76. The Respondent  accepted  that  the  security  situation  in  Iraq  has
    deteriorated recently, but observed that the current level of  violence
    is nowhere near the peak in 2006-7, nor is it anything like  the  level
    of violence that exists in Syria. It was further noted that the  curfew
    in Baghdad had recently been lifted and that Dr Fatah had accepted that
    there had not been any wave of violence as a consequence. There is  not
    an Article 15(c) risk within Baghdad city  or  the  Baghdad  Belts.  Dr
    Fatah agreed that ISIL  were  not  in  control  of  Baghdad  and  that,
    although fighting was more pronounced in the Baghdad  Belts,  it  could
    not operate there or exert influence there because there  was  so  much
    military opposition to it.


77. Mr Blundell thereafter accepted that there  were  no  specific  Kurdish
    areas in Baghdad but, nevertheless, asserted that  it  would  still  be
    reasonable to expect a person of Kurdish origin to relocate there.


78. As to documentation, it was confirmed that the Iraqi authorities  would
    only grant entry to a person returned to Baghdad if that person  is  in
    possession of a laissez-passer, a current Iraqi passport or an  expired
    Iraqi passport. Dr Fatah accepted that if a person were returned with a
    passport or expired passport these could be used to obtain a CSID. If a
    person were to be returned on a laissez-passer that person would either
    have a CSID or have the sort of documents required to get one,  because
    it would have been necessary for such person to produce these documents
    to obtain the laissez-passer. A CSID can be obtained from  the  UK.  It
    was said that in such circumstances the Tribunal  should  consider  the
    appeal on the hypothetical basis that the Appellant will  have  a  CSID
    upon return. In any event, there is a Central Archive in  Baghdad  that
    can issue documentation.


79. Mr Blundell submitted that the evidence demonstrates that a majority of
    IDPs in Baghdad live  with  family  members  there.  Returnees  receive
    assistance  under  the  Voluntary  Assisted  Return  and  Reintegration
    Programme ('VARRP'). A 'Start Card' containing the  first  �500  [of  a
    possible maximum of �1,500], is provided at the airport as the returnee
    leaves. This can be used to withdraw the �500 from a bank machine  upon
    return. The rest of the funds can usually be accessed  through  partner
    organisations in the country of return, who will use  it  to  give  the
    returnee support and  assistance  after  he  or  she  returns.  It  was
    submitted  that  the  Appellant  could  use  this   money   to   obtain
    accommodation on his return;  if  need  be,  in  any  period  prior  to
    obtaining a CSID and other papers, the Appellant could  rely  on  Iraqi
    and international assistance. Life goes on in Baghdad  and  it  is  not
    unreasonable for a person to internally relocate there.


80. Returns from the UK to the IKR take place on EU letters. A  person  not
    originally from the IKR would not be returned there.  Returnees are pre-
    cleared with the IKR authorities. Identity is assured in advance.


81. As to the instant appellant, he would be returned to Baghdad.  He could
    fly from Baghdad to Erbil and would not  require  a  sponsor  to  enter
    given his Kurdish ethnicity. He has family in Iraq who could assist  in
    the re-documentation process.  It should not be assumed that they  have
    moved on or that they cannot be contacted.

Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive

Legal Framework

82. Article 15 of the Directive provides as follows:

         "Serious harm consists of


         (a)      death penalty or execution;


         (b)      torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
         an Applicant in the country of origin; and


         (c)      serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
         person by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of
         international or internal armed conflict."


83. Article 15 is applied by Article 2(e) of the Directive which defines  a
    person eligible for subsidiary protection as:

         "... a third country national or  stateless  person  who  does  not
         qualify as a refugee but in respect  of  whom  substantial  grounds
         have been  shown  for  believing  that  the  person  concerned,  if
         returned to his or her country of origin ... would face a real risk
         of suffering serious harm as defined  in  Article  15  ...  and  is
         unable, or, owing to  such  risk  unwilling  to  avail  himself  or
         herself of the protection of the country."

84. Paragraph 339C of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  ("the  Immigration
    Rules") gives effect to Article 15(c) in  domestic  law,  providing  as
    follows:

         "339C. A person will be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
         United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


   i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of entry  in  the
      United Kingdom;
  ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in  regulation  2  of  The
      Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection  (Qualification)
      Regulations 2006;
 iii) substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  the  person
      concerned, if he returned to the country of return, would face a  real
      risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or, unwilling  to  avail
      himself of the protection of that country; and
  iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.


         Serious harm consists of:


   i) the death penalty of execution;
  ii) unlawful killing;
 iii) torture or inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment of  a  person
      in the country of return; or
  iv) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or person by reason
      of indiscriminate violence in situations of international and internal
      armed conflict."


85. The Court of Justice of the  European  Union  ("CJEU"),  the  Court  of
    Appeal and the Upper Tribunal have  given  extensive  consideration  to
    Article 15(c) of the Directive and we gratefully adopt the  summary  of
    learning to be derived therefrom set out by the Upper Tribunal  in  its
    recent country guidance case on returns to Somalia - MOJ & Ors  (return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) at [30] - [33]:


        "30.      ...There are now two decisions of the Court of Justice  of
             the European Union (CJEU) which deal with Article 15(c):  Case
             (C-465/07) Elgafaji v Staatssecretaris van Justitie  [2009]  1
             WLR 2100, and Case (C-285/12) Diakite  v  Commissaire  general
             aux refugies [2014] WLR(D) 37...[4];


         31.      In Elgafaji, the ECJ construed Article  15(c)  as  dealing
             with a more general risk of harm than that  covered  by  15(a)
             and (b).

             The essence of the Court's ruling in Elgafaji was:

                 '43. Having regard to all of the foregoing  considerations,
                 the answer to the questions referred is that Article  15(c)
                 of the Directive, in conjunction with Article 2(e)  of  the
                 Directive,  must  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that:   the
                 existence of a serious and individual threat to the life or
                 person of an applicant for  subsidiary  protection  is  not
                 subject  to  the  condition  that  that  applicant   adduce
                 evidence that he is  specifically  targeted  by  reason  of
                 factors  particular  to  his  personal  circumstances;  the
                 existence of such a threat can exceptionally be  considered
                 to  be  established  where  the  degree  of  indiscriminate
                 violence characterising the  armed  conflict  taking  place
                 assessed by the competent national authorities before which
                 an application for subsidiary protection is made, or by the
                 courts of a Member State to which a decision refusing  such
                 an application is referred reaches such a high  level  that
                 substantial  grounds  are  shown  for  believing   that   a
                 civilian, returned to the relevant country or, as the  case
                 may be, to the relevant region, would, solely on account of
                 his presence on the territory of that  country  or  region,
                 face a real risk of being subject to that threat.'

         32.      In Diakite, the Court, having provided  a  definition  of
             internal armed conflict at [28], reaffirmed in [30]  its  view
             that for civilians as such to  qualify  for  protection  under
             Article  15(c)   they   would   need   to   demonstrate   that
             indiscriminate violence was at a high level:


                  '30. Furthermore, it should be  borne  in  mind  that  the
                 existence of an internal armed conflict can be a cause  for
                 granting subsidiary protection  only  where  confrontations
                 between a State's armed forces and one or more armed groups
                 or between two  or  more  armed  groups  are  exceptionally
                 considered to create a serious and individual threat to the
                 life or person of an applicant  for  subsidiary  protection
                 for the purposes of  Article 15(c)  of  Directive  2004/83
                 because  the  degree  of  indiscriminate   violence   which
                 characterises those  confrontations  reaches  such  a  high
                 level that substantial grounds are shown for believing that
                 a civilian, if returned to the relevant country or, as  the
                 case may be, to the relevant  region,  would  -  solely  on
                 account of his presence in the territory of that country or
                 region - face a real risk of being subject to  that  threat
                 (see, to that effect, Elgafaji, paragraph 43).'

             At [31] the Court reaffirmed the view it expressed in Elgafaji
             at [39] that Article  15(c)  also  contains  (what  UNHCR  has
             termed) a "sliding scale" such that "the more the applicant is
             able to show that he is specifically  affected  by  reason  of
             factors particular to his personal  circumstances,  the  lower
             the level of indiscriminate violence required for  him  to  be
             eligible  for  subsidiary  protection."    The  Court  thereby
             recognised that a person may still be accorded protection even
             when the general level of violence is not very  high  if  they
             are able to show that there are  specific  reasons,  over  and
             above them being mere civilians, for  being  affected  by  the
             indiscriminate  violence.   In  this  way  the  Article  15(c)
             inquiry is two-pronged: (a)  it  asks  whether  the  level  of
             violence is so high that  there  is  a  general  risk  to  all
             civilians; (b) it asks that  even  if  there  is  not  such  a
             general risk, there is a specific risk based on the  "sliding-
             scale" notion.


         33.      In the United  Kingdom,  the  principal  decision  of  the
             higher courts dealing with Article 15(c) remains QD  (Iraq)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] 1  WLR  689.
             QD helpfully explains and indicates  how  Elgafaji  should  be
             applied. In addition we have the guidance set out  in  HM  and
             others (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 409 (IAC). At  [42]-
             [45] of HM (Iraq) the Tribunal stated that:

                  '42.  We recognise that the threat to life or person of an
                 individual need not come directly from armed conflict.   It
                 will  suffice  that  the  result  of  such  conflict  is  a
                 breakdown of law and order which has the effect of creating
                 the necessary risk.  It is obvious that the  risk  is  most
                 likely  to   result   from   indiscriminate   bombings   or
                 shootings.    These   can   properly   be    regarded    as
                 indiscriminate in the sense  that,  albeit  they  may  have
                 specific or general targets,  they  inevitably  expose  the
                 ordinary civilian who happens to be at the  scene  to  what
                 has been described in argument as  collateral  damage.   By
                 specific targets, we refer to individuals or gatherings  of
                 individuals such as army  or  police  officers.  The  means
                 adopted may be bombs, which can affect others  besides  the
                 target,  or  shootings,  which   produce   a   lesser   but
                 nonetheless real risk of  collateral  damage.   By  general
                 targets we refer to more  indiscriminate  attacks  on,  for
                 example, Sunnis or Shi'as or vice versa.  Such attacks  can
                 involve explosions of  bombs  in  crowded  places  such  as
                 markets or where religious processions  or  gatherings  are
                 taking place.

                  43. The CJEU requires us to decide whether the  degree  of
                 indiscriminate violence characterising the  armed  conflict
                 taking place reaches such a  high  level  as  to  show  the
                 existence for an  ordinary  civilian  of  a  real  risk  of
                 serious harm in the country  or  in  a  particular  region.
                 When we refer below to the "Article 15(c) threshold",  this
                 is what we have in mind. Thus it  is  necessary  to  assess
                 whether the level of  violence  is  such  as  to  meet  the
                 test...


                  44. In HM1 at [73] the Tribunal decided that an attempt to
                 distinguish between a real risk of targeted and  incidental
                 killing of  civilians  during  armed  conflict  was  not  a
                 helpful exercise.  We agree, but in assessing  whether  the
                 risk reaches the level required by the CJEU, focus  on  the
                 evidence about the numbers of civilians killed  or  wounded
                 is obviously of prime importance. Thus we  have  been  told
                 that each death can be multiplied up to  seven  times  when
                 considering  injuries  to  bystanders.   This  is  somewhat
                 speculative and it must be obvious that the  risk  of  what
                 has been called collateral damage will differ depending  on
                 the nature of the killing.  A bomb is likely to  cause  far
                 greater  "collateral  damage"  than  an  assassination   by
                 shooting.  But the incidence and numbers  of  death  are  a
                 helpful starting point.


                 45. The harm in question must be serious  enough  to  merit
                 medical treatment.  It is not limited to physical harm  and
                 can include serious mental harm such as, for example, post-
                 traumatic stress disorder.  We repeat and  adopt  what  the
                 Tribunal said in HM1 at [80]:

            "In  our  judgment  the  nexus  between  the  generalised  armed
                    conflict and the indiscriminate violence posing  a  real
                    risk to life or person is met when the intensity of  the
                    conflict involves means of combat  (whether  permissible
                    under the laws of war or not)  that  seriously  endanger
                    non-combatants as well  as  result  in  such  a  general
                    breakdown of law and order  as  to  permit  anarchy  and
                    criminality occasioning the serious harm referred to  in
                    the  Directive.   Such  violence  is  indiscriminate  in
                    effect even if not necessarily in aim.   As  the  French
                    Conseil  d'Etat  observed  in  Baskarathas,  it  is  not
                    necessary for the threat to life  or  person  to  derive
                    from protagonists in the armed conflict in question:  it
                    can simply be a product of  the  breakdown  of  law  and
                    order." ' "

Article 15(c) - Discussion and Conclusions


86. As identified above, the instant appeal was remitted by  the  Court  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal for reconsideration under Article 15(c) of
    the  Qualification  Directive.  The  burden  of  proof  rests  on   the
    Appellant, albeit the standard of proof is low.


87. Given that this is a Country Guidance decision, and  is  restricted  to
    consideration of Article 15(c), it is prudent first  to  reiterate  the
    following observation made by this Tribunal in HM2:


         "260.    Our primary focus in these appeals is strictly confined to
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, and  a  discrete
             issue relating to risk on return to BIAP. However, since  this
             case  deals  with  the  current  situation  in  Iraq  it  will
             inevitably be a reference point for  decision-makers  deciding
             asylum-related appeals brought by Iraqis that are not confined
             to the Article 15(c) issue. In this context we would reiterate
             the  observations  made  recently  by  the  Tribunal   in   AK
             (Afghanistan) at  [154]-[156]  that  in  the  general  run  of
             appeals decision-makers should ordinarily deal first with  the
             issue of refugee eligibility and only deal with the  issue  of
             subsidiary protection (including Article 15(c))  second.  They
             should not deal with Article 3 until last."


88. Both parties accepted that we should take an inclusive approach to  our
    consideration of Article 15(c). This was the approach  adopted  by  the
    Tribunal in both HM1 and HM2 as  well  as  in  numerous  other  country
    guidance decisions of this Tribunal. We remind ourselves that  such  an
    approach requires an analysis of the violence that is both  qualitative
    and quantitative and is not to be restricted to a  purely  quantitative
    analysis of the number of civilian deaths and injuries in Iraq,  or  in
    any particular governorate within Iraq. The list of factors relevant to
    such an  analysis  is  non-exhaustive  but  includes  within  them  the
    conduct, and relevant strength, of the parties to  the  conflict  (see,
    for example, AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163  at
    [163]),  the  number  of  civilian  deaths  and   injuries;   including
    psychological  injuries  caused  by  the   conflict,   the   level   of
    displacement and the geographical scope of the conflict.


89. Turning to the evidence, we found Dr Fatah  to  be  an  impressive  and
    authoritative witness.  He  demonstrated  extensive  knowledge  of  the
    circumstances  in  Iraq  and  sought,  wherever  possible,  to  provide
    multiple sources for the evidence he provided, which  was  to  a  large
    extent consistent with the  other  materials  placed  before  us.  When
    giving oral evidence he clearly identified those parts of his  evidence
    which called for speculation on his part. In all the  circumstances  we
    attach significant weight to Dr Fatah's evidence.


90. The landscape in Iraq has undoubtedly changed since HM2  was  heard  in
    October 2012, with the rise of the ISIL - the main insurgent group  now
    operating in the country. This group was established by  the  Jordanian
    national Abu Musab al-Zarqawi in  1999  -  originally  being  known  as
    Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad. In October 2004 it  became  known  as  Al-
    Qaeda in Iraq and was identified as such by the Tribunal in HM2.


 91. In April 2013 its current leader, Abu Bakr  al-Baghdadi,  changed  the
     group's name to Al-Dawla Al-Islamiya  fi  al-Iraq  wa  al-Sham  -  the
     "Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham"; al-Sham referring to an undefined
     region around Syria which translates into  English  as  "The  Levant"-
     thus the use of the acronym ISIL[5].


 92. In June 2014, after a major military offensive, ISIL seized control of
     the northern  city  of  Mosul  and  shortly  thereafter  declared  the
     existence of an Islamic State across parts of northern Iraq and Syria.


 93. The UNHCR, in its October 2014 report "UNHCR Positions on  Returns  to
     Iraq" summarised the situation thus:

      "Iraq has experienced a new surge in violence between Iraqi  security
         forces (ISF) and Kurdish forces (Peshmerga) on the one hand and the
         group "Islamic State of Iraq and Al-Sham" (hereafter  ISIS),  which
         operates both in Iraq and Syria, and affiliated armed groups on the
         other hand. Civilians are killed and wounded every day as a  result
         of this surge of violence, including suicide attacks and car bombs,
         shelling, airstrikes, and executions. As a result  of  advances  by
         ISIS, the Government of Iraq is  reported  to  have  lost  full  or
         partial control over considerable parts of the country's territory,
         particularly in Al-Anbar, Ninewa, Salah Al-Din, Kirkuk  and  Diyala
         governorates. Although the ISF and Kurdish forces, supported by  US
         airstrikes, have recently regained control  over  some  localities,
         mostly along the internal boundaries  with  the  Kurdistan  Region,
         overall frontlines remain fluid. The conflict,  which  re-escalated
         in Al Anbar governorate in January 2014 and since  then  spread  to
         other governorates, has been labelled as a non-international  armed
         conflict. Casualties so far in 2014  represent  the  highest  total
         since the height of sectarian conflict in 2006-2007."


 94. The objectives of ISIL,  so  far  as  they  can  be  ascertained,  are
     threefold:


         a)   To permanently break down political boundaries in Iraq, Syria
            and the surrounding region;
         b)   To establish  the  Islamic  Emirate  by  controlling  terrain
            across  Syria  and  Iraq,  governing  within  the  terrain  and
            defending its external borders; and,
         c)   To expand the territory of the Emirate and connect it to  the
            wider Muslim community.


 95. ISIL is said to have significant  financial  resources,  with  funding
     from individuals in Arab Gulf states, together with  income  from  oil
     fields it controls and from smuggling  and  extortion  (BBC,  30  June
     2014)


 96. Dr Fatah observes that in addition to ISIL there are four other  anti-
     GoI groups operating in Iraq; the Jaysh Rijal al-Tariq  al-Naqshabandi
     (JRTN) movement,  the  Mujahideen  Shura  Council,  the  Revolutionary
     tribes and Ansar al-Sunni.  He also avers that there are eight pro-GoI
     Shia militia groups and four pro-GoI Sunni militia groups operating in
     Iraq - as well as a number of foreign forces.


 97. The evidence provides a range of figures for deaths and casualties  in
     Iraq during 2014 and early 2015. Before summarising  those  statistics
     we sound the same note of caution as was sounded in both HM1 [117] and
     HM2 [107] in seeking to rely on any particular survey:


      "Because the estimates of Iraqi casualties contained in  this  report
         are based on varying time  periods  and  have  been  created  using
         different methodologies, readers should exercise caution when using
         them  and  should  look  to  them  as  guideposts  rather  than  as
         statements of fact."

98. Iraq Body Count, whose figures Dr Fatah relies upon and were  found  by
    the Tribunal in HM2 to be  most  reliable  because  of  their  multiple
    sourcing [110], record that 17,049 civilians were killed in Iraq during
    2014,  this being almost double the figure for 2013, which  itself  was
    roughly double the figure recorded for 2012. As of  18  February  2015,
    Iraq Body Count (IBC) had recorded  2,245  civilians  deaths  in  2015.
    According to IBC, civilian deaths peaked in 2006 and 2007 at 29400  and
    25968 deaths respectively.

99. The GoI record 15,538 civilian  deaths  in  2014,  the  United  Nations
    Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) record  12,282  such  deaths  (April
    2015 CIG) or 10,187 (Dr Fatah's  first  report)  and  Musings  on  Iraq
    record 17,098 deaths, both over the same period. The number of civilian
    casualties recorded by the same organisations ranged from 22,000  (GoI)
    to 26,590 (Musing on Iraq). IBC  broke  down  its  record  of  civilian
    deaths into three categories - 1,748 deaths caused by Iraqi airstrikes,
    4,325 at the hands of ISIL and 10,858 deaths where it was not  possible
    to establish which of the 'actors' were involved.


The Contested Areas - the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk (aka
Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din

100. The contested area is formed of the governorates listed above to the
     north and west of Baghdad, excluding those in the IKR.

101. We need say little about the situation for ordinary civilians  in  the
     contested areas, given the concession made by the  Respondent.  It  is
     enough for us to identify that the security situation in  these  areas
     remains volatile. Following its  offensive  in  June  2014  ISIL  took
     occupation of significant parts of these areas; however, the  GoI  and
     its allies subsequently retook a number or  towns/areas  within  these
     governorates. Nevertheless, ISIL still  holds  control  of  key  urban
     areas and on the  day  prior  to  the  hearing  of  this  appeal  took
     occupation of the strategic town of Ramadi, in the Anbar governorate -
     70 miles west of Baghdad.


102. Life in the areas controlled by ISIL is  characterised  by  systematic
     and widespread acts of violence and gross violations of  international
     humanitarian law and abuses of human rights.  Among  ISIL  victims  in
     areas under its control are those Sunni Muslims who refuse to live  by
     its rules. In  its  attempts  to  gain  increased  occupation  of  the
     contested areas ISIL has  directly  targeted  civilians  and  civilian
     infrastructures. Although figures for the civilian deaths and injuries
     in the contested  areas  have  been  put  before  us,  we  accept  the
     rationality of Amnesty International's view on  such  statistics  i.e.
     that "it is difficult to establish the  true  scale  of  killings  and
     abductions that ISIS have committed...Accurate  casualty  figures  are
     very hard to come by for all areas of Iraq, owing to the nature of the
     conflict and the risks faced by investigators." Whilst we accept  this
     is likely to be true country-wide, it must be particularly  so  within
     the areas of ISIL control; given the obvious difficulties of accessing
     the contested areas and thereafter risks in  identifying  and  logging
     the security incidents.


103. In its May 2015 report Amnesty International  record  that  after  re-
     taking Tikrit from ISIL, Shia militias looted, killed and  perpetrated
     sexual violence against the Sunni residents of the town; actions  also
     reported by Agence France Press.


104. The volatility of the  contested  areas  has  led  to  there  being  a
     "massive flow of internal refugees" [Landinfo -  February  2015]  from
     these areas to Baghdad. According to the Home Office April  2015  CIG,
     the International Organisation  for  Migration  Displacement  Tracking
     Index ("DTM") for March  2015  recorded  Baghdad  as  hosting  325,692
     displaced individuals. There was also displacement from the  contested
     areas into the IKR.


105. Given the volatility of the situation  in  the  contested  areas,  the
     number of displaced persons therefrom, the  tactics  of  warfare  used
     there by ISIL and the circumstances in the areas controlled  by  ISIL,
     we have no hesitation in endorsing  the  Respondent's  concession  and
     conclude that a civilian with no distinguishing characteristics  will,
     simply by virtue of his/her presence in a contested area, be  at  real
     risk of suffering harm of the type identified in Article 15(c) of  the
     Qualification Directive.


  Babil


106. Babil governorate is located directly to the South of Baghdad, sharing
     the extreme north of its border with Baghdad and Anbar governorates.


107. In paragraph 1.3.22 of its April 2015 Country Information and Guidance
     document: Iraq: Security situation in Baghdad,  southern  governorates
     and the Kurdistan Region of Iraq the Home Office  state  that:  "there
     has  been  a  deterioration  in  the  security  situation   in   Babil
     governorate since 2012 and 2013...In 2014 there was an average of  126
     people  killed  per  month"  It  continues  in  paragraph  1.3.23   by
     identifying that "the government maintains control over  the  majority
     of the governorate, including the northern part of Babil  around  Jurf
     Al-Sakhr, which was previously  an  ISIL  strong-hold  from  which  it
     launched attacks on the surrounding area and manufactured  car  bombs.
     By the end of 2014 ISIL's presence in Jurf Al-Sakhr had been  cleared,
     with insurgents  routed  further  north.  This  military  success  had
     improved the security situation considerably. However, there  remained
     a risk of further violence, both from renewed armed conflict and as  a
     result of IEDs left behind by insurgents".


108. At paragraph 1.3.25 it concluded that: "while levels of violence  have
     increased in Babil compared to previous  years,  conditions  have  not
     deteriorated to the extent that a person returning there would face  a
     breach of Article 15(c)". However, it is added that: "while in general
     a return to Babil would not breach Article 15(c), decision makers must
     also consider whether there are particular  factors  relevant  to  the
     person's individual circumstances which might nevertheless place  them
     at risk. Such factors include - but are not limited to - the  person's
     age,  gender,  health,  ethnicity,  religion,  sect,  disability   and
     profession. Some persons, especially those who reside in  areas  where
     they are a minority, may face  a  heightened  risk  of  indiscriminate
     violence". At paragraph  1.3.27,  the  Home  Office  noted  that  "the
     security situation remains fluid".


109. In his first report, of 27 February 2015, Dr Fatah observes that  ISIL
     was ousted from its based in  Jurf  Al-Sakhr,  in  the  north  of  the
     governorate, in October 2014. The majority of the fighting in Babil  -
     and the casualties - occurred during the summer  months  of  2014  and
     that the province  is  now  far  quieter,  although  there  remains  a
     consistent level of violence. Dr Fatah's later reports do not describe
     any change to his position in this regard. Statistics are provided  by
     Dr Fatah identifying that in the first  two  weeks  of  February  2015
     there were 20 security incidents  in  the  governorate,  in  which  18
     civilians were  killed  and  59  wounded.   The  population  of  Babil
     governorate, according to the Home Office is 1.8 million.


110. As evidenced by its previous operations in Jurf Al-Sakh, the north  of
     Babil governorate  is  clearly  viewed  by  ISIL  as  a  strategically
     advantageous position, because of its proximity  to  Baghdad  and  its
     border with Anbar. Given this, it is important that  decision  makers,
     when faced with applicants from that province, carefully consider  up-
     to-date information on the situation  there.   On  the  basis  of  the
     limited information put before us on the current  situation  in  Babil
     governorate, which we have summarised above, we do not accept that  it
     has been demonstrated that there presently  exists  an  Article  15(c)
     risk there to an  ordinary  civilian;  and  neither  does  a  person's
     ethnicity,  religion   or   sex,   whether   taken   individually   or
     cumulatively, enhance the level of risk there so as to engage  Article
     15(c). There is no evidence of very recent conflict between  ISIL  and
     state authorities in the north  of  the  province,  and  the  security
     incidents, deaths and injuries to civilians in  the  governorate  from
     'security incidents', whilst  deplorable,  is  small  in  number  when
     compared to the size of the governorates population.


Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) - Erbil, Sulaymaniyah and Dahuk

111. In Dr Fatah's opinion the IKR "is virtually violence  free,  and  only
     exceptional one offs disrupt this". The most recent security  incident
     in the IKR referred to in Dr Fatah's evidence was a suicide  car  bomb
     outside the governorate office in Erbil on  19  November  2014,  which
     killed six people, including the driver, and wounded dozens. Prior  to
     that there was a bomb in Erbil on 29 September 2013, which also killed
     six people. The Home Office April 2015 CIG also makes reference to the
     November 2014 attack, but identifies there having been 10 deaths as  a
     consequence. It concludes that the IKR is  stable  and  has  very  low
     levels of violence.


112. The evidence before us does not establish that  there  is  an  Article
     15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the  IKR;  and  neither  does  a
     person's ethnicity, religion or sex,  whether  taken  individually  or
     cumulatively, enhance the level of risk so as to engage Article 15(c).



The Southern Governorates - Basra, Kerbala, Najaf, Muthana, Thi-Qar,
Missan, Qadissiya and Wassit

113.  Dr  Fatah  identifies  that  security  incidents   in   the   southern
    governorates of Iraq are "rare" - with Thi-Qar, Missan,  Qadissiya  and
    Wassit being almost entirely free of violence for some  years  and  the
    mainly Sunni governorate of Muthana being "basically empty". There were
    more regular security incidents in Basra and Kerbala, although  not  on
    the scale of the incidents in other parts of Iraq. The  evidence  given
    by Dr Fatah in relation to the Southern governorates accords with  that
    provided in the April 2015 CIG report at [1.3.29],  which  recalls  the
    number of civilian fatalities in 2014 in Thi-Qar and Muthana  as  being
    eight and six respectively, Basra as having 128 such fatalities, and in
    Kerbala  200  fatalities.  The  combined  population   of   the   eight
    governorates is 6.7 million.

114. Our attention has not been drawn to  any  evidence  contradicting  that
    which we have summarised above  and,  as  a  consequence,  we  have  no
    hesitation in concluding that the evidence before us does not  disclose
    that there is a real risk of serious harm - as defined in Article 15(c)
    - for an ordinary civilian in any of  the  southern  governorates;  nor
    does a person's ethnicity, religion or sex - whether taken of itself or
    cumulatively - increase the risk of serious harm to such person  so  as
    to engage Article 15(c).


115. Although we have found  that  Article  15(c)  is  not  engaged  for  an
    ordinary civilian in the Southern governorates we are also required  to
    consider issues of safety arising during the process  of  return  to  a
    person's home area  -  this  being  part  of  the  decision  on  status
    entitlement (HH(Somalia) [2010] EWCA Civ 426 at [82-84]).


116. Iraqi nationals not originating  from  the  IKR  will  be  returned  to
    Baghdad by the Respondent. Dr Fatah provides detailed evidence  on  the
    safety of road travel from Baghdad to the southern governorates in  his
    second report stating at [103] that  "There  are  no  reports  of  such
    targeting by armed groups on civilians  using  roads  from  Baghdad  to
    southern areas, or vice versa." He does however provide evidence  of  a
    truck bombing on a water purification centre on the  Umqasir  -  Safwan
    road in Basra in March 2015 and an explosive device attached to  a  car
    in northern Babil  in  February  2015.  There  are  also  a  number  of
    incidents of attacks on checkpoints in Baghdad. This evidence  reflects
    evidence found elsewhere before us and does not  lead  us  to  conclude
    that there would be a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
    Baghdad airport to the southern governorates, suffering serious harm en
    route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

Baghdad City


117. Baghdad governorate consists  of  10  districts,  covers  approximately
    4500 square kilometres and has a population  of  between  6.6  and  7.1
    million (the figure referred to in HM2 being that produced by  the  GoI
    of 7,055,200 - whereas the UN's  Joint  Analysis  Unit  identifies  the
    population of Baghdad governorate to be  6,696,596  as  of  2013).  The
    governorate is under the control of the Iraqi Security Forces, although
    Human Rights Watch wrote on 15 February 2015 that  Shia  militias  were
    leading security operations in Baghdad.


118. Within the governorate, Baghdad city comprises nine  districts  and  89
    neighbourhoods and is said to have a population  of  approximately  6.5
    million ([199] of HM2). A US Congressional Research Service  report  of
    February 2015 referred to the population of Baghdad city as  being  80%
    Shia, although the Landinfo report indicates that the percentage mix of
    Shia and Sunnis in Baghdad  is  not  known.  The  sensitivity  of  this
    political subject led to the  national  census  being  deferred.   Sadr
    City, a 'Shia district' within Baghdad city, is the centre for  Moqtada
    al-Sadr and his followers and the area relies entirely on the Jaysh  al
    Mahdi for its security.  Sunni areas are largely to  be  found  to  the
    west of the city (Al Ghazaliya, Abu Ghraib and Al Jami'ah), although Al
    Doura, in southern Baghdad, is also reported to  be  a  majority  Sunni
    neighbourhood  (USA  Today  -  13  July  2013)  and  there  are   mixed
    neighbourhoods, such as al Adel in the east of Baghdad and Karkh in the
    centre of the city. There is no identifiable Kurdish  area  in  Baghdad
    city and Dr Fatah was unaware of the number  of  Kurds  living  in  the
    city. Most violent activity within Baghdad  is  the  responsibility  of
    ISIL and Shia militia groups. ISIL pursues its campaign in  Baghdad  to
    undermine the stability of the security apparatus  there  -  instilling
    fear within general populace and feeding off the global coverage of the
    incidents.


119. In  his  first  report  Dr  Fatah  refers  to  their  having  been  127
    'incidents' in Baghdad in  the  first  three  weeks  of  January  2015,
    killing  185  and  injuring  500  persons.  Another  explosive   device
    detonated in a market on 30 January, killing a further 18-20 people. He
    describes five bomb attacks (suicide  bombs  or  IEDs)  in  Baghdad  in
    February 2015, each near a restaurant or other  public  place,  causing
    approximately 60 deaths in total and a significantly greater number  of
    wounded. These, and other incidents, are also reported elsewhere in the
    evidence before us.


120. In January 2015 there were 118 IED attacks in Baghdad. Musings on  Iraq
    reported the number of IED attacks in Baghdad in February 2015  in  the
    following terms:


         "Baghdad continued to suffer from a  steady  stream  of  improvised
         explosive devices (IEDs). 23 went off during the  week  killing  32
         people, 46% of all deaths, and injured  another  129,  80%  of  the
         total. The Islamic State's VBIED  bases  around  the  capital  have
         largely been disrupted and the group is  using  most  of  them  for
         tactical  attacks  upon  the  government  forces  in  places   like
         Salahaddin. That has left IEDs as the main form of  attack  in  the
         capital. While not as deadly as car bombs, most IEDs are set off in
         public places like shops and markets to harm as many  civilians  as
         possible and are the main driver of casualties for the last several
         months."


121. According to figures produced by UNAMA, in the first 3 months  of  2015
    there were 947 civilian deaths and 2,561 civilian injuries in  Baghdad.
    IBC recorded 4,767 civilian deaths  in  Baghdad  governorate  in  2014,
    almost double that of 2013.


122. Later incidents, in May 2015, are detailed in  Amnesty  International's
    report of 14 May - reference being made therein to bomb, and/or  rocket
    attacks of public places in Baghdad on 2, 5, 9 and 12  May  this  year,
    and kidnappings and other killings on 7 May. After the hearing we  were
    also provided with news reports relating to two  significant  car  bomb
    attacks on hotels in central Baghdad, carried out by ISIL at the end of
    May, in which at least nine more people were killed and dozens injured.


123. Dr Fatah explains that it  is  Baghdad's  Shiite  districts  that  have
    borne the brunt of the bomb attacks - with the  perpetrators  generally
    believed  to  be  either  ISIL  or  other  Sunni  insurgents.   Amnesty
    International reports that Shia militias,  backed  by  GoI,  have  been
    abducting and killing Sunni civilian men in  Baghdad,  and  around  the
    country - indicating that it has documented "dozens" of such  cases  in
    Baghdad, Samarra and Kirkuk.  Dr Fatah observes  that  Sunni  districts
    experience fewer incidents than Shia districts and that such  incidents
    as there are largely take the form of kidnappings and killings.  Sunnis
    are targeted, amongst other reasons, as retribution  for  the  acts  of
    ISIL.


124. There are also reports of the  Christian  and  Kurdish  communities  in
    Baghdad receiving death threats from Shi'a  militias  warning  them  to
    leave, although Dr Fatah does not identify the number of such  threats,
    whether the threats prompted the recipients to leave,  or  whether  any
    such threats were acted upon.


125. When viewed in the context of the size of  the  population  of  Baghdad
    city, we do not find the level of civilian deaths and  injuries  there,
    even  taken  at  its  highest  and  allowing  for  the  likelihood   of
    underreporting,  to  be  indicative  of  the  level  of  indiscriminate
    violence so as to engage Article 15(c).  A  resident  of  Baghdad  city
    could, of course, reduce still further the already small possibility of
    being caught up in an attack by avoiding those busy public places which
    the evidence suggests are one of the primary targets.


126. We accept, however, that the statistics as to  the  level  of  civilian
    deaths and injuries in Baghdad  are  not  determinative  of  the  issue
    before us; indeed if they were then, as Mr Bazini properly points  out,
    they are not significantly different to the statistics  on  deaths  and
    injuries to civilians drawn in relation to some of the governorates  in
    the contested areas. A more holistic approach is required.


127. There are significant differences as between the circumstances in  the
     contested areas and those prevailing in Baghdad. The  April  2015  CIG
     reports that despite the levels of violence in  Baghdad,  displacement
     there has remained low (around 60,000)  with  the  majority  of  those
     displaced (40,000) moving within the governorate. This is in  contrast
     to the high levels of population displacement away from the  contested
     areas.


128. Although displacement levels are clearly a relevant factor when  taking
    the inclusive approach to a consideration  of  Article  15(c),  we  are
    cautious about giving them undue prominence in our holistic assessment.
    A person who is facing egregious violence in one place  may  decide  to
    move to another place that, whilst safer, is still far  from  peaceful.
    We do, however, accept that the  large  movement  of  people  from  the
    contested  areas  to  Baghdad  city  is  indicative  of   there   being
    sufficiently less violence in Baghdad to make the arduous and upsetting
    process of fleeing one's home worthwhile. The geography also  indicates
    that those moving to Baghdad from the contested areas  do  not  face  a
    "Hobson's Choice", in that some, at least, would  appear  to  have  the
    option of seeking refuge in the Southern  Governorates  or  across  the
    border in Jordan.


129. It is also apparent from what we say  above  that  the  nature  of  the
    conflict is very different as between the contested areas and  Baghdad,
    as are the circumstances of daily life between in the two regions - the
    nature of the conflict and the features of daily life in  Baghdad  both
    being relevant  considerations  in  our  determination  of  whether  an
    Article 15(c) threshold has been met. As to the latter it  is  observed
    in the Landinfo report of February 2015, that:


      "Daily life in Baghdad carries on in the midst  of  all  the  violent
         incidents. Somehow communications, transport,  trade  and  industry
         and public business  go  on  functioning,  in  spite  of  the  many
         restrictions as a result of the many years of  misrule,  corruption
         and poor security."


      It is also relevant that the violence in Baghdad is largely  generated
      by asymmetrical warfare (i.e. sporadic terrorist attacks) rather  than
      by all out fighting, such as is to be seen in the contested areas.


130. Dr Fatah expressed agreement with the aforementioned passage  from  the
    Landinfo report during the  course  of  his  oral  evidence,  with  the
    proviso that although daily life carries on the security situation  has
    instilled a fear in the general populace. This we accept and  have  had
    full regard to when coming to our conclusions; nevertheless  this  must
    be viewed in the context of the very small proportion of persons living
    in Baghdad who are killed and injured  there as a  direct  or  indirect
    consequence  of the security situation.


131. Having considered all of the evidence before us, a summary of which  we
    have set out above, in our view we  do  not  find  that  the  level  of
    violence in Baghdad city, or in Baghdad governorate as a  whole,  comes
    even close to crossing the Article 15(c) threshold.


132.  Mr  Bazini  submits  that,  Kurds,  Christians  and  persons   without
    established connections to Baghdad should be considered  to  be  in  an
    "enhanced risk category" - by this, reference  is  being  made  to  the
    conclusions of the CJEU in Elgafaji  that where a person comes within a
    group of people for whom there is  an  enhanced  risk,  the  degree  of
    indiscriminate violence does not  need  to  be  as  high  as  it  would
    otherwise have to be in order to invoke Article 2 or  Article  15(c)  -
    see also Diakite at [31].


133. Other than the Mr Bazini's assertion that Christians in Baghdad are  at
    an enhanced risk we heard no  submissions  directly  relating  to  this
    issue and were not directed to any evidence in support of the assertion
    made.  Given the paucity of evidence, and lack of detailed submissions,
    we do not accept that it has been established that Christians  in  Iraq
    are in an enhanced risk category under Article 15(c).


134. We have heard or seen nothing that leads us  to  conclude  that  either
    persons without connections, or Kurds, in Baghdad are an "enhanced risk
    category". As to the latter, this was put by Mr Bazini primarily on the
    basis that there is no established Kurdish area in Baghdad.  Whilst  we
    accept Dr Fatah's evidence in this regard, we observe the evidence does
    not disclose a significant number of attacks on Kurds in  Baghdad,  nor
    have we been drawn to any evidence of recent displacement by Kurds  out
    of Baghdad.  The same is the position for those who have no  connection
    to Baghdad prior to moving there.  The  evidence  before  us  does  not
    establish that a person with such a characteristic is  at  an  enhanced
    risk in Baghdad.


135. It is rightly not suggested that the evidence demonstrates  that  there
    is a real risk of Article 15(c) harm arising solely because a person is
    a Sunni or Shia civilian in Baghdad and we, in any event, conclude that
    it does not.


136. Furthermore, the  evidence  does  not  disclose,  and  neither  was  it
    suggested to us, that those returned to Iraq on an expired passport, or
    a laissez-passer,  have  any  difficulties  at  the  airport,  or  when
    travelling en route to Baghdad city, for reason of not having a current
    passport or other form of Iraqi identification document.


The Baghdad Belts

137. The Institute for the Study of War  identifies  the  Baghdad  belts  as
    consisting of residential,  agricultural,  and  industrial  areas  that
    encircle the city of Baghdad, as well as  the  "networks  of  roadways,
    rivers, and other lines of communication that lie within  a  twenty  or
    thirty mile radius of Baghdad and connect the capital to  the  rest  of
    Iraq. Beginning in the north, the belts include  the  cities  of  Taji,
    clockwise to Tarmiyah, Baqubah  [Diyala  governorate],  Buhriz  [Diyala
    governorate], Besmayah and Nahrwan, Salman Pak,  Mahmudiyah,  Sadr  al-
    Yusufiyah,   Fallujah   [Anbar   governorate],   and   Karmah    [Anbar
    governorate]. This "clock" can be divided  into  quadrants:  Northeast,
    Southeast, Southwest, and Northwest".


138. This accords with information provided by the Foreign and  Commonwealth
    Office ("FCO") in its letter of the 11 May 2015, in which  it  is  also
    observed that ISIL and other  associated  Sunni  insurgent  groups  are
    active in the Baghdad Belts and have been  known  to  target  civilians
    travelling by road. It said further therein, however, that the  numbers
    of attacks are lower than elsewhere in Iraq due to the  generally  non-
    permissive environment for Sunni insurgents to operate in.


139. In its "map of Iraqi towns and Cities seized by the Islamic States  and
    its allies" (circa September 2014) the Long War Journal listed  several
    areas in the Baghdad governorate as  showing  recent  armed  clashes  -
    including Madain, Taji and Tarmiyah.


140. Both the Landinfo February 2015 report and the Home Office COI  Request
    of 6 May 2015 report numerous attacks carried by ISIL in,  or  launched
    from, the Baghdad Belts.   For  example,  on  18  September  2014  ISIL
    launched an attack on Baghdad's Kadhmiyah neighbourhood,  using  mortar
    rounds and improvised explosive devices. It is said that it is believed
    the attacks were launched from Taji. There was also  seven  attacks  on
    Dhuluyia, on the border of the Baghdad governorate, in September 2014 -
    an assault on the village  being  repelled  by  local  fighters  on  18
    September. On 27  April  2015,  10  cars  carrying  unidentified  armed
    individuals wearing security uniforms stormed Taji police  station  and
    took five detainees.


141. Paragraph 52 the Home Office COI  Response  records  in  the  following
    terms incidents of forced displacement from regions within the Belts:


     "Sources interviewed  by  Reuters  confirmed  the  practice  of  forced
        displacement in the Baghdad belts region. Citing a defence  official
        the  report  noted:  "The  militias...  are  trying  to  change  the
        demography...They are carrying out acts of revenge and it is out  of
        control. The military cannot restrain them. Hanin  al-Qaddo,  deputy
        head of the parliamentary committee on displacement and a member  of
        PM al-Abadi's political bloc stated: "It's not possible to allow all
        these [displaced] families to return back to  their  house  even  if
        Islamic State is kicked out and clashes stopped...Why? Because  most
        of these families in Baghdad Belt were providing  a  safe  haven  to
        Islamic State".


142. The February 2015 Landinfo report reads:


     "In the suburbs [another name for the Baghdad belts] fighting has  been
        taking place continuously between ISIL and Iraqi forces supported by
        Shiite militias and the US air  force  ever  since  the  summer  [of
        2014]. The army and Shiite militias are trying to prevent ISIL  from
        taking control in these areas which would give them a  foothold  for
        launching attacks against the city from the  suburbs.  According  to
        Jessica Lewis (2014) at ISW, ISIL is trying to hold and  extend  the
        positions they established in the summer so that they  can  surround
        the city and launch attacks on a larger scale"

143. On 1 May 2015 The Institute for the Study of War listed Nebai,  in  the
    North-West of the Baghdad Belts, as a "contested area" - observing that
    ISIL enjoyed freedom of movement in the area, and  had  used  it  as  a
    place from which to launch its attacks.


144. It is immediately apparent  from  the  brief  synopsis  above,  of  the
    geographical reach of the Baghdad Belts, that parts of the Belts to the
    north, west and east of Baghdad city fall within the territory  of  the
    governorates in which we have found there to be an Article 15(c) risk.


145. Given this, and the other evidence before us, we find  that  there  are
    areas within the Baghdad Belts in which ordinary civilians are at  risk
    of suffering harm of the  type  identified  in  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive. Such  areas  are  though  in  the  significant
    minority in the Belts, and in the areas  closer  to  the  Baghdad  city
    boundaries the risk is akin to that which we have considered above  for
    those person living within the city itself.  Although we cannot give an
    exhaustive list of towns or villages in  the  Baghdad  Belts  where  an
    Article 15(c) risk exists, in our view it  does  include  those  towns,
    villages or regions within the five governorates which form a  part  of
    the 'contested areas' and those parts of the Belts which constitute the
    borderlands between Baghdad governorate and the 'contested areas'.


Internal relocation


  Legal Framework


146. Article 8  of  the  Qualification  Directive,  which  applies  to  both
    Refugee Convention and subsidiary (humanitarian) protection claims,  is
    headed "Internal protection" and provides:


         "1.       As part of the assessment  of  international  protection,
         Member States may determine that an applicant is  not  in  need  of
         international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of  origin
         there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no  real  risk
         of suffering serious harm  and  the  applicant  can  reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.
         2. In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.
      3. Paragraph 1  may  apply  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
         return to the country of origin."


147. The correct approach to the issue of relocation  is  that  set  out  by
    Lord  Bingham  in Januzi  v  Secretary  of   State   for   the   Home
    Department [2006] UKHL 5 [2006] 2 AC 426 i.e.  whether  a  person  can
    reasonably be expected to relocate or whether it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect them to do so. In AH (Sudan) & others (FC) [2007] UKHL 49  at
    [22],  Baroness  Hale  described  the  reasonableness  test  as   being
    "stringent".   The  burden  of  proof,  as  with  all  aspects  of  the
    subsidiary protection determination process that we are concerned with,
    falls on the appellant.


148. If an ordinary civilian can establish  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm
    exceeding the Article 15(c) threshold in their home area, then in order
    to  found  eligibility  for  a  grant  of   humanitarian   (subsidiary)
    protection, it also has to be demonstrated that such  a  person  cannot
    relocate to another region either because  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm in, or en route to, such a region or because circumstances
    exist there that would otherwise make it unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
    for such a person to relocate. The presence of Article 3  etc.  serious
    harm is not a prerequisite for finding that relocation would be  unduly
    harsh or unreasonable.


  Places of Return


149. The Respondent states that she will  only  return  Iraqi  nationals  to
    either Baghdad or to the IKR. The Respondent also identified  that  she
    will only return a person to the IKR if that person is from the IKR and
    such person has been pre-cleared for return by the IKR authorities.


  Relocation to Baghdad


150. The Respondent's position is that, save  for  those  returnees  in  the
    category identified below, it would in general be reasonable,  and  not
    unduly harsh, to expect a person to relocate to Baghdad city  if  there
    is an Article 15(c) risk in their home  area.  The  exception  to  this
    generality is identified by the Respondent as being:


      "A person returned to Iraq who was  unable  to  replace  their  Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate [who would] be likely  to
         face  significant  difficulties  in  accessing   services   and   a
         livelihood and would face destitution which is likely to reach  the
         Article 3 threshold.[6]"


151. Having considered the entirely of the evidence before us, we have  come
    broadly to the same conclusions  as  the  Respondent  -  save  that  we
    observe that there will undoubtedly be persons who do not have  a  CSID
    and who have been returned with a passport or an expired  passport  who
    will not be destitute in Baghdad, and  for  whom  there  are  no  other
    reasons why relocation there would not be reasonable. In  this  regard,
    whilst Dr Fatah provides evidence, which we  accept,  that  a  CSID  is
    required to access income/financial assistance, employment,  education,
    housing, a pension, and medical  committee  documents,  there  will  be
    persons who do not have a CSID but who nevertheless have access  to  an
    adequate support mechanism in Baghdad; for example those  persons  with
    family or friends in Baghdad who are willing and able to  provide  such
    assistance to them.  Such matters  will,  of  course,  require  careful
    consideration of the evidence, and a reasoned finding to  be  made,  in
    each case.


152. The number of persons for whom it is not reasonable,  or  for  whom  it
    would be unduly harsh, to relocate to Baghdad is, we think,  likely  to
    be small.


153. As can be seen from the  evidence  we  have  set  out  earlier  in  the
    determination, this conclusion does not  accord  with  the  UNHCR's  or
    Amnesty International's views - both organisations being of the opinion
    that it is not  appropriate  for  States  to  deny  persons  from  Iraq
    international protection on  the  basis  of  the  applicability  of  an
    internal flight alternative.


154. Whilst we accept that the UNCHR  has  a  significant  presence  on  the
    ground in Iraq, with independent expert staff that  have  access  to  a
    wide range of information and evidence, and that its position paper  on
    returns to Iraq is detailed and carefully sourced, it is but one  of  a
    large number of documents before us relating to  the  circumstances  in
    Iraq which we have  considered  and  weighed  as  part  of  a  holistic
    assessment. In doing so we have borne  in  mind  that  the  authorities
    identify that considerable respect  should  generally  be  afforded  to
    UNHCR materials when consideration is being to a protection  claim,  an
    approach we have taken in the instant case, but such  evidence  is  not
    presumptively binding of us (See  HF  (Iraq)  at  [44]).   The  UNHCR's
    position paper on  returns  speaks  in  a  generalised  way  about  the
    relocation alternative and does not descend  into  specifics  regarding
    the circumstances in particular governorates, unlike many of the  other
    documents before us which, when considered holistically, lead us  to  a
    different conclusion to that taken by the UNHCR.


155.  The  same  can  be  said  of  the   evidence   provided   by   Amnesty
    International. Once again,  when  undertaking  our  assessment  of  the
    evidence as a whole we have borne fully in mind not only the  evidence,
    and conclusions thereon, provided by Amnesty  International,  but  that
    Amnesty International is a recognised and well-informed  body  of  high
    repute[7]


156. Despite the conclusions on the viability of internal  relocation  drawn
    by both of aforementioned respectable organisations from  the  evidence
    at their disposal, we  have  drawn  a  different  conclusion  from  the
    evidence available to us, including the helpful expert reports from  Dr
    Fatah which were not available to either organisation as far as we  are
    aware. When this difference in  conclusion  is  broken  down  into  its
    component parts, it can be seen that it does not in fact derive from  a
    significantly different view as to the situation and  circumstances  on
    the ground in Baghdad, or the incidents that have  taken  place  there,
    but rather the legal consequences that flow from such situation.


157. Turning then to identify why we conclude as we do on  this  issue.  The
    Secretary of State indicates that returns to  Baghdad  will  only  take
    place in accordance with the requirements of the Iraqi authorities i.e.
    that the returnee will  either  have  an  expired,  or  current,  Iraqi
    passport, or a laissez-passer.


158. In cases where a returnee does not have an expired passport, a  current
    passport or a laissez passer, whether as a consequence of  refusing  to
    engage with the process for obtaining one or for  another  reason,  the
    Respondent will only enforce such  person's  removal  once  a  document
    meeting the requirements of the Iraqi authorities becomes available. In
    the meantime such a person cannot and will not be removed to Iraq.


159. A returnee with any one of  the  aforementioned  three  documents  will
    have established to the satisfaction of the Iraqi authorities,  at  the
    point in time of being  returned  to  Baghdad,  their  nationality  and
    identity - that being the very purpose of requiring a returnee to  hold
    one of these documents.


160. According to Dr Fatah, applications for  a  laissez-passer  made  after
    November 2014 are considered on a case  by  case  basis  by  the  Iraqi
    Embassy. The applicant must  "convince"  the  Iraqi  Embassy  of  their
    nationality and identity before  the  Embassy  will  issue  a  laissez-
    passer. In his oral  evidence  Dr  Fatah  confirmed  that  the  Embassy
    requires production of an applicant's CSID or INC or a photocopy  of  a
    previous passport and a report from the police confirming that  it  had
    been lost or stolen.


161. It was submitted by Mr  Bazini  that  if  a  person  is  not  removable
    because they do not have one of the aforementioned  documents  required
    by the Iraqi authorities, a status  determination  should  be  made  in
    relation them  on  the  factual  basis  that  they  do  not  have  such
    documentation.  In such circumstances, he asserted, it would be  for  a
    decision-maker - whether this be the Secretary of State or  a  Tribunal
    judge hearing an  appeal  against  an  adverse  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State, to determine whether (i) such a person has  a  CSID
    and (ii) if not, whether it is reasonably likely  that  such  a  person
    will not be able obtain a CSID either prior to, or  after,  removal  to
    Baghdad. He reminded the Tribunal that pursuant to the Respondent's own
    evidence a person relocating to Baghdad without a CSID would be at risk
    of an Article 3 breach and it would,  therefore,  be  unreasonable  and
    unduly harsh for them to relocate there.


162. The Secretary of State took a contrary position, Mr Blundell  commended
    the Tribunal to proceed on the basis that both the assessment  of  risk
    and the assessment of the reasonableness of relocation made in relation
    to an Iraqi national protection applicant, should be undertaken on  the
    basis that such an applicant will, at the point in time of return, have
    either a current or expired passport, or a laissez-passer issued by the
    Iraqi Embassy in London.


163. Mr Bazini sought to draw support for his submission from the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in HH (Somalia) and others v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 426
    (Sedley LJ giving the judgment of the Court) in which  the  Court  gave
    consideration to the issue of whether the route chosen by the Secretary
    of State to return a protection applicant  could  be  relevant  to  the
    decision whether such applicant is entitled to protection:


     1. It appears to  us  that  the  intention  of  the  Qualification  and
        Procedures Directives is  to  require  a  member  state  to  make  a
        decision on entitlement within a reasonable time of the  application
        and to allow the issues raised in it to be subject to  an  appeal...
        we do think that, in a case in which the applicant raises  a  cogent
        argument within his statutory appeal that there may not  be  a  safe
        route of return, the Secretary of State must address  that  question
        and the issue  must  be  considered  as  part  of  the  decision  on
        entitlement. Postponement of such consideration until the  Secretary
        of State is in a position  to  set  safe  removal  directions  would
        effectively  be  to  postpone  the  decision  until  the   cessation
        provisions have come into play.


     1. We also consider that it  is  the  intention  of  the  Qualification
        Directive that all matters relating to safety on return should  form
        part of the decision on entitlement.  Article  8  envisages  that  a
        person may properly be returned to his country  of  origin  if  only
        part of it is safe. It excludes 'technical obstacles to return' from
        the  determination  of  entitlement.  On  its  face,  however,  this
        provision has to do  principally  with  internal  relocation,  which
        makes it difficult to derive any general proposition from  it  about
        the Directive as a whole or as to what the Directive envisages as to
        safety during return. It gives some modest support to the suggestion
        that what Mr  Thomann  calls  'the  mechanics  of  return'  are  not
        intended to form part of the  case  for  protection.  But  not  much
        support - for it starts with the words "As part of the assessment of
        the application for international protection...." Nevertheless,  its
        first paragraph treats the availability of internal relocation as  a
        factor negating any need for protection,  and  its  third  paragraph
        excludes from this calculation any "technical obstacles to return to
        the country of origin".


     1. ... there remains  a  question  about  what  constitutes  "technical
        obstacles" to return. In our view these  are  probably  confined  to
        administrative difficulties such as documentation; they may  include
        physical difficulties such as the lack of return  flights;  but  the
        phrase does not readily signify a requirement  to  ignore  risks  to
        life or limb once the returnee is back in the country of origin, not
        only because it does not say so - it speaks only of  return  to  the
        country of origin - but because to do so would be to permit the very
        thing that the Directive is designed to prevent,  refoulement  to  a
        situation of real danger. Our  view  is  that  the  mere  fact  that
        technical obstacles are excluded from  consideration  suggests  that
        issues of safety during return are to be considered.


     1. In conclusion, our provisional view  is  that  the  Directives  read
        together require that the issues of safety during return (as opposed
        to technical obstacles to return) should be considered  as  part  of
        the decision on entitlement. Only technical obstacles of the kind we
        have sought to identify may legitimately be deferred to the point at
        which removal directions are being made or considered. We are  aware
        that the entitlements which appear to follow may  be  considered  an
        unintended consequence of the Directives; but this, as we have said,
        is an issue for another day...as it seems  to  us  at  present,  the
        decision on entitlement must be taken within a reasonable  time  and
        cannot be left until the Home Secretary is in a position to set safe
        removal directions.


164. Mr Bazini submits that the absence of an  applicant  having  either  an
    expired or current passport, or a laissez passer, is not to be  treated
    as a "technical obstacle" to return for the purposes of  Article  8  of
    the Qualification Directive, given that the lack of documentation is  a
    core feature in the assessment of such applicant's safety upon  return.
    He asserts that in such circumstances it  is  the  factual  nexus  that
    pertains as of  the  date  of  the  decision  on  the  application  for
    protection (or subsequent appeal) that  must  form  the  basis  of  the
    assessment of risk upon return.


165. We reject Mr Bazini's submissions. First, it is  to  be  observed  that
    the reasoning in paragraphs 81 to 84 of HH (Somalia) was obiter, as the
    court itself identified in paragraph 80 of its  judgment.  Second,  the
    court in HH (Somalia) was not  dealing  with  matters  relating  to  an
    impediment to return, as in the instant case - but to a failure of  the
    Secretary of State to identify a route  of  return  where,  in  certain
    circumstances, the choice of a particular route might put an  applicant
    at risk. Third, this issue has, in any event, now been disposed  of  by
    the binding judgment of the Court of Appeal in HF (Iraq)  -  (Elias  LJ
    with the agreement of the Vice President and Fulford LJJ) - a  decision
    that was placed before us by the parties but to which our attention was
    not specifically drawn.


166. We have set out the background to the decision in HF (Iraq)  above  and
    do not repeat it here again. Elias LJ concluded therein as follows:


         "89. The question which then potentially arises is how someone will
         be  treated  who  is  forcibly  returned  without  the  appropriate
         document. The Upper Tribunal concluded that this would  not  happen
         because the Secretary of State had  stated  that  in  practice  she
         would not return anyone to Iraq  who  did  not  have  the  relevant
         identity documentation. It was suggested that this was her "policy"
         but in fact this  is  something  of  a  misnomer:  the  policy  was
         effectively forced upon her. Her evidence, as recorded by the Upper
         Tribunal, was that "without the necessary documentation  there  was
         no guarantee that they would be accepted by the  Iraqi  authorities
         in Baghdad."


         90. It was for this reason that the Upper Tribunal considered  that
         the issue was now academic: with the appropriate documentation, the
         appellants would not  be  at  risk  on  return  from  ill-treatment
         arising out of detention; without it, they would not  be  returned.
         It was of course within their  control  which  category  they  fell
         into.
         ...


         95. Mr Fordham submits that ... the Upper Tribunal  ...  could  not
         simply rely on an assurance from the Secretary of  State  that  the
         appellants would not be  returned.  Whilst  it  is  true  that  the
         individual would not be at risk whilst  the  Secretary  of  State's
         policy was in place, nonetheless the Tribunal was  obliged  to  ask
         itself the hypothetical question whether there would be a real risk
         of ill treatment constituting either  a  breach  of  Article  3  or
         entitling the appellants to humanitarian protection. The appellants
         were entitled to have their position determined not  least  because
         it affected their status,  and  hence  their  rights,  whilst  they
         remained in the United Kingdom.


         96. Moreover, Mr Fordham submitted that the fact  that  they  could
         secure safe return by obtaining the relevant documents was  not  to
         the point. It was immaterial to the Tribunal's  decision  that  the
         appellants may only be at risk because  of  their  refusal  to  co-
         operate. That is similarly the  position  with  certain  sur  place
         cases,  such  as  those  where  an   asylum   seeker   deliberately
         participates in activities in the UK which are  designed  to  catch
         the attention of the home state and thereby place him  at  risk  on
         return. If there is a real risk of  serious  harm  on  return,  the
         applicant should be granted asylum even though he has  by  his  own
         actions deliberately  chosen  to  bring  that  risk  upon  himself,
         perhaps specifically to secure asylum.


         97. I agree with Mr Fordham  that  if  the  reason  for  the  Upper
         Tribunal declining to deal with the  matter  was  simply  that  the
         Secretary of State had a policy not to return persons who could  be
         returned but would be at risk of ill treatment in their home state,
         that would constitute an error of law, essentially for the  reasons
         elucidated in JI.


         98. However, Mr Eadie submits that this is a  misrepresentation  of
         the true position. His contention is that, properly  analysed,  the
         practice of not returning  those  without  the  appropriate  travel
         documents is not a voluntary policy of the Secretary  of  State  at
         all. The lack of documentation  creates  an  impediment  to  return
         which the Secretary of  State  cannot  circumvent.  Iraq  will  not
         receive anyone from the UK without the relevant travel document. If
         an unsuccessful applicant  for  asylum  refuses  to  co-operate  to
         obtain the laissez passer document, he is  in  precisely  the  same
         situation as any other failed asylum seeker whom the  Secretary  of
         State is unable to return for one reason or another. The  assurance
         of the Secretary of State that she would not return someone to Iraq
         without the relevant documents is of no  special  significance;  it
         simply reflects realities. The  general  position  of  someone  who
         cannot be returned, whether because he cannot obtain the  requisite
         documents or for some other reason, is that he may be  detained  or
         granted  temporary  admission  pursuant  to  section  67   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  provided  at  least
         there remains a possibility of his being returned at some stage  in
         the future: see R (on the application of AR and FW) v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1310. As Lord Justice
         Sedley pointed out in that case, the condition of someone with that
         status is harsh, although being granted temporary admission does at
         least allow the unsuccessful asylum-seeker to  be  free  of  actual
         detention.


         99. Mr Eadie submits that these appellants  are  precisely  in  the
         situation of any other failed asylum seekers who would  not  be  at
         risk in their  own  state  but  cannot  for  technical  reasons  be
         returned home. The existence of such  technical  difficulties  does
         not entitle them to humanitarian protection. Article  8(3)  of  the
         Qualification Directive makes that plain where, as here, relocation
         is an option, and it is a fortiori the case where they are  not  at
         risk in their home area. Moreover, they can hardly be in any better
         position than any other asylum seeker who cannot  be  returned  for
         technical reasons given that the technical difficulty stems from  a
         deliberate refusal to co-operate.


         100. Mr Eadie says that this is not like JI or the sur place  cases
         where, if returned, the  appellants  would  potentially  face  ill-
         treatment meeting Article 3 standards. They can  only  be  returned
         with the necessary documentation, and if and  when  the  impediment
         caused by lack of the relevant documentation is overcome, they will
         be safe on return.


         101. In my judgment, this analysis is  correct.  I  accept,  as  Mr
         Fordham submits, that it  would  be  necessary  for  the  court  to
         consider whether the appellants would be at risk on return if their
         return were feasible, but I do not accept that the Tribunal has  to
         ask itself the hypothetical question of what would happen on return
         if that is simply not possible for one reason or  another.  Section
         67  of  the  2002  Act  envisages  that  there  may  be   practical
         difficulties impeding or delaying making removal arrangements,  but
         those difficulties do not alter the fact  that  the  failed  asylum
         seeker would be safe in his own country and therefore is in no need
         of refugee or humanitarian protection. I agree with  the  Secretary
         of State that the sur place cases are distinguishable because there
         the applicant could be returned and would be at risk if he were  to
         be returned. They are not impediment to return cases.  "  (emphasis
         added)


167. We consider that  the  judgments  in  HF  (Iraq)  are  of  considerable
    importance in formulating any country guidance regarding entitlement to
    international protection claims involving  lack  of  documentation.  If
    return is not feasible (to use the term employed by Elias LJ), then  it
    is plain from paragraph 101 of the judgment that a  tribunal  must  not
    hypothesise any potential situations on return, by  reference  to  what
    documentation the returnee may or may not have or be able to obtain. We
    simply do not know. It appears to us this means that  many  appeals  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, arising  from  refused  protection  claims  by
    Iraqis, will fall into this category. It will only be  when  return  is
    found to be feasible that the issue of documentation (or  the  lack  of
    it) will be able to play a part in the determination of an  appellant's
    entitlement to protection.


168. On one reading of HF (Iraq) - particularly the highlighted  passage  in
    paragraph 101 - the impossibility of return could be said  to  make  it
    unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to an appellant in the  country  of
    proposed return, whether or not stemming from a lack  of  documentation
    or similar problem. We do not, however, consider that the Court can  be
    taken to have intended such a reading. There may be cases where it will
    be evident  that  the  person  concerned  would  be  at  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm irrespective of lack of documentation. Were
    Nazi persecution of the Jews occurring today, it would clearly  subvert
    the purpose of the Convention to deny refugee status on the basis that,
    regardless of what might happen to appellants on  return  because  they
    are Jewish, they cannot in practice be  returned  (whether  because  of
    documentation or mere refusal to admit Jews to Nazi Germany). For  this
    reason, we consider that the judgment in HF (Iraq) does not preclude  a
    claim to international  protection  from  succeeding,  insofar  as  the
    asserted risk of harm is not (or not solely) based on factors (such  as
    lack of documentation) that currently render a person's  actual  return
    unfeasible.


169. In the absence of an expired or current Iraqi passport,  a  person  can
    only be returned to Baghdad using a  laissez-passer.  According  to  Dr
    Fatah, either a CSID or INC or a photocopy of a previous Iraqi passport
    and a police report noting that it had been lost or stolen is  required
    in order to obtain a laissez-passer. If a person does not have  one  of
    these documents then they cannot obtain a laissez-passer and  therefore
    cannot be returned. This has a significant bearing on what we have just
    said. If the position is that  the  Secretary  of  State  can  feasibly
    remove an Iraqi national,  then  she  will  be  expected  to  tell  the
    tribunal whether and  if  so  what  documentation  has  led  the  Iraqi
    authorities to issue the national with the passport or  laissez  passer
    (or signal their intention to do so). The Tribunal will need  to  know,
    in particular, whether the person concerned has  a  CSID.  It  is  only
    where return is feasible but the individual concerned does not  have  a
    CSID that the consequences of not having one come into play.



Relocation to the IKR

170. We have found at paragraphs 112 and 113 above that there is no Article
     15(c) risk to an ordinary  civilian  in  the  IKR.  What,  though,  of
     internal relocation? So far as a Kurd is concerned, the evidence of Dr
     Fatah was not seriously challenged by the respondent and  we,  in  any
     event, accept it (see esp. paragraph 24 above). The position of  Iraqi
     Kurds not from the IKR is that they can gain temporary  entry  to  the
     IKR; that formal permission to remain can be obtained if employment is
     secured; and that the authorities  in  the  IKR  do  not  pro-actively
     remove Kurds whose permits have come to an end. Whether this state  of
     affairs is such as to make it reasonable for an Iraqi Kurd to relocate
     to the IKR is a question that may fall to  be  addressed  by  judicial
     fact-finders, if it is established  that,  on  the  particular  facts,
     permanent relocation  to  Baghdad  would  be  unduly  harsh.  In  such
     circumstances, the person concerned might be  reasonably  expected  to
     relocate to the IKR. In this scenario, whether such further relocation
     would be reasonable will itself be fact  sensitive,  being  likely  to
     involve (a) the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the  IKR  (such
     as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  securing  employment;  and
     (c) the availability of assistance from friends and family in the IKR.


171. So far as non-Kurds are concerned, we  do  not  consider  that,  as  a
     general matter, relocation to the IKR is a reasonable proposition. The
     risk of being turned away at the point of entry is significant, unless
     a person has connections with people in the IKR.

  Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK


172. As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi passport  but  no
    CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first  report  that  a  CSID  may  be
    obtained through the "Consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in London",
    which will send a request for a replacement  or  renewed  CSID  to  the
    General Directorate for Travel and Nationality - Directorate  of  Civil
    Status. A request for a replacement CSID  must  be  accompanied,  inter
    alia, by "any form of official document in support of  the  applicant's
    identity" and the application form must be signed by "the head  of  the
    family, or the legal guardian or representative to verify the truth  of
    its contents." He also added that an applicant must  also  authorise  a
    person in Iraq to act as his representative in order for that person to
    "follow up on the progress of the application.

173. However, Dr Fatah continued by explaining that  if  an  individual  has
    lost his CSID and does not know the relevant page and book  number  for
    it,  then the Iraq Embassy in London will not be able to obtain one  on
    his behalf. Instead, he or she will  have  to  attend  the  appropriate
    local office of family registration in Iraq or give a relative,  friend
    or lawyer power of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of a
    giving power of attorney to a lawyer in Iraq to act  "as  a  proxy"  is
    commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this himself. He also explained  that
    the power of attorney could be obtained through the Iraq Embassy.


174. Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect  that  having  a  marriage
    certificate may be useful as it would contain data found in the  family
    records. It is, however, not possible to use a "health card"  in  order
    to obtain a CSID because there is no primary health care or  GP  system
    in Iraq, but instead patients attended hospital when they needed to  do
    so and no central records are held.


175. There is a consensus between Dr  Fatah's  evidence  and  the  following
    more general evidence provided by UNHCR-Iraq in April 2015 on the issue
    of obtaining CSID's from abroad.


      "In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed  any  Iraqi  citizen
         abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents  through  Iraqi  embassies  and
         consulates. There is  a  special  authorization  granted  to  these
         bodies to provide documents for Iraqi abroad on the condition  that
         the beneficiaries should have any available documents in  order  to
         prove their nationality."


176. In summary, we conclude that it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi  national
    living in the UK to obtain a CSID through the consular section  of  the
    Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to produce a  current
    or expired passport and/or the book and page number  for  their  family
    registration details. For persons without such a passport, or  who  are
    unable to produce the relevant family registration details, a power  of
    attorney can  be  provided  to  someone  in  Iraq  who  can  thereafter
    undertake the process of obtaining the CSID for such  person  from  the
    Civil Status Affairs Office in  their  home  governorate.  For  reasons
    identified in the section that follows below, at the present  time  the
    process of obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered
    if the person wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where  Article
    15(c) serious harm is occurring.


  Obtaining a CSID whilst in Iraq


177. The evidence before us in this regard is largely undisputed.


178. Dr Fatah  in  his  most  recent  report  indicates  that  the  starting
    position is that in order to obtain a new or replacement CSID a  person
    usually had to return to the governorate where his  or  her  birth  was
    registered and where the primary family registration book is held  i.e.
    in the local population registration/civil status office. He went on to
    explain that there are 300  population  registration  offices  in  Iraq
    which are responsible to a central Civil Status Affairs Directorate.


179.  Births  are  registered  manually  in  volumes  held  at  these  local
    population registration offices and these offices are  responsible  for
    checking the manual register before issuing  a  CSID.  They  also  send
    information on to the central population  registry  in  Baghdad.  USAID
    Iraq told Dr Fatah that the central population registry/central archive
    is not a searchable data base. Instead a "search of the central archive
    needs an officer to  open  doors  (literally  or  metaphorically).  The
    search must be done by a government official - members  of  the  public
    cannot search through the "central archive". The key issue  is  whether
    the official is willing to do the search - or can be made  willing.  In
    addition, the individual would need to know his volume and page numbers
    or the official would have  to  trawl  through  a  given  governorate's
    entire archive of back-up files. As a  consequence,  if  an  individual
    does not have his volume and page number his only  option  will  be  to
    locate a close family member with the same details  and  hope  that  an
    official will assist him.


180. There is also some doubt as to whether a CSID could be handed  over  to
    anyone but the individual  whose  details  it  contained,  even  if  an
    individual did hold a power of attorney. In addition, if the person  is
    outside Iraq the details of an individual's CSID would have to be  sent
    to him and he  would  have  to  ask  the  Iraqi  Embassy  to  send  any
    application for a CSID through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to Iraq.
    The Ministry of the Interior would then need to issue the CSID and send
    it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs who would send  it  back  to  the
    Iraqi Embassy in London.


181. UNHCR-Iraq told Dr Fatah that there is no database  or  any  electronic
    system in place to issue CSIDs. Scanned copies of local  paper  records
    are archived in the General Directorate  of  Civil  Status  Affairs  in
    Baghdad.  Having  discussed  the  situation  with  Landinfo  Dr   Fatah
    concluded that registration is undertaken in the local  area  and  that
    the Civil Status Affairs Directorate or central population registry  in
    Baghdad does not generally issue CSIDs.


182. This is confirmed to some extent by the fact that the Iraqi  government
    has set up two Alternative Civil Status Affairs Offices to issue  CSIDs
    to IDPs from governorates which have been captured by ISIL. One  office
    has been set up in Najaf to issue copies of CSIDs archived from  Mosul,
    and another office has been set up in Baghdad to issue copies of  CSIDs
    to individuals from  Anbar  and  Salahaddin.  These  offices  are  only
    authorised to issue CSIDs to IDPs from these governorates.


183. Dr Fatah was further informed by a  source  at  the  Norwegian  Refugee
    Council that the Ministry of the Interior had refused to open  up  more
    Alternative Civil Status Affairs offices so as to protect civil records
    from fraud, to protect confidentiality and  to  avoid  duplication,  as
    there was no database or electronic system.


184. UNHCR-Iraq provides some support to those without a  CSID  through  its
    Protection, Assistance and Re-integration Centres  ("PARC"),  but  such
    support is limited to providing guidance and legal advice  on  required
    procedures and documents needed to obtain a CSID.   It  did  not  issue
    these or other documents itself.  It also confirmed  that  Harikar  and
    Qandil[8] have indicated that they do not issue  CSIDs.  The  Norwegian
    Refugee Council told Dr Fatah that there is  a  network  of  legal  aid
    clinics in Iraq, which is funded as part  of  USAID's  Iraq  Access  to
    Justice Programme.  They also provide legal advice, but  do  not  issue
    CSIDs.


185. Drawing all of this together we conclude that an Iraqi national  should
    as a general matter be able to obtain a  CSID  from  the  Civil  Status
    Affairs Office for their home  Governorate,  using  an  Iraqi  passport
    (whether current or expired), if they have one. If  they  do  not  have
    such a passport, their ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether
    they know the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding  their
    information (and that  of  their  family  members).  Their  ability  to
    persuade the officials that they are the person named on  the  relevant
    page is likely to depend on whether they have family members  or  other
    individuals who are prepared to vouch for them.

186. An Iraqi national's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to  be  severely
    hampered if they are unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of
    their home Governorate because it is in an  area  where  Article  15(c)
    serious harm is occurring. As a result of the violence, alternative CSA
    Offices for Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin  have  been  established  in
    Baghdad and Kerbala.   The  evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
    provide CSIDs to those in need of them. There is, however,  a  National
    Status Court in Baghdad, to which  a  person  could  apply  for  formal
    recognition of identity.  The  precise  operation  of  this  court  is,
    however, unclear.


  Conditions in Baghdad


187. We accept that Iraq's economy is in  a  poor  position,  being  heavily
    dependent as it is on oil revenues,  which  have  fallen  significantly
    because of the drop in the oil price and the fact that a number of  oil
    producing facilities are in the contested areas.


188. Dr Fatah cites figures from 2007-2011 in which it is said that 2.8%  of
    the population lie below the poverty line of $1.25 per  day.  According
    to the CIA Fact Book, as of July 2014 Iraq had an estimated  population
    of 32,585,692, with 10 million males and 8.5 million females  being  of
    "working age" (taken to be between 15 and 64 years old).  Only  50%  of
    the population "participate in the workforce" of  which,  according  to
    UNDP Iraq  in  2014,  approximately  one  in  six  were  women.  It  is
    considered normal in Iraq for Iraqi  women  to  depend  on  their  male
    family members in a male headed household. Sources vary between 18% and
    24% as to the unemployment rate in Iraq as a whole for 2013/14. A  CSID
    is necessary in order to obtain employment.

189. According to unemployment figures  for  2014  produced  by  the  United
    Nations, the percentage of unemployment recorded for Baghdad was  9.7%,
    although youth unemployment (between the ages of 15 and 29) was said to
    be at 17.1%. Musings on Iraq commented, from the  figures  produced  by
    the UN that "men were proportionately employed to a greater degree than
    women". There is also clear  evidence  that  the  Iraqi  state  is  the
    dominant employer in the country,  employing  approximately  5  million
    people. Political connections and family  ties  are  of  importance  in
    obtaining employment, particularly in the public sector.


190. Dr Fatah provides evidence indicating that the average salary  in  2012
    in Iraq was $6000, but that some public  sector  workers  were  earning
    $2400 per  year.  He  is  of  the  opinion  that  that  the  employment
    statistics are distorted by the presence of 'ghost' employees  -  there
    being over a 1000 ghost companies according to Iraqi News.


191. As to the living conditions generally in Baghdad  -  Dr  Fatah  reports
    that residents there have electricity supply for approximately 16 hours
    per day and 62-80% "used public  water  for  drinking",  although  many
    households have less than two hours access a day to water. This broadly
    accords with evidence provided in the February 2015 Norwegian  Landinfo
    report, which also identifies that:


      "The public health service is  operational,  if  only  at  a  minimal
         level. It is generally poor  all  over  the  country  but  operates
         better in Baghdad than  other  places.  There  are  no  significant
         shortages of medicines generally in the country...The  schools  are
         open and education has not been seriously interrupted  for  several
         years."


192. Turning to the issue of accommodation - Dr Fatah opines that  the  vast
    majority of IDPs in Iraq live in temporary shelters, with one in  every
    five living in an unfurnished building with no  water,  electricity  or
    heat. Dr Fatah  does  not,  however,  particularise  this  evidence  in
    relation to Baghdad and we do not accept  that  this  generality  holds
    good for this city.


193.  The IOM Displacement Snapshot for Baghdad  - dated  September  2014  -
    states:


      "The great majority of IDPs in Baghdad are  Arab  Sunnis  (83%)...and
         are located across most districts of Baghdad...


      The most common type of  shelter  arrangement  for  Baghdad  IDPs  is
         staying with relatives; almost 60% of all IDP families  in  Baghdad
         are being hosted by relatives across the governorate...


      Additionally, close to 500 families are being hosted by  Mosques  and
         holy sites...All these families are Shia Muslim. Over  60  families
         are currently seeking shelter in school buildings  exposed  to  the
         possibility of having to relocate when the school year begins.


      ...over 130 families  are  staying  in  vulnerable  housing,  meaning
         school buildings, informal settlements, camps, collective  centers,
         abandoned/public building/spaces under construction  exposing  them
         vulnerabilities such as adequate access to water, food,  sanitation
         facilities, and health facilities.


      IDPs in Baghdad are  reportedly  receiving  food  assistance  through
         local NGOs, religious groups and  community  donations.  They  also
         generally have access to water, sanitation and healthcare...


      The majority of IDPs  are  living  in  rented  houses  and  they  are
         struggling to pay the rent..."


194. According to the IOM  Displacement  Tracking  Matrix[9]  Round  XVII  -
    dated April 2015 - there are 177,906 IDPs living  in  a  host  family's
    accommodation in Baghdad, 167,328 IDPs living in rented  accommodation,
    3,330  in  school  buildings,  3,180  in  camps,  2,106   in   informal
    settlements - such as a groups of tents, 1554 persons living in  Hotels
    or Motels, 690 living in religious buildings and  186  IDPs  living  in
    abandoned buildings.


195. Given the precision of these statistics, and body  producing  them,  we
    accept they  provide  a  reasonably  accurate  picture  of  the  living
    arrangements in Baghdad for persons displaced there -  although  it  is
    also not difficult to accept that there will be some IDPs who  are  not
    captured within these statistics.


196. There are a number of relevant features in these statics for  decision-
    makers determining whether, in any given case, it is reasonable  for  a
    person to relocate to  Baghdad.  First,  a  significant  proportion  of
    displaced person's live in host family's  accommodation.  This  accords
    with evidence set out above regarding the 'draw' factors of Baghdad for
    displaced persons. Careful consideration  will  have  to  be  given  by
    decision-makers to the question of whether an individual being returned
    to Baghdad has family there to accommodate them. If  this  is  so  then
    consideration will have to be given  to  the  issue  of  whether  those
    family members will provide sufficient assistant to  render  relocation
    reasonable irrespective of whether the applicant has a CSID.


197. The second significant feature is the percentage of  displaced  persons
    who reside in rented accommodation in  Baghdad.  Although  we  have  no
    evidence to show how such persons obtained the financial capability  to
    fund their accommodation, we do not  think  it  beyond  the  realms  of
    reasonableness to draw from this that there are opportunities available
    in Baghdad for displaced persons to earn  sufficient  funds  to  enable
    them to rent accommodation if they have a CSID.


198. The third relevant feature of these statistics is the small  percentage
    of displaced persons who are recorded as living in places other than  a
    host family's, or rented, accommodation.


199. In addition to that which we have observed above,  we  have  also  been
    provided with evidence regarding numerous  organisations  operating  in
    Baghdad that provide assistance to displaced persons. However, we  take
    cognisance of  the  fact  that  a  staff  member  at  the  Ministry  of
    Displacement and Migration informed Dr Fatah that failed asylum seekers
    are not treated as IDPs by the Ministry and that the Ministry only  had
    an obligation to assist IDPs. An organisation named Harikar  also  told
    Dr Fatah that they focused on IDPs and not failed asylum seekers. UNHCR
    and the Ministry of Interior were not able to provide  any  information
    about whether or not failed asylum seekers  would  be  able  to  access
    support or assistance provided to IDPs.


200. As identified above, evidence from UNCHR-Iraq reveals that as of  April
    2015 it had a branch office in Baghdad and that it  had  established  a
    network of Protection  and  Assistance  Centres   through  its  partner
    agencies, which include:


       (i)  the Norwegian Refugee Council, which is funded by USAID's Iraq's
           access to justice programme and provides cash  assistance,  food
           distribution and shelter;


       (ii)       the International Organisation for Migration ("IOM") which
           has implemented several projects directed towards IDPs  in  Iraq
           including; income generation projects, emergency response  in  a
           crisis, and  livelihood  projects,  which  were  implemented  in
           conjunction with the  Ministry  of  Displacement  and  Migration
           ("MoDM"); and,


       (iii)      the International Rescue Committee ("IRC"), which provides
           a number of services for, and on  behalf  of,  IDPs,  including:
           legal assistance, protection monitoring, capacity  building  and
           development, protection interventions  and  referrals,  advocacy
           and information dissemination.


201. It is clear from the evidence before  us  that  Arabic  speaking  males
    with family connections to Baghdad and a  CSID  are  in  the  strongest
    position. At  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  those  with  no  family
    connections in Baghdad who are from minority communities and  who  have
    no CSID are least able to provide for  themselves.  There  are  a  wide
    range of  circumstances  falling  between  these  two  extremes.  Those
    without family connections are more vulnerable  than  those  with  such
    connections. Women are more vulnerable than men. Those who do not speak
    Arabic are less likely to be able  to  obtain  employment.  Those  from
    minority communities are less likely to be  able  to  access  community
    support than those from the Sunni and Shi'a communities.


202. On the evidence before us, whilst we accept that for a person  who  has
    no family or other support in Baghdad and who  also  does  not  have  a
    CSID, and cannot obtain one reasonably soon after arrival, it would  be
    unreasonable  and  unduly  harsh  to  relocate  to  Baghdad,  for   the
    generality of Iraqis, despite difficulties that may be  experienced  in
    respect of such matters such as access to health  care,  education  and
    jobs,  we  consider  that  relocation  to  Baghdad  is  safe  and   not
    unreasonable or unduly harsh - one reason being that a person can  only
    be returned to Baghdad if such person has a current  or  expired  Iraqi
    passport or a laissez-passer.


Country Guidance

203. The guidance we give is as follows:

    A.      INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE   15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


    1.     There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


    2.     The degree of armed conflict in certain parts  of  the  "Baghdad
         Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
         intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a
         generalised Article 15(c) risk. The  parts  of  the  Baghdad  Belts
         concerned  are  those  forming  the  border  between  the   Baghdad
         Governorate and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.


    3.     The degree of armed conflict in the remainder of Iraq (including
         Baghdad City) is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to such serious harm to civilians,  irrespective
         of their individual characteristics, so as to engage Article 15(c).


    4.     In accordance with the principles set out in Elgafaji (C-465/07)
         and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in  Iraqi  cases  should  assess  the
         individual characteristics  of  the  person  claiming  humanitarian
         protection, in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are
         such as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.




    B.     DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)


    5.     Return of former residents of the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.


    6.     No Iraqi national will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.


    7.     In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq)  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from  an  absence  of
         Iraqi identification documentation, if the Tribunal finds that  P's
         return is not currently feasible, given what  is  known  about  the
         state of P's documentation.




    C.     POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE


    8.     It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the  return
         of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of  alleged  risk  of  harm
         arising from an absence of Iraqi identification documentation  will
         require judicial determination.


    9.     Having a CSID is one of the ways in which it is possible for  an
         Iraqi national in the United Kingdom to  obtain  a  passport  or  a
         laissez passer.  Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove  P
         by means of a passport or laissez passer, she will be  expected  to
         demonstrate  to  the  Tribunal   what,   if   any,   identification
         documentation led the  Iraqi  authorities  to  issue   P  with  the
         passport or laissez passer (or to signal their intention to do so).




    10.    Where P is returned to Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport or other  current
         form of Iraqi identification document.


    11.    Where P's return  to  Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
         feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has  a
         CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after  arrival
         in Iraq. A CSID is generally required in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to
         access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;  employment;
         education; housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no
         family or other members likely to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
         support, P is in general likely to face a real risk of destitution,
         amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P
         by the Secretary of State or her agents to assist P's  return  have
         been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still  have  no
         CSID.


    12.    Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P should as
         a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.


    13.    P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be  severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad.  The evidence  does  not  demonstrate  that  the  "Central
         Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to  provide
         CSIDs to those in need of  them.  There  is,  however,  a  National
         Status Court  in  Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply  for  formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.




    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).




    E IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.




    F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS


    22.    This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq

The Appellant's Case


204. The Appellant is Kurdish and comes from Kirkuk, which  is  one  of  the
    contested areas of Iraq. He would face an  Article  15(c)  risk  if  he
    returns there.


205. However, the Respondent has  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    returned to Baghdad city. There is no evidence that the  Appellant  has
    access to a current or expired Iraqi passport, or a laissez-passer, and
    we conclude that he does not. In all the circumstances we find that  he
    will  not  be  returnable  until  he  is  able  to  supply   sufficient
    documentation to the Iraqi Embassy in London to enable  it  to  provide
    him with a passport or a laissez passer. This will only occur if he can
    provide a copy of a CSID or Nationality  Certificate.  His  return  is,
    therefore, not currently feasible.


206. Given that the appellant's return is not currently  feasible  it  could
    be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to him upon  his
    return to Iraq. However, as identified in paragraphs 169 and 170 above,
    there may be cases where it will be evident that the  person  concerned
    would be at real risk of persecution or serious  harm  irrespective  of
    the lack of documentation and that an applicant should not be precluded
    for pursuing a claim to international protection in circumstances where
    the asserted risk of harm is not (or not solely) based on factors (such
    as lack of documentation)  that  currently  render  a  person's  actual
    return unfeasible.


207. The appellant's legal advisors were not to know our  findings  on  this
    issue at the time of presenting the appellant's  appeal,  and  we  have
    heard no submissions on the issue of  whether,  despite  it  not  being
    feasible to return the appellant, it is said his circumstances are such
    that he is entitled to humanitarian protection.  It  is  no  answer  to
    this,  we  think,  for  us  to  simply  request  the  parties  to  make
    submissions on this issue in writing. This would cause prejudice to the
    appellant not of his own making. There are matters of  factual  dispute
    such as, inter alia, the appellant's claimed inability to speak Arabic;
    the whereabouts of certain of his family members;  and  (possibly)  his
    ability to enter and remain in the IKR as  longer-term  alternative  to
    Baghdad, which require resolution in these  proceedings.  Although  the
    appellant's legal representatives chose not to call him  to  give  oral
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal,  the significance of the matters of
    fact still in dispute  could  not  have  been  fully  appreciated,  and
    certainly was not by the Tribunal, until  the  'Country  Guidance'  had
    been formulated. Had it been so appreciated we have no doubt  that  not
    only would the appellant have been called to give evidence but Dr Fatah
    could also have been asked to provide evidence on matters  relevant  to
    these issues; for example, the likelihood of, and extent to which,  the
    appellant would have been  taught  Arabic  as  part  of  the  education
    process that he accepts he undertook in Iraq.

208. The Tribunal last undertook a fact  finding  exercise  in  relation  to
    this appellant as long ago as April 2011 i.e. over 4 years ago.  Whilst
    the  findings  of  fact  made  by  Designated  Judge  Wynne  have  been
    preserved, he did not make findings on all of  the  matters  that  have
    subsequently become relevant to assessment of the appellant's claim. It
    is equally clear that as a consequence  of  the  passage  of  time  the
    situation in Iraq for the appellant's family may have changed. Findings
    are required in this regard.


209. In light of all that we have said above,  we  conclude  that  the  most
    appropriate course, given the extent of the fact finding  necessary  in
    this appeal, is to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal  for  it
    to make the further necessary findings of fact. The Tribunal is  hereby
    directed to thereafter apply the relevant Country Guidance.




                                   Signed:
                                    [pic]
                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor




  Paragraph 168, 169 and 203 of this decision have been amended pursuant to
     Rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



                                 APPENDIX A
               DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                               Expert Reports

|Date            |Description                                              |
|27 February 2015|Expert report of Dr Fatah                                |
|8 April 2015    |Expert's Response to Respondent's Questions              |
|1 May 2015      |Expert's Additional Report on "Central Archive"          |
|19 May 2015     |Supplementary Expert report of Dr Fatah                  |


                     Documents before the Upper Tribunal

|Date            |Source            |Description                           |
|                                                                          |
|Undated                                                                   |
|Undated         |International     |Information Leaflet: Magnet II - Job  |
|                |Organization for  |Placement Assistance - for Voluntary  |
|                |Migration (IOM)   |Returnees from Belgium, Finland,      |
|                |                  |France Germany, the Netherlands and   |
|                |                  |the United Kingdom returning to the   |
|                |                  |Kurdistan region of Iraq              |
|                                                                          |
|2015                                                                      |
|1 January 2015  |Radio Free Europe |Iraq Endures One of its deadliest     |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |years                                 |
|1 January 2015  |The New York Times|Iraq: Civilian Deaths Increase in 2014|
|1 January 2015  |UNAMI             |UN Casualty figures for December; 2014|
|                |                  |deadliest since 2008 in Iraq          |
|1 January 2015  |Iraq Body Count   |Iraq 2014: Civilian deaths almost     |
|                |(IBC)             |doubling year on year                 |
|2 January 2015  |Rudaw             |Jalawal, Sadia seethe in sectarian    |
|                |                  |rivalries                             |
|2 January 2015  |Rudaw             |Mosul governor: 10,000 volunteers     |
|                |                  |against ISIS; Zumar assault repulsed  |
|3 January 2015  |Daily Sabah       |Almost 100,000 people killed in a year|
|                |                  |in Iraq and Syria                     |
|3 January 2015  |Al Jazeera        |ISIL is losing. Iraqis optimistic for |
|                |                  |2015                                  |
|4 January 2015  |BasNews           |US Condemns the Killing of Three Sunni|
|                |                  |Clerics in Iraq                       |
|6 January 2015  |Immigration       |UNE halts returns to parts of Iraq    |
|                |Appeals Board     |                                      |
|                |(UNE) (Norway)    |                                      |
|8 January 2015  |New York Times    |Iraq: Suicide attacks leave at least  |
|                |                  |23 dead                               |
|12 January 2015 |Associated Press  |Officials say suicide bombing kills 12|
|                |                  |people in Iraq                        |
|12 January 2015 |Musings on Iraq   |Insurgents pick up attacks in Iraq but|
|                |                  |casualties remain stable 1st week of  |
|                |                  |January 2015                          |
|14 January 2015 |Musings on Iraq   |Why has there been a dramatic drop in |
|                |                  |car bombs in Iraq                     |
|15 January 2015 |The Institute for |ISIS sanctuary map                    |
|                |the Study of War  |                                      |
|17 January 2015 |Al Jazeera        |Iraqis in Erbil happy despite war with|
|                |                  |ISIL                                  |
|18 January 2015 |Rudaw             |800,000 strong Shiite militia calls   |
|                |                  |for formal recognition by Baghdad     |
|19 January 2015 |Musings on Iraq   |1,200 casualties in Iraq in 2nd week  |
|                |                  |of January 2015                       |
|27 January 2015 |OCHA              |Iraq; Humanitarian Snapshot           |
|29 January 2015 |Human Rights Watch|World Report 2015 - Iraq              |
|30 January 2015 |Radio Free Europe |Islamic State Militant Attacks, Bombs |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |Kill 30 in Iraq                       |
|1 February 2015 |UN                |UN casualty figures for January 2015  |
|2 February 2015 |UN Security       |Second report of the Secretary-General|
|                |Council           |pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution |
|                |                  |2169 (2014)                           |
|2 February 2015 |United Nations    |At least 1,375 people killed by       |
|                |News Centre       |violence in January, says UN Iraq     |
|                |                  |Mission                               |
|2 February 2015 |Human Rights Watch|Iraq: ISIS, Militias Feed Cycle of    |
|                |                  |Abuses                                |
|3 February 2015 |Radio Free Europe |Iraqi government approves bill on     |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |creation of National Guard            |
|7 February 2015 |Radio Free Europe |Deadly bombings strike Baghdad before |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |removal of curfew                     |
|8 February 2015 |Radio Free Europe |Iraq: Baghdad curfew lifted after     |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |decade                                |
|9 February 2015 |United States     |Iraq 2015 Crime and Safety Report:    |
|                |Department of     |Baghdad                               |
|                |State Bureau of   |                                      |
|                |Diplomatic        |                                      |
|                |Security          |                                      |
|9 February 2015 |US Overseas       |Iraq 2015 Crime and Safety Report:    |
|                |Security Advisory |Baghdad                               |
|                |Council (OSAC)    |                                      |
|13 February 2015|Landinfo          |Security Situation in Baghdad         |
|15 February 2015|Radio Free Europe |Sunni lawmakers boycott Iraqi         |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |parliament after killing              |
|15 February 2015|Human Rights Watch|Iraq: Militias Escalates Abuses,      |
|                |                  |Possibly War Crimes                   |
|16 February 2015|Freedom House     |Freedom in the World 2015 Iraq        |
|18 February 2015|Amnesty           |Iraq: Investigate Baghdad kidnapping  |
|                |International     |and assassination of Sunni leader and |
|                |                  |his convoy                            |
|23 February 2015|United Nations    |Iraq: UN documents rights violations  |
|                |News Centre       |of increasingly sectarian nature      |
|23 February 2015|Office of the     |Report on the protection of Civilians |
|                |United Nations    |in the Armed conflict in Iraq: 11     |
|                |High Commissioner |September - 10 December 2014          |
|                |for Human Rights  |                                      |
|                |(OHCHR) / United  |                                      |
|                |Nations Assistance|                                      |
|                |Mission for Iraq  |                                      |
|                |(UNAMI)           |                                      |
|23 February 2015|Office of the     |Iraq: UN report documents human rights|
|                |United Nations    |violations of increasingly sectarian  |
|                |High Commissioner |nature                                |
|                |for Human Rights  |                                      |
|                |(OHCHR)           |                                      |
|24 February 2015|United Nations    |Situation 'very worrying' for         |
|                |News Centre       |displaced families from Iraq's Anbar  |
|                |                  |province, UN officials warn           |
|25 February 2015|Amnesty           |Amnesty International Report 2014/15 -|
|                |International     |Iraq                                  |
|26 February 2015|Human Rights Watch|Iraqi Kurdistan: Arabs Displaced,     |
|                |                  |Cordoned off, Detained                |
|27 February 2015|International     |IOM identifies Nearly 2.5 Million     |
|                |Organization for  |Displaced in Iraq                     |
|                |Migration (IOM)   |                                      |
|28 February 2015|OCHA              |Iraq: Humanitarian Dashboard          |
|March 2015      |IOM Displacement  |Response to the IDP crisis in Iraq -  |
|                |Tracking Matrix   |Round XVII March 2015                 |
|1 March 2015    |United Nations    |UN Casualty Figures for February 2015 |
|                |Iraq              |                                      |
|3 March 2015    |El Inside Track   |Iraq, Weekly Security Report          |
|4 March 2015    |Human Rights Watch|Iraq: Prevent Militia Reprisals in    |
|                |                  |Tikrit Fighting                       |
|6 March 2015    |Radio Free Europe |UN says Thousands of Iraqi Sunni      |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |Civilians Flee Battle at Tikrit       |
|6 March 2015    |Al-Monitor        |Militarization of Iraqi society is    |
|                |                  |intensifying                          |
|8 March 2015    |Al-Shorfa         |More than 3 million Iraqis displaced  |
|                |                  |by ISIL                               |
|10 March 2015   |El Inside Track   |Iraq Weekly Security Report           |
|12 March 2015   |UK Government     |Iraq - Country of Concern             |
|12 March 2015   |International     |ICRC Annual Report2014 - Iraq         |
|                |Committee of the  |                                      |
|                |Red Cross (ICRC)  |                                      |
|12 March 2015   |International     |Internal Displacement in Iraq Passes  |
|                |Organization for  |Million                               |
|                |Migration (IOM)   |                                      |
|12 March 2015   |International     |12 dead and 25 injured as Shia        |
|                |Business Times    |targeted in Baghdad bombings          |
|12 March 2015   |Iraqi News        |2 killed, 3 wounded in alSaadoun      |
|                |                  |bombing in Baghdad                    |
|13 March 2015   |Human Rights      |Annual report of the United National  |
|                |Council           |High Commissioner for Human Rights on |
|                |                  |the human rights situation in Iraq in |
|                |                  |light of abuses committed by the      |
|                |                  |so-called Islamic State in Iraq and   |
|                |                  |the Levant and associated groups      |
|14 March 2015   |Middle East Online|Four killed in Baghdad Shiite         |
|                |                  |pilgrimage violence                   |
|14 March 2015   |United Nations    |At Security Council, UN officials warn|
|                |News Centre       |against 'waning' global attention to  |
|                |                  |plight of civilians in Iraq           |
|14 March 2015   |Iraqi News        |Gunmen burn Investment Sunni Endowment|
|                |                  |building in Adhamiya Baghdad          |
|14 March 2015   |Amnesty           |Amnesty International Report          |
|                |International     |                                      |
|15 March 2015   |The Daily Beast   |Torched Baghdad Neighbourhood could be|
|                |                  |just the beginning                    |
|15 March 2015   |Foreign Policy    |How the Shiites are blowing it in Iraq|
|15 March 2015   |Washington Times  |Islamic State captures government     |
|                |                  |compound in Ramadi                    |
|15 March 2015   |UNHCR             |Report on the judicial response to    |
|                |                  |allegation of torture in Iraq         |
|15 March 2015   |UNHCR             |IDP Operational Update                |
|17 March 2015   |El Inside Track   |Iraq Weekly Security Report           |
|17 March 2015   |United Nations    |Q&A: Positive outlook for Iraq, but   |
|                |High Commissioner |improvement will take months to show  |
|                |for Refugees      |                                      |
|                |(UNHCR)           |                                      |
|18 March 2015   |Human Rights Watch|After Liberation Came Destruction:    |
|                |                  |Iraqi Militias and the Aftermath of   |
|                |                  |Amerli                                |
|20 March 2015   |Jamestown         |Islamic State Develops New Strategies |
|                |Foundation        |to Destabilize the KRG                |
|21 March 2015   |Reuters           |Iraqi Sunnis accuse Shi'ite           |
|                |                  |paramilitaries of burning homes       |
|                |                  |outside Tikrit                        |
|24 March 2015   |PM Barzani        |Shiite militias should be regulated   |
|24 March 2015   |The New York Times|Iraqi Forces Map Plan Against ISIS,   |
|                |                  |With Strategic Use of Militias        |
|24 March 2015   |IRIN              |Iraqi Kurdistan nears breaking point  |
|24 March 2015   |El Inside Tack    |Iraq Weekly Security Report           |
|26 March 2015   |Caitas            |Harsh life for Iraqis in Kurdistan    |
|27 March 2015   |OCHA              |Iraq Crisis. Situation Report No.37   |
|27 March 2015   |Human Rights Watch|UN: Human Rights Council Fails Iraqi  |
|                |                  |Civilians                             |
|April 2015      |IOM Displacement  |Response to the IDP crisis in Iraq -  |
|                |Tracking Matrix   |Round XVIII April 2015                |
|April 2015      |Home Office       |Country Information and Guidance.     |
|                |                  |Iraq: Security situation in Baghdad,  |
|                |                  |southern governorates and the         |
|                |                  |Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI)        |
|1 April 2015    |Iraq Business News|Nearly 1,000 Iraqis Killed in March   |
|1 April 2015    |UNAMI             |Archived casualty figures (November   |
|                |                  |2012 - March 2015)                    |
|1 April 2015    |United Nations    |UN Casualty Figures for March 2015    |
|                |Iraq              |                                      |
|2 April 2015    |Al-Monitor        |Iraqi residents denied return to town |
|                |                  |seized from ISIS                      |
|3 April 2015    |Institute for the |Control of Terrain in Iraq            |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|3 April 2015    |Institute for the |ISIS Sanctuary                        |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|3 April 2015    |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report No. |
|                |                  |38                                    |
|5 April 2015    |The Guardian      |Iraqi Sunnis forced to abandon homes  |
|                |                  |and identity in battle for survival   |
|7 April 2015    |NPR               |After Retaking Iraqi City. Shiite     |
|                |                  |Militias Accused of targeting Sunnis  |
|7 April 2015    |Iraq Business News|Weekly Security Update                |
|7 April 2015    |The New York Times|A visual guide to the crisis in Iraq  |
|                |                  |and Syria                             |
|7 April 2015    |El Inside Track   |Iraq Weekly Security Report           |
|8 April 2015    |Musings on Iraq   |Islamic State Launches New Car Bomb   |
|                |                  |Wave in Iraq                          |
|14 April 2015   |USAID             |Iraq, Complex Emergency Factsheet 5   |
|14 April 2015   |Voice of America  |Sectarian Tensions rise as Iraq Takes |
|                |News              |Fights Against IS into Sunni Heartland|
|14 April 2015   |Radio Free Europe |Deadly car bombs strike Baghdad area  |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |                                      |
|17 April 2015   |Radio Free Europe |Bombings Kill Dozens in Baghdad, Erbil|
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |                                      |
|19 April 2015   |United Nations    |UN humanitarian agencies mobilize     |
|                |News Centre       |assistance amid renewed fighting in   |
|                |                  |Iraq                                  |
|19 April 2015   |Radio Free Europe |UN Says 90,000 Displaced by Violence  |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |in Iraq's Anbar Crisis 'Dramatic'     |
|20 April 2015   |IRIN              |Displaced Iraqis blocked from Baghdad |
|21 April 2015   |United Nations    |Struggle to reach safety for thousands|
|                |High Commissioner |of civilians fleeing Iraq's Ramadi    |
|                |for Refugees      |                                      |
|                |(UNHCR)           |                                      |
|23 April 2015   |Musings on Iraq   |Fighting in Anbar and Salahaddin      |
|                |                  |Increases Casualties in Iraq 3rd Week |
|                |                  |of April 2015                         |
|24 April 2015   |McClathy DC       |Islamic State offensives stretch      |
|                |                  |Iraq's elite troops thin              |
|24 April 2015   |Radio Free Europe |Ramadi Civilians Fleeing IS 'Charged  |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |Hundreds of dollars to enter Baghdad  |
|25 April 2015   |Relief Web        |4 displaced Iraqi men kidnapped,      |
|                |                  |killed                                |
|26 April 2015   |Radio Free Europe |Car Bombs, Suicide Attack Kill at     |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |least 22 in Iraq                      |
|27 April 2015   |UK Home Office    |Country Information and Guidance -    |
|                |                  |Iraq: Security situation in Baghdad,  |
|                |                  |southern governorates and the         |
|                |                  |Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) (April |
|                |                  |2015)                                 |
|28 April 2015   |Radio Free Europe |Car Bombs Kill 19 in Baghdad          |
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |                                      |
|28 April 2015   |International     |Iraq: ICRC delivers urgent aid amid   |
|                |Committee of the  |heavy fighting in Anbar               |
|                |Red Cross (ICRC)  |                                      |
|28 April 2015   |Israel National   |Eight Iraqis Shot Dead, Dumped in     |
|                |News              |Baghdad                               |
|28 April 2015   |Rudaw             |UN local staffer abducted in Iraq; 8  |
|                |                  |bodies found in Baghdad               |
|30 April 2015   |Al Jazeera        |Fear of hidden ISIL                   |
|30 April 2015   |ABC News          |Car Bomb Kills 21 People in Iraq; EU  |
|                |                  |warns of donor fatigue                |
|30 April 2015   |Channel News Asia |Iraq poised to deploy Iran backed     |
|                |                  |Shi'ite militia in offensive in West  |
|1 May 2015      |Al-Monitor        |Anbar's displaced Sunnis not safe from|
|                |                  |sectarianism                          |
|1 May 2015      |ABC News          |Baghdad Officials Blame Sunni         |
|                |                  |Displaced for Wave of Bombings        |
|1 May 2015      |CBS News          |Iraq officials blame bombs on         |
|                |                  |residents fleeing war                 |
|2 May 2015      |News 24           |Iraqi officials blame Sunni displaced |
|                |                  |for bombings                          |
|2 May 2015      |International     |Islamic State in Baghdad: Two near    |
|                |Business Times    |simultaneous blasts kill at least 17  |
|3 May 2015      |Iraqi News        |37 dead, wounded in security accidents|
|                |                  |in Baghdad                            |
|3 May 2015      |UNAMI             |Civilians continue to pay a heavy     |
|                |                  |price due to terrorism, violence and  |
|                |                  |armed conflict                        |
|3 May 2015      |CTV News          |Revenge killings in Iraq growing      |
|                |                  |concern for US, Canadian officials    |
|4 May 2015      |Institute for the |Iraq Situation Report: 4 May 2015     |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|4 May 2015      |The New Indian    |28 killed in bomb attacks, clashes    |
|                |Express           |with IS in Iraq                       |
|4 May 2015      |Iraqi News        |Anbar Council appeals to government to|
|                |                  |protect displaced families from gangs |
|                |                  |of Baghdad                            |
|4 May 2015      |Iraqi News        |Civilian, senior officer killed, 5    |
|                |                  |bodies found in Baghdad               |
|4 May 2015      |Fars News Agency  |Iraqi Army Kills over 16 ISIL         |
|                |                  |Terrorism in Northern Baghdad         |
|4 May 2015      |Israel National   |ISIS Claims Responsibility for Baghdad|
|                |News              |Car Bomb Attack                       |
|4 May 2015      |The Nation        |IS claims Baghdad bombing that killed |
|                |                  |15                                    |
|5 May 2015      |UK Government     |Iraq Travel Advice                    |
|6 May 2015      |Home Office       |Response to country of origin         |
|                |                  |information (COI) request. Baghdad    |
|                |                  |Governorates                          |
|6 May 2015      |Home Office       |Response to country of origin         |
|                |                  |information (COI) request. The        |
|                |                  |Security Situation in the "Baghdad    |
|                |                  |belts" region                         |
|6 May 2015      |Institute for the |Iraq Situation Report: 6 May 2015     |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|                                                                          |
|2014                                                                      |
|2014            |IOM               |Displacement Tracking Matrix          |
|April 2014      |IOM               |Governorate Profile: Thi Qar          |
|April 2014      |US Department of  |Diplomacy in Action. Chapter 2.       |
|                |State             |Country Reports. Middle East and North|
|                |                  |Africa.                               |
|27 May 2014     |Human Rights Watch|Iraq: Government Attacking Fallujah   |
|                |                  |Hospital                              |
|June 2014       |UNICEF            |2014 Strategic Response Plan Revision |
|                |                  |- Iraq                                |
|10 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS seizes more towns in northern and|
|                |Journal           |central Iraq                          |
|10 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS takes control of Mosul, Iraq's   |
|                |Journal           |second largest city                   |
|10 June 2014    |Institute for the |Recent chronology on the fall of Mosul|
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|10 June 2014    |IOM               |Iraq Mission. Thi-Qar Governorate     |
|                |                  |Profile - April 2014                  |
|10 June 2014    |IOM               |Iraq Mission. Missan Governorate      |
|                |                  |Profile - April 2014                  |
|10 June 2014    |IOM               |Iraq Mission. Basrah Governorate      |
|                |                  |Profile - April 2014                  |
|11 June 2014    |Amnesty           |Iraq: Civilians must be protected     |
|                |International     |following the insurgents' takeover of |
|                |                  |Mosul                                 |
|11 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS takes control of Bayji, Tikrit in|
|                |Journal           |lighting southward advance            |
|11 June 2014    |Institute for the |Developments in the aftermath of the  |
|                |Study of War      |Fall of Mosul                         |
|11 June 2014    |Institute for the |The Islamic State of Iraq and al0Sham |
|                |Study of War      |Captures Mosul and Advances towards   |
|                |                  |Baghdad                               |
|11 June 2014    |Institute for the |ISIS Activity in Mosul and Beyond     |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|11 June 2014    |Reuters           |UPDATE. A- Sunni militants push into  |
|                |                  |Iraq oil refinery                     |
|11 June 2014    |Institute for the |Ba'athist Insurgents Support ISIS     |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|12 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS advance halted at Samarra        |
|                |Journal           |                                      |
|13 June 2014    |Foreign Policy    |Before the Fall. ISIS is wreaking     |
|                |                  |havoc in Mosul long before it took    |
|                |                  |over the city                         |
|14 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS, allies reviving Baghdad belts'  |
|                |Journal           |battle plan                           |
|15 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS photographs detail execution of  |
|                |Journal           |Iraqi soldiers                        |
|15 June 2014    |Institute for the |The Iraqi Shi'a Mobilization to       |
|                |Study of War      |Counter the ISIS Offensive            |
|17 June 2014    |The New York Times|As Sunnis Die in Iraq, a Cycle is     |
|                |                  |Restarting                            |
|17 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS releases a variety of videos     |
|                |Journal           |                                      |
|19 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS photos show gains and Iraqi      |
|                |Journal           |support                               |
|20 June 2014    |The Long War      |Ansar al Islam claims attacks against |
|                |Journal           |Iraqi military police                 |
|24 June 2014    |CNN               |Iraq's minorities left between        |
|                |                  |scorpions and a hard place            |
|24 June 2014    |The Long War      |Analysis: A protracted struggle ahead |
|                |Journal           |for Iraq                              |
|25 June 2014    |Human Rights Watch|Tunisians implicated in Iraq War      |
|                |                  |Crimes                                |
|25 June 2014    |UN Office for the |New IDPs Map by Province              |
|                |Coordination of   |                                      |
|                |Humanitarian      |                                      |
|                |Affairs           |                                      |
|26 June 2014    |Human Rights Watch|Iraq: ISIS Execution Sit Located      |
|26 June 2014    |Politico magazine |Letter from Iraq: No way out          |
|26 June 2014    |REACH initiative  |Entry point monitoring Kurdish Region |
|                |                  |of Iraq                               |
|27 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS advances on the oil fields in    |
|                |Journal           |Salahaddin                            |
|27 June 2014    |International     |ISIS Twitter Campaign Threatens US    |
|                |Business Times    |With Bloody Vengeance if it Acts in   |
|                |                  |Iraq                                  |
|27 June 2014    |Human Rights Watch|Iraq: ISIS kidnaps Shia Turkmen,      |
|                |                  |Destroys Shrines                      |
|27 June 2014    |Amnesty           |Iraq: Testimonies point to dozens of  |
|                |International     |revenge killings of Sunni detainees   |
|27 June 2014    |Institute for the |ISIS battleplan for Baghdad           |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|27 June 2014    |UNHCR briefing    |Iraq: 10,000 displaced from Christian |
|                |note              |communities near Mosul                |
|28 June 2014    |BBC               |Iraq army routs ISIS rebels' in       |
|                |                  |offensive on Tikrit                   |
|29 June 2014    |The Long War      |Iraqi troops, insurgents battle for   |
|                |Journal           |Tikrit                                |
|29 June 2014    |The Long War      |ISIS announces formation of Caliphate,|
|                |Journal           |rebrands as 'Islamic State'           |
|30 June 2014    |UN News Service   |Iraq violence: UN confirms more than  |
|                |                  |2,000 killed, injured since early June|
|30 June 2014    |The New York Times|ISIS Threatens Al Qeda as Flagship    |
|                |                  |Movement of Extremists                |
|30 June 2014    |BBC               |Is this the end for Iraq?             |
|30 June 2014    |BBC               |Viewpoint: ISIS caliphate a dangerous |
|                |                  |development                           |
|30 June 2014    |The Long War      |Google map of Iraqi and Syrian Towns  |
|                |Journal           |and Cities seized by the Islamic State|
|                |                  |of Iraq and the Sham and its allies   |
|30 June 2014    |Institute for the |Iraq Situation Report: 30 June 2014   |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|30 June 2014    |Al Jazeera        |Iraqis fear sectarian violence in     |
|                |                  |Baghdad                               |
|July 2014       |Institute for the |Middle East Security Report. The      |
|                |Study of War      |Islamic State: A Counter-Strategy for |
|                |                  |a Counter-State                       |
|July 2014       |REACH initiative  |Vulnerability, Needs and intentions of|
|                |                  |the Internally Displaced Persons in   |
|                |                  |Northern Iraq                         |
|July 2014       |International     |Battling an uncertain future: Iraq's  |
|                |Rescue Committee  |renewed displacement crisis           |
|1 July 2014     |UN                |Casualty figures for June 2014        |
|1 July 2014     |BBC               |Iraq: Kurdistan independence          |
|                |                  |referendum planned                    |
|1 July 2014     |BBC               |Iraq crisis: Key players in Sunni     |
|                |                  |rebellion                             |
|2 July 2014     |Assessment        |Humanitarian implications of Violence |
|                |Capacities Project|in Northern and Central Iraq          |
|                |(ACAPS)           |                                      |
|2 July 2014     |Institute for the |Control of Terrain in Iraq (map)      |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|5 July 2014     |Office of High    |Report on the protection of civilians |
|                |Commissioner for  |in the non international armed        |
|                |Human Rights      |conflict in Iraq: 5 June - 5 July 2014|
|                |(OHCHR)           |                                      |
|18 July 2014    |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report No.3|
|22 July 2014    |Daily News        |Iraqi Turkmens 'left for dead' in     |
|                |                  |desert                                |
|24 July 2014    |REACH initiative  |IDP Factsheet: Sulaymaniyah           |
|                |                  |Governorate                           |
|24 July 2014    |REACH initiative  |IDP Factsheet: Erbil Governorate      |
|26 July 2014    |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report No.4|
|August 2014     |REACH initiative  |Rapid Assessment Report:              |
|                |                  |Vulnerability, Needs and Intentions of|
|                |                  |Internally Displaced Persons in       |
|                |                  |Northern Iraq                         |
|1 August 2014   |UN Office for     |Iraq IDP Crisis Situation Report No.5 |
|                |Coordination of   |                                      |
|                |Humanitarian      |                                      |
|                |Affairs           |                                      |
|2 August 2014   |BBC               |Syria Iraq: The Islamic State         |
|7 August 2014   |REACH initiative  |Entry point monitoring. Kurdistan     |
|                |                  |region of Iraq                        |
|6 August 2014   |The Independent   |Baghdad's dismembered society: Kurds  |
|                |                  |face sectarian recriminations in a    |
|                |                  |city that has become largely Shia     |
|                |                  |dominated                             |
|8 August 2014   |United Nations for|Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report No.6|
|                |the Coordination  |                                      |
|                |of Humanitarian   |                                      |
|                |Affairs (OCHA)    |                                      |
|18 August 2014  |REACH initiative  |Iraq IDP Crisis Overview              |
|18 August 2014  |REACH initiative  |Displacement from al Muqdadiya,       |
|                |                  |Sa'aiya and Jalawla to Khanaqin 7     |
|                |                  |Kalar                                 |
|22 August 2014  |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report No.8|
|26 August 2014  |REACH initiative  |Iraq - Kurdistan Regions of Iraq      |
|                |                  |"Primary Displacements of IDPs to     |
|                |                  |Sulaymaniyah Governorate - 13 to 24   |
|                |                  |July 2014"                            |
|26 August 2014  |New York Times    |Betrayal of Yazidis Stokes Iraqi Fears|
|                |                  |of Return to 2006 Sectarian Horrors   |
|28 August 2014  |REACH initiative  |Entry point monitoring. Kurdistan     |
|                |                  |region of Iraq                        |
|28 August 2014  |The Washington    |Iraqi Kurds say their fight is against|
|                |Post              |more than just the Islamic State      |
|28 August 2014  |The Christian     |Aid to Sunni Arabs in Kurdistan comes |
|                |Science Monitor   |with a side of suspicion              |
|28 August 2014  |UK Home Office    |Country Information and Guidance -    |
|                |                  |Iraq: The security situation in the   |
|                |                  |'contested' areas of Iraq (August     |
|                |                  |2014)                                 |
|29 August 2014  |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report No.9|
|September 2014  |IOM               |Displacement Snapshot: Dahuk          |
|September 2014  |IOM               |Displacement Snapshot: Erbil          |
|September 2014  |IOM               |Displacement Snapshot: Baghdad        |
|September 2014  |IOM               |Overview of Displacement in Southern  |
|                |                  |Iraq                                  |
|September 2014  |Shelter for Life  |Rapid Response of IDPs in Erbil City  |
|                |International     |                                      |
|September 2014  |Inter-Agency      |Humanitarian Crisis in Iraq. Gender   |
|                |Standing Committee|Alert                                 |
|                |(IASC)            |                                      |
|September 2014  |UNHCR             |Emergency Response for the Iraq       |
|                |                  |Situation                             |
|4 September 2014|REACH initiative  |Entry point monitoring. Kurdistan     |
|                |                  |region of Iraq                        |
|4 September 2014|ACAPS briefing    |Humanitarian Implications of Violence |
|                |note              |in Northern and Central Iraq          |
|6 September 2014|OCHA              |Map of IDP site (Dahuk - Ninewa) (as  |
|                |                  |at 5 September 2014)                  |
|6 September 2014|OCHA              |Iraq: Displacement - Humanitarian     |
|                |                  |Snapshot (as at 6 September 2014)     |
|9 September 2014|OCHA              |Iraq, Humanitarian Assistance (as at 9|
|                |                  |September 2014)                       |
|9 September 2014|IOM               |Iraq Mission: Najaf Governorate       |
|                |                  |Profile- September 2014               |
|9 September 2014|IOM               |Iraq Mission: Kerbala Governorate     |
|                |                  |Profile - September 2014              |
|9 September 2014|IOM               |Iraq Mission: Dehuk Governorate       |
|                |                  |Profile - September 2014              |
|10 September    |OHCHR/UNAMI       |Report on the Protection of Civilians |
|2014            |                  |in Armed Conflict in Iraq             |
|12 September    |International     |Iraq: IOM Assists Most Vulnerable in  |
|2014            |Organization for  |Southern and Central Iraq             |
|                |Migration (IOM)   |                                      |
|12 September    |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Crisis. Situation Report     |
|2014            |                  |No.11                                 |
|13 September    |OCHA              |Iraq IDP Sites (as of 5 September     |
|2014            |                  |2014)                                 |
|15 September    |UNHCR Iraq        |Operational Update: Internally        |
|2014            |                  |Displaced Persons                     |
|15 September    |World Food        |Iraq Crisis Situation Report No.6     |
|2014            |Programme         |                                      |
|17 September    |IOM               |Iraq Mission: Erbil Governorate       |
|2014            |                  |Profile - September 2014              |
|18 September    |Institute for the |Warning Intelligence Update: ISIS     |
|2014            |Study of War      |attacks Baghdad                       |
|19 September    |OCHA              |Iraq Crisis. Situation Report No. 12  |
|2014            |                  |                                      |
|20 September    |IOM               |Iraq Crisis Response. Weekly Situation|
|2014            |                  |Report No.5                           |
|22 September    |Integrated        |Displaced Iraqis plug response gaps   |
|2014            |Regional          |                                      |
|                |Information       |                                      |
|                |Networks (IRIN)   |                                      |
|23 September    |IOM               |Iraqis displaced by conflict struggle |
|2014            |                  |to find adequate shelter              |
|24 September    |UNHCR             |Creating a home from home, far from   |
|2014            |                  |home in Erbil                         |
|25 September    |REACH initiative  |Iraq: Erbil Governorate - Ainkawa MODM|
|2014            |                  |Camp (updated 7 September 2014)       |
|25 September    |REACH initiative  |Iraq - Kurdistan Region of Iraq and   |
|2014            |                  |Anbar Governorate; IDP Camps and      |
|                |                  |Sites: Existing and Potential         |
|                |                  |Location. As of 13 September 2014     |
|25 September    |OCHA              |Iraq Humanitarian Needs Overview      |
|2014            |                  |                                      |
|25 September    |IOM               |Iraq Mission: Baghdad Governorate     |
|2014            |                  |Profile - September 2014              |
|25 September    |IOM               |Iraq Mission: Southern Governorate    |
|2014            |                  |Profile - September 2014              |
|25 September    |IOM               |Iraq Mission: Sulaymaniyah Governorate|
|2014            |                  |Profile - September 2014              |
|25 September    |Global Voices     |Survivor Recounts Iraqi Prison        |
|2014            |Middle East       |Massacre                              |
|26 September    |OCHA              |Iraq Crisis. Situation Report No. 13  |
|2014            |                  |                                      |
|27 September    |IOM               |Iraq Crisis Response. Weekly Situation|
|2014            |                  |Report No.6                           |
|28 September    |REACH initiative  |Iraq: IOM Iraq Displacement Tracking  |
|2014            |                  |Matrix                                |
|29 September    |REACH initiative  |Iraq: Destination of IDPs from Central|
|2014            |                  |Iraq                                  |
|October 2014    |REACH initiative  |Shelter Cluster Rapid Assessment. Iraq|
|                |                  |Internal Displacement Crisis. Area of |
|                |                  |Origin Assessment Report.             |
|October 2014    |Institute for the |Beyond the Islamic State: Iraq's Sunni|
|                |Study of War      |Insurgency                            |
|1 October 2014  |Middle East       |Iraq ministry says 320,000 Iraqis have|
|                |Monitor           |sought refuge in Dohuk                |
|2 October 2014  |Office of the     |Report on the Protection of Civilians |
|                |United Nations of |in the Armed Conflict in Iraq         |
|                |the High          |                                      |
|                |Commissioner for  |                                      |
|                |Human Rights      |                                      |
|                |(OHCHR) / United  |                                      |
|                |Nations Assistance|                                      |
|                |Mission for Iraq  |                                      |
|                |(UNAMI)           |                                      |
|3 October 2014  |International     |Emergency Appeal Operations Updated.  |
|                |Federation of Red |Iraq: Population Movement             |
|                |Cross and Red     |                                      |
|                |Crescent Societies|                                      |
|                |(IFRC)            |                                      |
|3 October 2014  |OCHA              |Iraq Crisis. Situation Report No.14   |
|5 October 2014  |Associated Press  |Kurds scrutinise refugees at camps to |
|                |                  |keep IS out                           |
|6 October 2014  |IOM               |Iraq Crisis Response. Weekly Situation|
|                |                  |Report No.7                           |
|7 October 2014  |Inter Press       |Schools open in Iraqi Kurdistan ...   |
|                |Service           |But for Refugees Not Students         |
|8 October 2014  |Premiere Urgence- |2014 - Multi Sectoral Rapid Needs     |
|                |Aide Medicale     |Assessment. Focus on IDP From Northern|
|                |Internationale    |Iraq                                  |
|9 October 2014  |RUDAW             |Yezidis tormented by living           |
|                |                  |conditions, trauma                    |
|10 October 2014 |OCHA              |Iraq Crisis. Situation Report No.15   |
|14 October 2014 |Amnesty           |Absolute Impunity: Militia Rule in    |
|                |International     |Iraq                                  |
|19 October 2014 |Vox               |Map: ISIS is just the latest in       |
|                |                  |Baghdad's decade of hell              |
|24 October 2014 |Human Rights Watch|For Iraqi's Sunnis, Sectarian Militias|
|                |                  |Pose an Extra Threat                  |
|27 October 2014 |UNHCR             |UNHCR position on returns to Iraq     |
|29 October 2014 |Refugees          |Waiting for Winter: Displaced Iraqis  |
|                |International     |in the KRI                            |
|                |(USA)             |                                      |
|November 2014   |REACH initiative  |Shelter and CCCM Cluster Rapid        |
|                |                  |Assessment: Iraq Internal Displacement|
|                |                  |Crisis                                |
|4 November 2014 |Human Rights Watch|The Gangs of Iraq                     |
|11 November 2014|Radio Free Europe |Suicide Bombers Strike in Two Iraqi   |
|                |                  |Cities                                |
|14 November 2014|Center for        |Gulf Security, Stability, and         |
|                |Strategic and     |Terrorism: Country Rankings           |
|                |International     |                                      |
|                |Studies (CSIS)    |                                      |
|19 November 2014|Radio Free Europe |Four Killed in Suicide Attack in Iraqi|
|                |/ Radio Liberty   |Kurdish Capital                       |
|21 November 2014|Human Rights Watch|Iraq: Spate of Attacks Terrorize      |
|                |                  |Civilians                             |
|25 November 2014|Institute for the |ISIS in the Southwest Baghdad Belts   |
|                |Study of War      |                                      |
|5 December 2014 |The New York Times|Sunnis Fear Permanent Displacement    |
|                |                  |From Iraqi Town                       |
|11 December 2014|BBC               |Jihadism: Tracking a month of deadly  |
|                |                  |attacks                               |
|14 December 2014|Rudaw             |Iranian official: Basij forces saved  |
|                |                  |Baghdad from ISIS takeover            |
|18 December 2014|The New York Times|Backed by US Airstrikes, Kurds Reverse|
|                |                  |and ISIS Gain                         |
|18 December 2014|Musings on Iraq   |Attacks up but casualties remain      |
|                |                  |stable in Iraq 8-14 December 2014     |
|20 December 2014|Rudaw             |Group accuses Iraqi government of     |
|                |                  |expelling Sunnis from Baghdad         |
|23 December 2014|Musings on Iraq   |Violence and casualties remain at low |
|                |                  |level in Iraq in 3rd week of December |
|                |                  |2014                                  |
|24 December 2014|UK Home Office    |Country Information and Guidance -    |
|                |                  |Iraq: Internal relocation (and        |
|                |                  |technical obstacles)                  |
|25 December 2014|IOM               |DTM Dashboard: Iraq IDP Crisis.       |
|                |                  |Displacement Flows (January 2014 to 24|
|                |                  |December 2014)                        |
|25 December 2014|IOM               |DTM Dashboard: Iraq IDP Crisis.       |
|                |                  |Shelter Group by Displacement Flow    |
|30 December 2014|BBC               |Iraqi forces recapture Dhuluiya from  |
|                |                  |Islamic State                         |
|30 December 2014|International     |Iraq: A tough year for civilians,     |
|                |Committee of the  |especially the displaced              |
|                |Red Cross (ICRC)  |                                      |
|31 December 2014|Musings on Iraq   |Slight Upstick in Violence in Iraq in |
|                |                  |Forth Week of December 2014           |
|                                                                          |
|2013                                                                      |
|May 2013        |Institute for     |Iraq's Minorities and Other Vulnerable|
|                |International and |Groups: Legal Framework, Documentation|
|                |Human Rights      |and Human Rights                      |
|21 June 2013    |Home Office       |Country of Origin Information (COI)   |
|                |                  |response compiled and researched by   |
|                |                  |COI service. Returns to Erbil         |
|13 August 2013  |Home Office       |Iraq bulletin: Security situation     |
|                |                  |update 2013                           |
|December 2013   |IOM               |Internal Displacement in Iraq:        |
|                |                  |Barriers to Integration               |
|20 December 2013|BBC               |Sharpening Sunni-Shia schism bodes ill|
|                |                  |for Middle East                       |
|                                                                          |
|2012                                                                      |
| March 2012     |UK Border Agency  |Iraq: Joint Report of the Danish      |
|                |                  |Immigration Service / UK Border Agency|
|                |                  |Fact Finding Mission to Erbil and     |
|                |                  |Dahuk, Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) |
|16 April 2012   |UK Border Agency  |Bulletin: Treatment of Persons        |
|                |                  |Returning to Iraq, Including Failed   |
|                |                  |Asylum Seekers: The Situation of      |
|                |                  |Internally Displaced Persons and      |
|                |                  |Procedures to Re-Obtain Documentation |
|                |                  |to Access Services and Facilitate     |
|                |                  |Internal Movement                     |


-----------------------
[1] A Recast Qualification Directive, Directive 2011/95/EU, was adopted on
13 December 2011 and is binding on all EU Member States except for UK,
Denmark and Ireland, who have opted out.
[2] The official security organisation of the Kurdish Region of Iraq
[3] Referred to as ISIL throughout this decision.
[4] also at [2014] 1 WLR 2477
[5] The acronym ISIS (Islamic State in Iraq and Syria) is used
interchangeably with ISIL in the documents before us but refers to the same
insurgent group.
[6] Paragraph 50 of the Respondent's skeleton argument.
[7] SA (Syria) & Anor v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1390 per Toulson LJ at [22].
[8] Harikar and Qandil are both non-governmental organisations operating in
Iraq
  [9] The Displacement Tracking Matrix is an "information  management  tool
     that gathers specific information regarding the status and location of
     displaced persons..."



