
        Hughes (Leave to Appeal - Time Limits) Zimbabwe * [2001] UKIAT 00015



                         IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL


                                                   Date heard: 10/05/2001
                                      Date Determination notified: 22/6/2001

                                   Before

                  The Honourable Mr Justice Collins (President)
                               Mr M W Rapinet
                                Dr H H Storey


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, HARARE
                                                               APPELLANT
                                     and

                            BRENDAN COLIN HUGHES

                                                              RESPONDENT

For the Appellant:  Ms Shahin Rahman, Counsel, instructed by
                      The Treasury Solicitor

For the Respondent:  Mrs Fay Mustapha, Solicitor,
                                   Lawson Turner & Gilbert

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.  The respondent is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  On 29 June 1999 he applied
for an entry clearance to enable him to come to the United Kingdom as a
working holidaymaker.  Following an interview on 23 September 1999, his
application was refused on 24 September 1999.  He appealed to an
adjudicator against that refusal and, following an unacceptable delay, his
appeal was allowed on 10 November 2000.

2.  Because of the delay, the respondent went to see the appellant and on 9
August 2000 he withdrew his appeal and made a fresh application which was
refused on 31 August 2000.  On 28 September 2000 the respondent's father
wrote a letter to the Immigration Appellate Authority saying that, because
he had not heard anything about his appeal for many months, his son, the
respondent, went to see the ECO and "was told he could re-apply, which he
did and was interviewed on 31 August 2000 and once again was refused
entry".  His father in the letter complained that the respondent had been
misled by the ECO into signing the withdrawal of his appeal although the
ECO knew that "he was not going to grant...entry".

3.  Notwithstanding the withdrawal of the appeal, the adjudicator heard it
on 30 October 2000.  The appellant was not represented; but such absence of
representation is all too common.  The adjudicator allowed the appeal:  his
conclusions are based on his acceptance of evidence given by the
respondent's father and cousin, who was acting as his representative.
Those conclusions were properly reached.

4.  Leave to appeal was sought on the ground that the appeal had been
withdrawn.  The adjudicator's determination was promulgated on 10 November
2000.  Notice of appeal was received by the tribunal on 30 November 2000.
In those circumstances, the President when granting leave to appeal was
concerned that the question whether the application had been made in time
in accordance with Rule 18(2) of the Immigration and Asylum (Procedure)
Rules 2000 (the 2000 Rules) should be decided.  This meant deciding what is
the true construction of Rule 18(2) and so this determination has been
starred.

5.  Rule 18(2) reads as follows:-

      "An application for leave to appeal shall be made not later than ten
      days, or in the case of an application made from outside the United
      Kingdom, twenty-eight days, after the appellant has received written
      notice of the determination against which he wishes to appeal."


The application in this case was made by the Home Office and so, if the
words of Rule 18(2) are read literally, it was clearly not made from
outside the United Kingdom.  The same would apply to an application made,
as is commonly the position, by the representative of an appellant who is
overseas.

6.  We must also consider Rule 48(2) which provides inter alia that a
notice sent to a person within the United Kingdom shall be deemed to have
been received on the second day after it was posted and that a notice sent
to a person outside the United Kingdom shall be deemed to have been
received on the twenty-eighth day after it was posted.  Rule 46(2) provides
that a notice sent to a person appearing to represent a party shall be
deemed to have been sent to that party.  And Rule 15 requires that written
notice of an adjudicator's determination shall be sent to "every party and
the appellant's representative (if he has one)".

7.  The Rules suffer from a combination of poor draftmanship and a failure
properly to marry different provisions.  It is tolerably clear that the
intention behind Rule 18(2) was to give applicants who are not in the
United Kingdom an extended period to enable them to have time to receive
the adjudicator's determination and to seek advice and give instructions
whether to apply for leave to appeal.  Thus the notice accompanying the
adjudicator's determination reads, so far as material:

      "In accordance with Rule 18(2) of the [2000 Rules] any application for
      leave to appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal together with all
      the grounds of appeal must be submitted to the following address
      WITHIN 28 DAYS OF RECEIPT OF THIS NOTICE...


      This notice is deemed to have been received by you 28 days after it
      was posted.  Therefore you must lodge your application within 56 days
      of the date of this notice."

The notice cannot, of course, dictate the true construction of the Rules,
but it is certainly desirable that they should, if possible, be construed
so as to give effect to their purpose.

8.  There are two stages.  The first is the time for service in accordance
with Rule 48(2).  The problem is created by Rule 46(2) since many (but not
all) appellants before an adjudicator will have a representative and the
ECO will always be represented by the Home Office.  Thus service on the
representative will be deemed to be service on the party, who is by virtue
of Rules 2(1) and 29(1) the appellant and the respondent.  In Part III of
the Rules, which deals with appeals to the Tribunal, 'appellant' is stated
by Rule 17(2) to include an applicant for leave to appeal.

9.  The answer to the problem lies first in Rule 15.  This specifically
requires that the adjudicator's determination is, in the case of an
appellant (that is to say, an appellant before the adjudicator who will
always be the individual who has received an adverse decision from the
Secretary of State, an Immigration Officer or an Entry Clearance Officer)
sent to his representative.  The explicit requirement to serve the
appellant and his representative means that the deeming provision in Rule
46(2) cannot apply.  Secondly, paragraph 22(1) of Schedule 4 to the
Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 gives a right of appeal to the Tribunal to

      "any party to an appeal ... to an adjudicator ... if dissatisfied with
      his determination ."

In this paragraph, 'party' means what it says and there is no deeming
provision to saddle a party with his representative's knowledge.  A person
must know what has been determined before he can be dissatisfied with it
and decide to appeal.  The Court of Appeal in R ( Asifa Saleem) v Secretary
of State for the Home Department  [2000] 4 All ER 814 has recently adopted
this reasoning in striking down the predecessor of Rule 48(2) which
provided that service of a notice was to be deemed to have been effected
even if it could be established that it had not in fact been received.

10.  Thus an individual who was an appellant before the adjudicator will
always have twenty- eight days before time for lodging his application
begins to run.  This extended period will often be needed when, for
example, the individual lives in a remote part of a country in which
communications may not be entirely satisfactory.  But the same should not
apply to the Entry Clearance Officer.  Rule 15 is the wrong way round,
since on its face it requires service in all cases on the individual Entry
Clearance Officer  or the Secretary of State himself.  That is absurd.  The
Home Office accepts service on its Presenting Officers' Unit as good
service on the Secretary of State or Entry Clearance Officer  as the case
may be.  The absence of the requirement in the case of the respondent to
serve both the party and his representative means that Rule 46(2) can apply
and so service on the Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit is service on
the respondent.  Since that service is by means of a notice served within
the jurisdiction, either two days is allowed, if it is sent by post, or if
it is, as is the usual practice served by hand, immediate service is
effected.  Thus the respondent has only at most two days before time for
lodging the application starts to run.  Ms Rahman accepted that this was so
and to that extent the notice served with the adjudicator's determination
is not accurate.  But since the Home Office will not be misled it is
probably better to leave it as it is to avoid any possibility of confusion
in the minds of appellants.

11.  We now come to Rule 18(2).  As we pointed out in argument, if read
literally it would enable all applicants to gain an extra eighteen days by
making the application from anywhere outside the United Kingdom.  A day
trip to Calais or the use of a friend or an office outside the United
Kingdom to lodge the application would suffice.  And, put the other way
round, if the representative lodges the application, it is made from within
the United Kingdom and so only ten days is permitted.  This is manifestly
not what was intended and both Ms Rahman and Mrs Mustapha have urged us to
construe the rule so that twenty-eight days is given when the applicant is
outside the United Kingdom, which is what was intended.

12.  Although we recognise that we are straining the language, in our
judgment in Rule 18(2) the word 'application' means the document which is
lodged by or on behalf of the applicant.  If the applicant is outside the
United Kingdom, the application that he makes, whether by himself or by his
representative, is made from outside the United Kingdom.  An Entry
Clearance Officer is outside the United Kingdom and so he has twenty-eight
days to make his application after he has been served with notice of the
adjudicator's determination.  Accordingly, the application in this case was
in time.

13.  Ms Rahman asked for an adjournment of the appeal to enable the Entry
Clearance Officer to produce a statement to deal with the allegations
contained in the respondent's father's letter of 28 September 2000 and the
suggestion, which it was said had not been foreseen, that the respondent
had been tricked or misled into withdrawing his appeal.  We found that
application unimpressive since it was obvious that, in order to uphold the
adjudicator's decision, the respondent would have to establish that his
withdrawal of the appeal should be treated as of no effect.  The appellant
had had ample time to obtain any necessary statement and the attempt to do
so at the hearing was contrary to the tribunal's standard directions.  In
any event, we expressed great concern that the Entry Clearance Officer,  as
respondent to an appeal against his decision, had thought it appropriate to
have a meeting with the appellant the upshot of which was that the appeal
was withdrawn and a fresh application made at no inconsiderable expense
which was then refused.  We appreciate that we have not seen any
explanation from the Entry Clearance Officer, but we find it difficult to
envisage any justification for what happened.

14.  However, we do not need to go into the merits.  Rule 18(4) of the 2000
Rules provides, so far as material:

      "An application for leave to appeal shall be made by serving upon the
      Tribunal the appropriate prescribed form........."


The appropriate prescribed forms are identified in the Schedule to the 2000
Rules, but Rule 3(1) provides, after referring to the forms in the
Schedule, in addition:

      "... and those forms, or similar forms, may be used with any
      variations that the circumstances may require."


The Schedule has three prescribed forms.  One is for family visit appeals
which fall into a special category.  The other two deal with United Kingdom
and overseas appeals respectively.  In this case, the Home Office used a
form headed "Asylum Appeal" which was signed "on behalf of the Secretary of
State."  It was a form which had been used under the Asylum Appeals
(Procedure) Rules 1996 and which on its face referred to those rules.  This
was the wrong form.  Not only was this not an asylum appeal nor one to
which the 1996 Rules applied but it was not even signed on behalf of the
correct party who was not, of course, the Secretary of State but was the
Entry Clearance Officer.

15.  In our judgment, the application was defective and could not properly
be brought within the scope of the definition of 'appropriate prescribed
forms' in Rule 3(1) of the 2000 Rules.  Ms Rahman submitted that this was a
purely technical point which should not  prevent the appeal proceeding.
She did not apply for leave to issue a correct application out of time.

16.  Although neither counsel drew it to our attention, we have had to
consider the decision of the Court of Appeal in R v I.A.T. ex parte
Jeyeanthan [1999] INLR 241.  That case concerned the failure by the
Secretary of State  to include in his application for leave to appeal a
declaration of truth which was required by the provisions then in force,
namely Rule 13(3) of the Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 1993.  That
failure meant, as the Court decided, that the equivalent of Rule 3(1)
(which was in identical terms) could not validate the application.  But
that was not the end of the case.  Lord Woolf, M.R. said (at page 244F):


           "... the Tribunal before whom the defect is properly  raised  has
           the task of determining what  are  to  be  the  consequences  of
           failing to comply with the requirement in the context of all the
           facts and circumstances of the case in which the  issue  arises.
           In such a situation the Tribunal's task will be to  seek  to  do
           what is just in all the circumstances...."

We therefore must consider whether, notwithstanding the defect, the  appeal
should be allowed to proceed.



17.   The point is indeed technical, but the Home Office must know that the
rules should be obeyed.   We  have  to  take  into  account  not  only  the
defective application but also the failure  to  comply  with  the  standard
directions  in  not  putting  forward  the  appellant's  case    in   time.
Furthermore, we are, as we have said, very concerned by the actions of  the
appellant in seeing the respondent and having a conversation with him which
resulted in the apparent  withdrawal  of  the  appeal.   In  addition,  the
adjudicator has reached a conclusion on the facts which cannot be  said  to
have been unreasonable and so the effect of allowing the appeal to go ahead
would be added expense and delay to no good purpose.  Even if the appellant
persuaded the Tribunal that the appeal had been properly withdrawn, a fresh
application would be likely to succeed, albeit  at  added  expense  to  the
respondent.



18.   In all the circumstances, we have no doubt that we should not  permit
this appeal to proceed.  It would not be just to do so.  Accordingly, since
it  has  not  been  properly  brought,  this  appeal  is   dismissed.    In
consequence,  the  respondent  must  forthwith  be  issued  with  an  entry
clearance to enable him to come to the United Kingdom for a working holiday
in accordance with his application.  Although we appreciate that we  cannot
so direct, we would expect that he be refunded  whatever  he  has  paid  in
order to make his second application following the purported withdrawal  of
his appeal.



                                                    MR JUSTICE COLLINS
