
IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
LB (Sufficiency of Protection - Communism) Lithuania CG [2001] UKIAT 00005
                                                      Date heard: 19/03/2001
                                                   Date notified: 09/04/2001
                                   Before:
                            Mr D K Allen (Chair)
                                Mrs J Jordan
                               Dr A U Chaudhry
                               Liama BAGUZIENE
                                  Appellant
               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                 Respondents
                          Determination and Reasons
1. The Appellant is a citizen of Lithuania who has been granted leave to
appeal to the Tribunal against the determination of an Adjudicator, Mr P
Brenells, in which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's
decision of the 10th April 2000 refusing to grant her asylum.
2. The hearing before us took place on the 19th March 2001. Mr M Jones for
Purcell Brown & co., appeared on behalf of the Appellant, and Mr J W Harper
of the Home Office Presenting Officers' Unit appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.
3. Mr Jones reminded us that leave had been granted on the basis that Dr
Vesna Popovski, whose report had been relied on by the Appellant, was to be
called to justify that report orally in connection with the question of
whether persecution of members of the Communist Party occurs in Lithuania.
4. Dr Vesna Popovski, who gave her address as Flat 3, 66 Constantine Road,
London NW3 gave evidence. She had re-read her report which was in the
bundle at pages 38 to 39. She referred to the Pazyma which she had
described in her report, the untranslated copy of which was at page 18 of
the bundle. The word Pazyma meant health certificate. The suggestion that
the Appellant had been beaten up was contained in the certificate, rather
than being a surmise of Dr Popovski's.
5. As regards her status as an expert, she had a Doctorate on National
Minorities and Citizenship Rights in Lithuania, having studied for this
between 1988 and 1993 in the Department of Geography at the University of
Cambridge. At present she was a lecturer in the Politics of Ethnicity at
the University College London, in the School of Slavonic and Eastern
European Studies. She was from the former Yugoslavia, Croatia. As regards
Lithuania, she kept up to date reading the literature on Lithuania and was
in touch with scholars and every year a scholar from Lithuania came to her
School. She used the internet to keep in touch with colleagues and she had
colleagues in Lithuania. She had prepared around 15 reports on Lithuania
and had published a book entitled National Minorities and Citizenship
Rights in Lithuania. There were few other experts on Lithuania in the
United Kingdom.
6. The Communist Party in Lithuania was banned, having been banned after
the January 1991 events, in August of that year. Comsumol, the Youth
Communist Party had been banned at the same time.
7. The state made efforts to discourage membership as for example when
demonstrations were organised the police tried to deal with the people.
There had been an event in 1998 and she imagined there were later examples
also of the police trying to catch and arrest people. This was a Baltic
Times Report that she was referring to. They tried to catch them as they
were Pro-Communists who were demonstrating.
8. She was asked whether she knew whether this went beyond capture and
arrest. She said that knew the people were not taken to Court and were not
prosecuted, and issues could happen in prison and that was what people
talked about. There was no factual evidence and as she said in her report,
she relied on conversations and interviews with people. She gathered that
in certain cases people could be beaten up.
9. She was asked whether it followed that the more active one was in a
demonstration the more likely such consequences would be. She said that she
would think so, if people repeatedly demonstrated and the police would get
to know them.
10. It was not a crime to be a member of the Communist Party and they were
not prosecuted as members. She referred to the last paragraph of her report
where the former President of Lithuania Mr Landsbergis had pushed through a
declaration asking for the former high up Communists not to be given posts
or that they were to be screened in advance. She was asked whether she knew
what the official government reaction was to police action while people
were in detention. She said that the government would argue that such
actions should not occur and by this she meant beatings up. She was asked
whether they did anything about it in practice and she said it was very
hard to get evidence. She said the government said it was aware of the
police especially locally who were involved in activities contrary to
Lithuanian law. This was referred to in the Home Office and State
Department Reports. They were trying to prosecute these officers. She was
asked whether there was any official policy towards communist party members
and said not to her knowledge, just the declaration that she had mentioned.

11. She was asked whether given her history as an active party member the
Appellant could live elsewhere safely without being harmed. She said that
it would be rather difficult. It was a small country. Members of the
Communist Party especially if they were active would be known to the
police. It was necessary to bear in mind that the numbers were as few as
200 or so party members according to the last figure she had come across in
1998. It would not be difficult for the police to keep their names.
12. When cross-examined by Mr Harper, Dr Popovski agreed that the
Landsbergis declaration was meant to be connected to high up party members
and also people who would be eligible for higher posts in the present
Lithuania but as far as she knew the Appellant had not been a senior member
but had said she was rank and file. The declaration could be used against
her in every day life but as a matter of law it was quite right to say that
it would not apply to her.
13. She was asked why she said the Appellant could have problems on return
given that she was only a low level party member. She said that the issue
was that the police would know who the members were especially in local
areas and she could be discriminated against. The legislation should
protect her but the reality was every day life. It would be discrimination
and she could be arrested and detained for 24 hours.
14. She was referred to page 5 of the U.S. State Department Report to the
reference to the exercise of the freedom of peaceful assembly and she was
asked why if this was the case did she think the Appellant would be at risk
of arrest and ill-treatment. She said that it was the case that as in
reality for example in the 1998 demonstrations, people were captured and
despite the theory they were detained. There was no problem with the
legislation in Lithuania but rather how it was put sometimes into practice.
It was sometimes very difficult for Lithuanians to come to terms with
Lithuanian nationals supporting communist ideology as it had been perceived
as an occupied country.
15. She was referred to page 1 of the U.S. State Department Report and of
six people found guilty of complicity in the January 1991 coup attempt. She
said that this was top leaders. Lithuanian law said members should not be
prosecuted but in this case it was because of crimes against humanity.
After 1991 there were people who were party members who had problems and
again after August 1991 but it was different now. She agreed that to her
knowledge it was true as stated at page 2 of the report that there were no
reports of politically motivated disappearances. She herself had been to
Lithuania but not recently, but she had spent six months there in 1992 to
1993.
16. In his submissions Mr Jones referred to paragraph 4.11 of the Home
Office report. It was clear that the Communist Party was banned, with
activity on its behalf being illegal and this presupposed that there were
sanctions. Demonstrating attracted arrest and detention as the Court had
heard. He also took us to paragraph 4.28 of the Country Assessment and the
references there to misbehaviour by the police. There was no openness
concerning the situation at all and this was an exception to the normal co-
operation. There was an atmosphere of impunity as could be seen from the
second paragraph under C and page 2 of the State Department Report. It was
getting worse and the police were not being dealt with. Therefore although
membership of the Communist Party was not illegal the security forces
discouraged activity which was illegal and arrested and detained people and
this had been done to the Appellant on three occasions.
17. She had gone to the authorities who had dismissed her story. She had
also suffered threatening telephone calls up to the time when she left. If
she was credible she had been targeted because of her active party
membership and she was arrested and beaten. The Adjudicator's adverse
credibility findings were flawed. There was no real difference between
sexual assault and rape particularly since the evidence had showed that she
had suffered a miscarriage as a consequence of the sexual assault. In
addition the report of Dr Steadman went a lot further than the Adjudicator
had thought. The Adjudicator had failed to make findings on his conclusions
about the state of the Appellant. The Adjudicator had not considered
whether it would be unduly harsh to return her. The approach to credibility
was wrong. The gaps in the objective evidence before the Adjudicator had
been filled out before the Tribunal today. There was a clear Convention
reason and the appeal should be allowed.
18. In his submissions Mr Harper noted that the Adjudicator had not had the
benefit of the health certificate which had now been in effect translated.
He understood the Tribunal's concerns about whether or not the
Adjudicator's findings on the difference between sexual assault and rape
were valid, but the Tribunal should also look to paragraph 17, in the
background evidence showing that there were cases but the matter was not
systematic in Lithuania and the question was whether what had happened to
the Appellant was persecution. It was argued not. Dr Popovski's evidence
was helpful but there was no further documentary evidence to support what
she said and it did not go much beyond the written evidence. There was
nothing to show that an ordinary Communist Party member would come into
conflict with the government. The evidence today did not suggest that there
was a problem today but it was references to up to 1998. It was accepted
that the U.S. State Department indicated that police misbehaviour had
increased but it was not linked to matters concerning Communist Party
members. The determination should be upheld and the appeal dismissed.
19. By way of reply Mr Jones argued that paragraph 17 of the determination
was not a finding on persecution but was more relevant to credibility. It
was not just a question of membership of the Communist Party but it was
activity and the question of whether a person had a freedom to exercise
their political opinion and it was clear that they did not as she had been
arrested and mistreated. Activities on behalf of the Communist Party were
illegal. There was no reason to believe that things had changed since 1998
but quite the reverse bearing in mind the Appellant's evidence.
20. We stated that we would reserve our determination.
21. We have considered carefully the submissions of the representatives
together with the grounds of appeal, the objective evidence and the
Adjudicator's determination. In addition we have had the benefit of hearing
oral evidence from Dr Popovski which supplements her earlier written
report.
22. The Adjudicator helpfully set out in his determination what facts were
disputed and what facts were disputed. He therefore accepted that the
Appellant became a member of the Communist Youth Organisation in 1986 and
joined the Lithuanian Communist Party in 1998. She was an active member of
the Communist Party and provided details of her actual participation. The
Lithuanian Communist Party had been declared illegal by the Lithuanian
government in 1991. She received anonymous threatening telephone calls in
October 1999 which she did not report to the police. She was arrested,
detained briefly and interrogated on the 10th November and the 15th
December 1999 and again on the 4th January 2000. On the 7th January 2000
she complained to a senior police official about these arrests and her
complaint was treated with contempt. On 25th January 2000 she travelled to
the United Kingdom and was given permission to remain for six months and
five weeks thereafter she applied for asylum.
23. The Adjudicator does not appear to have accepted that the Appellant had
been raped as she claimed. On the forms dated the 16th March 2000 which she
submitted some two months after her arrival in the United Kingdom she said
that on the 4th January 2000 she was "beaten and sexually assaulted". She
stated that as a result of this ill-treatment she suffered a miscarriage
and lost her baby. Subsequently in a statement dated the 24th August 2000
she said that she had been raped. A document entitled Pazyma which Dr
Popovski told us is to be translated as "health certificate" was before the
Adjudicator, but unfortunately no translation of this had been provided. Dr
Popovski commented on it at the top of page 39 of the Appellant's bundle in
her report as follows. "The medical evidence provided in Lithuanian, Pazyma
-Health Certificate, points out that Ms Baguziene suffered miscarriage and
her body was covered in marks which suggest that she was beaten up." Before
us she was able to clarify that the suggestion that the Appellant had been
beaten up was not an inference drawn by Dr Popovski from the certificate
but was actually stated on that certificate. We accept Dr Popovski's
evidence on this point. It bears out the contention the Appellant made in
her SEF. We do not think that there is any significant distinction between
a claim to have been sexually assaulted which resulted in a miscarriage and
a rape. We do not consider that the Appellant's credibility is in any way
diminished by the fact that she did not specifically refer to having been
raped in the SEF form.
24. In addition the Adjudicator did not find the report provided by Dr
Steadman helpful since all he could say was that the Appellant's symptoms
would be consistent with what she had told him. Mr Jones argued that the
Adjudicator had failed to make findings on such matters as Dr Steadman's
statement at page 36 of the bundle that the Appellant appeared from her
symptomatology to indicate both the past and present syndrome of depression
and post traumatic stress disorder which would be consistent with the
history she gave. We agree that Dr Steadman's report does not ultimately
take matters much further, but it would have been appropriate for the
Adjudicator to make fuller findings on this.
25. The other issue which the Adjudicator resolved against the Appellant
was his conclusion that she had failed to show that there was no other area
in Lithuania where it would be safe for her to live since in answer to the
questions when this was put to her she said she did not know. It was
pointed out in the grounds of appeal at paragraph 3.2 that the Adjudicator
failed to apply the proper tests considering whether in any event it would
be unduly harsh to return her to Lithuania. We note also that he regarded
as damaging to her credibility her failure to seek asylum for some five
weeks after her arrival in the United Kingdom. This was not a matter that
was raised directly before us, but we note that in her statement at
paragraph 13 the Appellant said that she was very traumatised after her
arrival in the United Kingdom as a result of her experiences in Lithuania,
her son was ill and she had no understanding of the mechanics of the asylum
process. We consider that this reflects no more than in a very minor extent
upon her credibility.
26. Accordingly in essence we consider the Appellant has given a credible
account. We also found helpful the evidence of Dr Popovski before us which
provided further detail in connection with the written report she has
already provided. We have taken this into account, together with the
objective evidence, in particular the State Department Report and the Home
Office Country Assessment.
27. As we understood Dr Popovski's evidence, in essence she was saying that
from the point of view of the government, matters such as the events that
occurred to the Appellant should not happen and that they were trying to
prosecute officers for offences of this kind. This is confirmed by the
objective evidence elsewhere. For example it is stated at paragraph 4.28 of
the Country Assessment for October 2000 that police sometimes beat or
otherwise physically mistreat detainees. The local press have reported that
incidents of police brutality are becoming more common. In many instances,
the victims reportedly are reluctant to bring charges against police
officers for fear of reprisals. A total of 79 officers were dismissed for
illegal or fraudulent activities in the first six months of 1998 for a
variety of offences, compared with 182 for all of 1997. During the first
six months of 1999 four police officers were charged with abuse of power
and one officer was sentenced. The Ministry of the Interior stated that the
district police and inspectors are the most negligent in the force. To
strengthen the integrity of the police the Inspectorate General of the
Ministry of the Interior was given administrative autonomy in May 1997. It
is said at page 2 of the State Department Report that in 1999 the
Inspectorate General was re- organised into an office of the Inspector
General, and some functions of the inspectorate were delegated to the
Internal Investigations Division of the police department. The Inspector
General cannot investigate abuses on his own authority but can act only on
the order of the Minister. Mr Jones referred us to the fact that at 5.9 of
the Country Assessment it is said that a key exception to the normal co-
operation of government authorities local NGOs is the Ministry of Interior,
which has continually refused to release information on police brutality
and statistics on corruption based incidents. However the most recent State
Department Report notes at page 6 that a key exception in the past of this
co-operation was the Ministry of Interior which continually refused to
release information on police brutality and statistics on corruption
related incidents. It says however that the Ministry is more willing to
share such information however it has released few statistics or reports.
We note also the association of the defence of human rights in Lithuania,
an umbrella organisation for several small human rights groups all of which
operate without government restriction.
28. Given that we have accepted as credible the Appellant's evidence, it
follows that we must accept that what she says happened to her in Lithuania
did in fact occur. Dr Popovski's evidence was that it would be rather
difficult for her to live elsewhere given that Lithuania is a small country
and active members would be known to the police and there were only 200 or
so members and it would not be difficult for the police to keep their
names. On the only occasion which the Appellant did appeal to higher
authorities she was effectively brushed aside.
29. Although we were not addressed on this point specifically, it seems to
us that it is impossible to consider this case without referring to the
decision of the House of Lords in Horvath v Secretary of State for the Home
Department which is reported at [1999] INLR 7 (the IAT hearing) at [2000]
INLR 15 in the Court of Appeal, and [2000] 3WLR 379 in the House of Lords.
It is clear from this judgement that in considering the ability of the
state or its willingness to protect, it is a pre-requisite that the state
must have in place a general system of criminal law enforcement for its
citizens from which by its terms, the asylum applicant or the class to
which he belongs is not excluded. This requirement is met by considering
whether the duty to its citizens at large is met by the provisions made. It
is clear from our review of the objective evidence in this case that,
albeit underground activity by the Communist Party is considered illegal,
there is no suggestion that the Lithuanian legal system and in particular
its general system of law enforcement is not available for most communists
and non-communists. Dr Popovski made it clear that the authorities would
say that activities such as happened to the Appellant in this case should
not occur and that it is aware of the fact that local police were involved
in activities which are contrary to Lithuanian law and they are trying to
prosecute these officers. There is evidence before us which we have
described above of prosecutions taking place albeit that there are
difficulties and sometimes people are concerned about reprisals.
Nevertheless, even bearing in mind what happened to the Appellant in
Lithuania, we consider that the system in place is one which offers her
sufficiency of protection. Internal flight would not appear to be a
possibility, but we do consider that the machinery is there for her to take
action and to report and seek the prosecution of any police officer who
does not treat her in accordance with the provisions of the law in
Lithuania, and we consider that as a consequence she has not made out her
claim to be in need of international protection.
30. This appeal is accordingly dismissed.
� Crown Copyright

