
JA (Mungiki - not a religion) Kenya [2004] UKIAT 00266    | |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|IMMIGRATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL                                        |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Date of Hearing:     30 July  2004                                 |
|Date Signed:       200                                             |
|Date Determination Notified:    22 September 2004                  |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|                                                                   |
|Before:                                                            |
|                                                                   |
|Mr C P Mather (Vice President)                                     |
|Mr F T Jamieson                                                    |
|Mr A A Lloyd, JP                                                   |
|Between                                                            |
|SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT                         |
|Appellant                                                          |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|Respondent                                                         |
|                                                                   |
|For the Appellant:   |Mr R Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer  |
|For the Respondent:  |Mr I Ali, Counsel, instructed by             |
|                     |Welfare Rights Advice                        |
|                                                                   |
|DETERMINATION AND REASONS                                          |


1.    The respondent is a citizen of Kenya.

2.    The appellant  appeals,  with  permission,  the  determination  of  an
Adjudicator, Mr H Sangha  promulgated  on  15  September  2003.     In  that
determination the Adjudicator allowed,  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights
grounds, the respondent's appeal from the appellant's decision  made  on  23
November 2001 to issue directions of his  removal  to  Kenya  following  the
refusal of his asylum application.

3.    The respondent claimed that he was born and brought up in Kenya  as  a
Christian but later joined the Mungiki.  We were told by  Mr  Ali  that  the
respondent comes from a village called Naivasha where the nearest  big  town
is Thika.   This is north east of Nairobi.  We will examine  the  nature  of
the Mungiki later.  Having joined them, after a year  he  felt  that  he  no
longer wished to follow their way of life and wanted to leave.   He did  so,
but in August 1999, was detained by them because they did not  wish  to  him
disclose their secrets.  He  had  taken  an  oath  not  to  do  so.  He  was
blindfolded and taken to a hut in a forest where  he  was  interrogated  and
beaten with rubber whips.  He was put into a drum of cold  and  dirty  water
overnight in preparation for body  piercing  the  next  day.     During  the
night he managed to escape and run away. He reported  the  incident  to  the
police but says they  took  no  action.    Thereafter  he  went  to  another
village and, in October 1999,  was  again  detained  by  the  Mungiki.    He
claims that he was tortured.  The Adjudicator accepted that  was  the  case.
He also said he received a head injury and was unconscious for a day.     He
said he was detained  until  December  1999  when  he  was  released  having
promised to follow their cult.    He was told it was his last chance  to  do
what they wanted, otherwise they would kill him.     Following  his  release
he went to Nairobi where he stayed with a friend and arranged to  leave  the
country.    He remained there, in hiding, until  21  January  2000  when  he
left for the United Kingdom.

4.    He is now known to be HIV positive.   Since  arriving  in  the  United
Kingdom he has married a Sudanese woman who  now  has  indefinite  leave  to
remain. She only had exceptional leave at  the  time  of  the  Adjudicator's
hearing.  She has  three  children,  who  are  all  Kenyan  citizens.    The
respondent says that he met this woman in  June  2000  and  claims  to  have
married her in October 2002.     The  Adjudicator  accepted  that.  He  also
accepted that the respondent is unable to live with his wife because he  has
been assigned an address following the grant of  temporary  admission.   His
wife is living at a separate address, some 15 minutes away by  bus.   It  is
said that he visits her weekly but cannot go more often because he does  not
have enough money for the bus fare.  Both the respondent and  his  wife  are
dependent on social security, or NASS, benefits.    She visits him when  the
children are at school.  He  says  he  has  a  good  relationship  with  her
children.    She is also HIV positive.

5.    The Adjudicator made several findings which are now challenged by  the
appellant.   First, he found that the respondent had a well-founded fear  of
persecution at the hands of the Mungiki and that such persecution  would  be
for a Convention reason - religion.    The  grounds  challenge  the  finding
that the Mungiki are a religion.

6.    The second ground is that the Adjudicator erred in  finding  that  the
Kenyan government do not offer  a  sufficiency  of  protection  against  the
Mungiki.    The  second  ground  also  challenges  the  finding   that   the
respondent was arrested by the Mungiki on  two  occasions  and  detained  by
them for 3 months as perverse.    That second part of  the  ground  was  not
pursued during the hearing before us.

7.    The third ground challenges the Adjudicator's finding  that  it  would
be a breach of Article 3 ECHR to  return  the  respondent   It  asserts  the
Adjudicator quoted a doctor who a provided a report about  the  respondent's
HIV status and said in the report that it would be a breach of Article 3  to
return the  respondent.     The  Adjudicator  found  that  the  respondent's
medical condition would cause the United Kingdom to breach the  respondent's
rights under Article 2, 3 and 8 ECHR if it were to return him to Kenya.   It
is asserted the Adjudicator was persuaded by the doctor's express  assertion
that there would be a breach of Article 3.

8.    The basis of the respondent's fear of persecution was said to be  that
he will suffer at the hands of the Mungiki for having abandoned  them.    We
will consider first whether or not, if that were true, it  would  be  for  a
Convention reason.    The Adjudicator found that the  respondent  would  not
be persecuted because he was a member of a particular social group  (because
he was Kikuyu) but did accept that any persecution would be for  reasons  of
religion.

9.    The CIPU report (the copy we had was April 2003, but we  were  assured
by both representatives that the April 2004 information is the same),  deals
with Mungiki under the heading "Religious Groups".     It is the only  group
that is considered  there  specifically.    Paragraph  6.72  refers  to  the
Mungiki as

            "a small, controversial, cultural and political  movement  based
            in part on Kikuyu ethnic traditions,  which  espouses  political
            views  and  cultural  practices  that   are   controversial   in
            mainstream Kenyan society.   The number of  Mungiki  members  is
            unknown, but the group draws a significant  following  from  the
            unemployed and other marginalised segments of society".


Although it is described in that paragraph as a sect, there  is  nothing  in
the section about any belief system.  We are hard pressed to  know  why  the
CIPU has dealt with Mungiki under 'religion'  rather  than  the  section  on
internal security issues.  At paragraph 6.76 the CIPU report, says this.

      "On 5 February 2003, assailants believed to belong to the Mungiki sect
      hacked a policeman to death and then burnt  his  body.      They  then
      stopped a commuter bus, and robbed a  (sic)  crew  and  passengers  of
      money and mobile phones, and then set the vehicle ablaze.    They then
      moved to Dandora Phase 1 where they ordered the driver of a Bus  Track
      bus to stop.   They then ordered the passengers out and in the process
      robbed them".


10.   The US State Department report  on  International  Religious  Freedom
published in October 2001, refers to  the  Mungiki  only  under  a  heading
"Abuses of Religious Freedom".    In that section it says:


      "The  government  historically  has  been  unsympathetic   to   tribal
      religious  groups  that  have  engendered  protest  movements.     The
      government frequently harassed and periodically arrested and  detained
      members of the Mungiki, a small, controversial, cultural and political
      movement based in part of  Kikuyu  ethnic  traditions  which  espouses
      political views and  cultural  practices  that  are  controversial  in
      mainstream Kenyan society.   Whilst religion may have played a role in
      the formation of the group, observers believe that it  is  not  a  key
      characteristic of the group.    The  Mungiki  do  not  adhere  to  any
      single religion and members are free to choose their own religion; the
      group includes Muslims and Christians.  The number of Mungiki  members
      is unknown, but the group does have a significant following  from  the
      unemployed and other marginalised segments of society.     The  debate
      over the right of the Mungiki to practice  their  cultural  traditions
      and advance their political agenda is on-going".


11.   The US State Department report on Human Rights which was  before  the
Adjudicator, and published in  2003,  reporting  on  2002,  has  a  section
referring to the Mungiki at page 18 of 33.    Saying much the same  as  the
CIPU and Religious Freedom Reports it goes on to say:


      "However, many observers characterise the Mungiki as a vigilante group
      or gang because of the criminal activities of some of its  members  as
      well as their reported harassment and  intimidation  of  residents  in
      areas where the group is active".


12.   A little further on it says:


      "During the year certain elements of this group were supporting ruling
      party presidential aspirant Huru Kenyatta (although he has  repudiated
      them)  and  no  longer  were  viewed  to  be  targets  of   government
      harassment.   In addition, the Mungiki were involved in or  implicated
      in a number of violent attacks  against  political  at  ethnic  rivals
      during the year".


13.   The respondent in his witness statement, said  that  he  changed  his
religion to Mungiki in 1999 because he was convinced by the followers  that
after he joined the cult he would go to heaven.   He said:


      "They criticised the Christian religion and their beliefs  by  telling
      me Christianity is not real because it was brought by a white man  who
      introduced the bible and Christian religion in order to come into  the
      black man's land and steal our wealth.   He told me  that  during  the
      early days the Kikuyus did not  read  the  bible  and  there  were  no
      churches.    They worshipped their god  "Ngai"  under  a  tree  called
      Mgumo, slaughter goats as offerings under the tree when there  was  no
      rain and it could rain immediately. They  did  not  wear  the  western
      clothes.  So they were able to convince  me  to  join  their  religion
      after giving me a lot of reasons.


      When I accepted, they started disclosing their beliefs and secrets  to
      me.   First I had to take an oath if I left the sect I would be killed
      and I should not reveal the Mungiki secrets  to  a  non-member  unless
      he/she joins the cult.    I must never  communicate  with  Christians.
      As I wanted to join them I took the oath by eating uncooked meat mixed
      with blood.   I did not know the type of meat it was.   I had to smoke
      cannabis as a holy communion and I understood that our women followers
      are circumcised.   My ears were to be pierced and  some  parts  of  my
      body were to be tattooed.   Also, the  cult  believed  in  traditional
      medicine and would not allow any followers to go to  hospital  despite
      anyone had been really ill.


      During my time with the Mungikis  I  was  doctrined  to  disregard  my
      Christian beliefs and follow their traditions.   I was taught that  to
      wear Western clothes was wrong and I should have  both  ears  pierced.
      Some parts of my body were also tattooed.   After being  in  the  cult
      for at least 1 year, in the whole of 1999, I was reluctant to do  what
      I was supposed to do and I felt that I  should  return  or  rejoin  my
      church.   This was the start of my problems  because  they  wanted  to
      punish me for trying to leave them and the leader and followers wanted
      me killed.


      After I realised their evil things and evil beliefs were  too  much  I
      was reluctant to follow what they had told me and I decided to  rejoin
      my Christian ways".


14.   Given the apparent absence of any belief system, and bearing in  mind
the objective material that we have set out above,  we  are  not  satisfied
that the Mungiki are a religious group. The US State  Department  does  not
appear to consider it a religious group and despite  its  position  in  the
CIPU report, there is nothing there to establish  Mungiki  as  a  religion.
Rather they appear to be more properly described as a  vigilante  group  or
gang.    The Mungiki appear to admit those of various religions. It appears
negative about other religions rather than positively asserting any  belief
system of its own.    We are not satisfied that any adverse attention  from
the Mungiki could properly be described as being for a  Convention  reason.
It was not argued that being a person who has left the Mungiki would amount
to being part of a particular social group.


15.   The Adjudicator accepted what had happened  to  the  respondent  and,
although one ground of appeal appears to attack that  finding,  the  ground
was not pursued before us.   The respondent has been the subject of adverse
attention on two occasions since he left the group.   On the first occasion
he was detained overnight and managed to escape.     He  said  he  reported
that to the police.   The Adjudicator, wrongly, says in paragraph 50 of the
determination that the evidence showed that  the  respondent  reported  the
incidents to the police.    Neither representative sought to  suggest  that
the evidence was that he reported  both  incidents,  only  the  first.  The
Adjudicator accepted the respondent gave two names  to  the  police.  Also,
that he followed up his  complaint  by  attending  the  police  station  to
enquire as to progress but he was told only that they were looking into the
matter.  In his witness statement he simply said:


      "I reported this incident to the police but no action was taken".


He said much the same at his interview.   In his earlier  SEF  statement  he
does not mention reporting the matter to the police at all.

16.    It  is  always  difficult  to  know  whether  police  ineffectiveness
following  a complaint is because of inactivity on their  part  of  because
they have been unable to find  the  people  concerned  or  lack  supporting
evidence.    Kenya has a significant internal security system.    Paragraph
6.74 of the CIPU report refers to scores of people being arrested during  a
major crackdown on members of the  Mungiki  in  October  2002.   The  local
District Commissioner said that the  operation  would  continue  until  the
sect's followers had been arrested, as their activities were illegal.   The
US State Department Report, at page 18 of  33,  refers  to  the  government
frequently harassing and periodically arresting and  detaining  members  of
the Mungiki.  It was put to us that the fact the  respondent  had  reported
his first detention to the police, and given information, but no action had
been taken, demonstrated a lack of willingness to protect him.   We do  not
agree.   The burden of proof was on the respondent.   There is no  evidence
that the respondent followed up his complaint in any serious manner.     He
may have called back at the police station on one occasion but there is  no
evidence that he has taken the matter up with more senior officers,  either
locally, or at District  Commissioner  level.     His  evidence  was  that,
shortly after his first detention, he moved to a village some 1� to 2 hours
away by bus.  He has not been in a position to  follow  his  complaint  up.
To report a matter on one occasion and then say no action has  been  taken,
does not establish  a  lack  of  sufficiency  of  protection.      That  is
particularly so in the light of  the  evidence  that  the  authorities  are
clearly willing to deal with Mungiki.    That  they  do  so  vigorously  is
illustrated by the  objective  evidence.    The  Adjudicator  accepted  the
respondent's argument that the police were less likely to want to help  him
because he had been involved with the Mungiki.  That is one view.   On  the
other hand, if, as is apparent from the objective material, the police  are
interested in the Mungiki then to find a person who has been involved,  and
who may be able to give evidence and be a  useful  witness  could  arguably
have the opposite effect.   The Adjudicator erred in law as  there  was  no
sufficient evidence to enable him to properly conclude  that  there  is  an
insufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the   respondent   from   the
authorities in Kenya.

17.   In view of that finding we do not  need  to  go  on  to  consider  the
question of internal flight.  However, we will do as it was  argued  before
us.   Mr Ali said the respondent had fled to a village that  was,  perhaps,
30 miles away and he had been found again.  That, he asserted, was a  clear
indication that he could not safely relocate elsewhere in  Kenya.    Thirty
miles is not a large distance, even in the bush,  and  certainly  does  not
indicate that the whole of Kenya would be unsafe for the respondent.    The
Mungiki are mainly Kikuyu and the Kikuyu do not occupy the whole of  Kenya.
 The large towns are populated by a mix of people. There  was  no  evidence
before the Adjudicator that the Mungiki are  particularly  organised.   Nor
that they have intelligence systems or information  to  track  down  former
members away from their own area.   Nor is there evidence that they operate
in all the major town and cities.   The fact that they caught up  with  the
respondent in a relatively nearby village is not enough to  establish  that
he would not be safe throughout the whole of Kenya.   There is therefore no
satisfactory evidence that he could not relocate from  a  safety  point  of
view.

18.   The Adjudicator made a finding in paragraph 51  that  internal  flight
was not a possibility.   He said this:

      "In relation to internal flight I note that the Mungkiki are based all
      over Kenya.   The evidence shows there are over  3 million members  of
      the Mungiki sect.    The evidence also  shows  that  the  [respondent]
      tried to move away from his home area travelling some 1�  to  2  hours
      away but the Mungiki still managed to trace him.   In the light of the
      fact that the [respondent] had attempted to move away  from  his  home
      area but was traced I find that it would be unduly harsh to expect him
      to relocate in Kenya.


That was not the correct conclusion to draw.   If the Adjudicator  felt,  on
that evidence, that the respondent could not relocate it was not because  it
would be unduly harsh, it would be because he would not be  able  to  escape
the interest  of  the  Mungkiki  by  doing  so.     However,  there  is  not
sufficient evidence to establish that he would be unsafe  throughout  Kenya.
It is only if he could safely relocate that the question of undue  harshness
arises.   There is no evidence in support of the contention  that  it  would
be unduly harsh to  expect  the  respondent  to  relocate  elsewhere.    The
finding that he could not relocate is  unsound  and  was  not  open  to  the
Adjudicator on the evidence before him.

19.   When considering the question of internal relocation we were taken to
the case of Adhiambo [2002] UKIAT 03536.    In that appeal a female  asylum
seeker who expressed fear of the Mungiki was found not to have an  internal
relocation alternative that would not be unduly harsh.    That decision  is
not binding on us and is factually very different from this  appeal.   That
appellant was a lone female with a mixed race child.  Not  only  would  she
have encountered prejudice (because of her  child)  if  she  located  to  a
different area but it would make her easily identifiable to  the  Mungkiki.
None of those considerations apply in the respondent's case.

20.   Mr Ali conceded that, in so far as the  respondent's  HIV  status  is
concerned, he could not, on the evidence, satisfactorily defend the appeal.
   The respondent, does not have AIDS.   There is no evidence  of  lack  of
treatment in Kenya such as to bring the case  outside  N  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
1369.   He could not argue that the respondent's case engages Article 3  or
Article 8 in so far as that issue is concerned.


21.   He did argue that the appeal should be dismissed in relation  to  all
aspects of the rights protected by Article 8.   The Adjudicator declined to
allow the appellant's wife to give evidence.    This was because no witness
statement had been produced, in breach of the  directions  and  rules.   He
also declined to adjourn the case so that  a  witness  statement  could  be
produced.    In doing so he said that the  evidence  which  the  respondent
wished to adduce through his wife, could be given by  him.   That  evidence
was that he was married and his wife has exceptional leave to remain.   The
Adjudicator  accepted that the respondent is now married.   Mr  Ali  argued
that the Adjudicator was wrong to exclude that evidence.   We do not  agree
that he was wrong.  We asked whether  a  statement  had  subsequently  been
prepared and submitted to the Tribunal with a request that the new evidence
should be admitted or any application made for  the  respondent's  wife  be
allowed to give evidence before us.  Neither had been.  The respondent  was
on notice, because he was well aware that the Adjudicator had  declined  to
accept such evidence, that if he wished this evidence to be  considered  he
needed to produce a statement and comply with Rule 21  of  the  Immigration
and Asylum Appeals (Procedures) Rules 2003.    In reality he would probably
not have  succeeded  in  getting  the  evidence  admitted  because  of  the
principles in Ladd v Marshall (1954 1 WLR 1489) and E [2003] EWCA  CIV  49.
(see also MD (Sri Lanka) 2004 UKIAT 00161 which deals with fresh evidence.)
 We were not in a position to decide whether the evidence would have made a
material difference to the outcome of the appeal.


22.    Mr  Ali  argued  that  when  looking  at  whether  it  would  be   a
disproportionate breach of the respondent's Article 8 rights to return him,
we should look at matters cumulatively.   The  respondent's  wife  now  has
indefinite leave to remain.   It was argued that she could not therefore go
to Kenya.    That is wrong.  Indefinite leave to remain  entitles  somebody
to stay in the United Kingdom but does not require them  to  stay.   It  is
entirely matter for the respondent and his  wife  whether  she  decides  to
accompany him.     The other factors we were asked to  consider  were  that
they are both HIV positive; that the respondent has been here for 4� years,
that the relationship is over 4 years old and there are her children.


23.   We have had regard to the Tribunal's starred decision in M  (Croatia)
[2004] UKIAT 00024 and cannot find that there is anything truly exceptional
about this case.  When they married, both the respondent and his wife  were
aware of his precarious immigration status, and it is  clear  from  Mahmood
[2001] INLR 1 that parties to a marriage are not entitled to  choose  where
they live in such  circumstances.    The  length  of  the  relationship  is
immaterial because they could go to Kenya together.  There is no sufficient
evidence that the health aspects  are  such  as  to  entitle  them  to  the
protection of the Convention.    The  fact  that  they  both  have  similar
problems does not affect our view.


24.   Because the respondent's wife now has indefinite leave to remain, the
respondent can apply for entry clearance as her spouse.   It is well  known
that the possibility of an application for entry clearance being  rejected,
because it does not comply with the  rules,  is  not  an  argument  against
requiring a person to go abroad to make an application.  It is particularly
important, in the circumstances of this  case,  that  such  an  application
should be made because the parties are not living together. Enquiries  will
need to be made by an Entry Clearance Officer as to whether the marriage is
still subsisting and as to the other provisions of paragraph 281  of  HC395
can be complied with. It would not be  a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
respondent's Article 8 right to family life to require  him  to  return  to
Kenya  and  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from  there.   In
concluding that it would not be a disproportionate breach to return him  to
Kenya (other than to apply for entry clearance consideration) we took  into
account that there is no evidence that the respondent's wife would  not  be
allowed to enter Kenya.  We  also  noted  that  her  three  children  by  a
previous relationship have Kenyan citizenship.


25.   In summary, any fear of the Mungiki is not for a  Convention  reason.
The Adjudicator was wrong  in  law  to  find  that  it  was,  there  is  no
sufficient evidence to support that finding.


26.   Also, the Adjudicator was wrong in law  to  find  that  there  is  an
inadequacy of protection.     There is no satisfactory  objective  evidence
to support that finding.  The same applies  to  the  Adjudicator's  finding
that it would be unduly harsh to expect the respondent to relocate or  that
he  could  not  relocate  safely  anywhere  in  Kenya.   The   respondent's
representative did not seek to  argue  that  his  HIV  status  engages  the
Convention.   We have dealt in detail with Article 8.


27.    In  all  the  circumstances,  the  Adjudicator's  determination   is
unsustainable.  The respondent has failed to establish that he would be  at
real risk of persecution or mistreatment on the basis of a  breach  of  his
Article 3 rights if he were to return to Kenya.   He  has  also  failed  to
establish that it would be either a breach of his rights under  Article  8,
or that such a breach would be disproportionate, if he were to be  returned
to Kenya.


28.   The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.




                                                   C P Mather
                                                   Vice President


Approved for electronic distribution.

Kenya/Mungiki/not a relgion
