
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/00270/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 21 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    M H Y
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as a  contempt  of  court.  We  make  this  order
because the appellant claims to be a refugee and his identity should not  be
published before his claim is resolved lest the publicity creates a risk  to
his safety.

This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
State refusing him asylum and other forms of protection.

The fundamental problem in the Decision and Reasons is that  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge, although claiming to have considered all  of  the  evidence,
made no comment on two reports from  medical  practitioners,  one  outlining
physical injuries on the appellant which could be thought supportive of  his
case and the other outlining difficulties with his mental health  which  may
support a decision favourable to the appellant  and  may  illuminate  points
that have been taken against the appellant as adverse credibility findings.

This means that we are of the view that this evidence is  too  important  to
be  considered  in  the  blanket  way  indicated   and   required   specific
consideration.

Mr Mills for the Secretary of State wholly realistically  and  properly  has
accepted that is the position and the parties agree that this  Decision  and
Reason is deficient.

Further, given that the faults go to the root of the matter on  credibility,
it is only fair that there is a further hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal.
That is what the parties want and that is what we agree.

Notice of Decision

This decision is set aside for error of law and will be heard again  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2019                   |



