
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02118/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 11th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JANE UTUBOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Willford, Counsel, for Duncan Lewis and Co,
Solicitors, Harrow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  5th  April  1981.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 26th  March  2014
    which was that the Appellant should be removed from the United  Kingdom
    by way of directions following refusal of asylum.  Her appeal is  based
    on her rights under ECHR.  The Grounds of Appeal  do  not  contest  the
    decision to refuse asylum as such.  The appeal was heard  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Camp on 23rd  October  2014.   The  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds and on the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    entitlement to humanitarian protection in a  determination  promulgated
    on 10th November 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin  on  24th  November
    2014.  The grounds of application are that the judge  erred  in  making
    findings which were not based on an accurate  picture  of  the  medical
    situation facing the Appellant on return to Nigeria and in  respect  of
    Section 117B of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and the weight applied  to  the
    Appellant's private life including her ability to speak English and  be
    financially independent. The grounds go on  to  state  that  the  judge
    failed to apply the findings in  Akhalu  [2013]  UKUT  00400  (IAC)  in
    respect of the cost of healthcare in the  UK.   The  permission  states
    that it is arguable that the judge did not  take  into  account  and/or
    resolve  certain  conflicts  of  fact  and  opinion  relating  to   the
    Appellant's medical condition and that it is arguable  that  the  judge
    made a material misdirection of law, particularly in respect of Article
    8.

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge was wrong to allow  the
    appeal under Articles 3 and 8.

 5. He referred to the first ground of application and the  medical  report
    and submitted that the Respondent is challenging the judge's  reasoning
    relating to Article 3.  He submitted that there are issues relating  to
    the diagnosis of the Appellant's medical condition.  The medical report
    on more than one occasion states that the diagnosis of the  Appellant's
    medical condition is not entirely clear and neither is  the  prognosis.
    He submitted that what is clear  is  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant has a psychotic illness  in  spite  of  no  formal  diagnosis
    having been made.  He submitted that the judge did  not  properly  take
    into account the fact that there is no formal  diagnosis  and  did  not
    properly take into account the fact that the Appellant's  condition  is
    at present under control because of the medication she is  taking.   He
    submitted that it was put to the judge at the First-tier  hearing  that
    that particular medication is available in Nigeria.

 6. The Presenting  Officer  referred  to  paragraphs  32  and  35  of  the
    determination.  He submitted that the judge has not properly  addressed
    the facts before him when dealing with the Appellant's medical  issues.
    The judge has made no mention of "reasonable likelihood" but  has  made
    an assessment based on supposition.  He  submitted  that  although  the
    judge has referred to the cases of N [2008] ECHR 453 and D [1997]  ECHR
    25 he has not properly assessed their terms. He accepts that  there  is
    treatment for the Appellant's condition in Nigeria.  He goes on to find
    that on the basis of her medical condition the Appellant does not cross
    the very stringent threshold for an Article 3  claim  based  solely  on
    medical grounds but he states that most of  the  treatment  for  mental
    illness in Nigeria is provided by traditional  and  faith  healers  and
    this takes the Article 3 claim beyond a claim based on medical  grounds
    alone.  The judge has not taken into account the  fact  that  there  is
    official medical treatment available for the Appellant in  Nigeria  and
    the medication which she takes in the United Kingdom is  available  for
    her there.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  has  speculated  that  the
    Appellant would be reliant on healers in Nigeria and  that  her  mental
    health might lead to her being  subjected  to  persecution  because  of
    attitudes in Nigeria to sufferers  of  mental  health  conditions.   He
    submitted that there is no evidence that the Appellant would be  unable
    to get official treatment in Nigeria.  It is clear from  the  objective
    evidence that this is available.

 7. He submitted that the judge had no reason to suppose that her family in
    Nigeria would encourage the Appellant to use  traditional  medicine  or
    would allow the Appellant to be subjected to ridicule  because  of  her
    mental health.  He submitted that the judge's finding is based  on  one
    medical report and one faith healer and he  submitted  that  the  judge
    should have made a finding as to the likelihood of the Appellant  being
    able to get proper treatment for her  mental  health  and  whether  her
    family would help her with this and  would  help  her  to  access  this
    treatment.  He submitted that if the judge had properly considered this
    there was nothing before him  to  indicate  that  the  Appellant  would
    suffer ill-treatment to the threshold required by Article 3 if  she  is
    returned to Nigeria and he  submitted  that  the  judge's  decision  is
    unsustainable.  He also submitted that the Article 3 threshold in  this
    claim is very high as what the judge has  to  consider  is  what  would
    happen to the Appellant in her home country.

 8. The Presenting Officer then referred to the judge's approach to Section
    117B of the 2002 Act in connection  with  Article  8.   His  Article  8
    assessment starts at paragraph 36 of the determination.   He  submitted
    that at paragraph 47 the judge states

         "The question of weight given to the Appellant's private  life  has
         to be considered in the light of the statutory provision.   However
         it must remain a matter for the  Tribunal  to  determine  how  much
         weight constitutes 'little weight.'"

    He submitted that what the judge appears to be doing  is  ignoring  the
    statutory terms of Section 117B and is replacing it with his own ideas.
     He submitted that on this basis  his  decision  must  be  flawed.   He
    submitted that what the Tribunal has to do is look at all  the  factors
    in the round.  He submitted that Section 117 is clear.   That  part  of
    the Statute cannot be ignored.  He submitted that as there is an  error
    in the judge's Article 3 findings this error has resulted in  an  error
    in his Article 8 findings.  He  submitted  that  many  of  the  judge's
    Article 8 findings are based on the medical treatment  being  given  to
    the Appellant in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed in an Article 8 claim  because  she  is  getting  better
    treatment in the United Kingdom than she may get  in  Nigeria.   I  was
    again referred to the said case of Akhalu and  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the judge's Article 8 argument is fundamentally flawed.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the argument put forward  by  the
    judge relating to Article 3 and the Appellant's medical treatment  must
    fail and the fact that the Appellant might not be able  to  afford  the
    available medication in Nigeria is not sufficient for  the  Appellant's
    claim to succeed.  He submitted  that  the  medical  report  helps  the
    Appellant's claim very little.

10. The Appellant's representative made his submissions referring me to his
    written submissions.

11. With regard to Article 3 and the grounds, the representative  submitted
    that the judge did not apply an incorrect  test.   The  grounds  assert
    that the judge erred  because  there  was  no  firm  diagnosis  of  the
    Appellant's condition but the doctor found that  the  Appellant  has  a
    psychotic illness.  He submitted that the grounds state that the  judge
    based his decision on the Appellant having been admitted to hospital in
    2010 but that is not the case.  The judge  made  his  decision  on  the
    basis of a psychiatric report which states clearly that  the  Appellant
    has a psychotic illness.  This is a  formal  diagnosis.   He  submitted
    that what the doctor states in the report is that there  is  no  formal
    diagnosis in his possession but that does not  stop  him  from  finding
    that the Appellant has a primary psychotic illness.  The representative
    submitted that the Appellant  has  medication  for  that  illness.   He
    submitted that the judge accepts that this not a case which can succeed
    based purely on this illness under Article 3.  The judge  accepts  that
    this would not meet the required threshold  but  the  judge  makes  his
    Article 3 finding on the basis  of  the  treatment  which  people  with
    mental illnesses in Nigeria are subjected to.  He submitted that  based
    on what was before the judge he was entitled to come to his decision.

12. I was referred to paragraph 32 of the determination in which the  judge
    refers to an extract from a journal dated in 2013  and  a  report  from
    World Psychiatry dated in 2003.  He submitted that the judge took these
    into account and the judge's finding on Article 3 is not on  the  basis
    of a lack of healthcare in Nigeria  but  because  the  judge  finds  it
    likely that the Appellant will be subjected to the  quackery  which  he
    details in said paragraph 32.  He submitted that at paragraph 34 of the
    determination the judge finds that the Appellant would be at real  risk
    of such treatment in Nigeria and he again submitted that the  judge  is
    not using an incorrect test.  He submitted that as  the  Appellant  was
    found to suffer from a primary psychotic illness at  the  date  of  the
    hearing the judge was entitled to come to the decision he did.

13. With regard to the ground relating to Section 117B of Part  5A  of  the
    2002 Act, the representative submitted that the judge  refers  to  this
    and finds that the terms of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  do  not
    encompass the circumstances the Appellant finds herself in, so  Article
    8 outside the Rules has to be considered.  He  submitted  that  Section
    117 deals with "the public interest question" relating to private  life
    and Article 8.  He submitted that  all  the  considerations  listed  in
    Section 117B have to be applied and he pointed out that  the  Appellant
    speaks English well and this must be a positive factor and because  the
    judge does not refer in particular to Section 117B(2) this omission  is
    not a material error of law.

14. With regard to paragraph 117B(3) the judge finds that in light  of  the
    Appellant's mental illness, her moral and physical  integrity  must  be
    considered and this outweighs public interest.  He  submitted  that  it
    was open for the judge to make this finding.  With  regard  to  Section
    117B(4) and (5) it is clear that the judge had these in  mind  when  he
    wrote paragraph 46 of the determination.  The representative  submitted
    that the judge has  a  statutory  obligation  to  give  weight  to  the
    Appellant's private life and he gives this weight  and  finds  that  it
    would be disproportionate to remove her from the United Kingdom because
    of the circumstances of her private life.

15. The representative then went on to compare Section 117B(4) and  (5)  to
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 which gives statutory guidance  to  judges  and  to  the  Home
    Office when credibility is assessed.  I was referred to paragraph 21 of
    the written submissions and he submitted that  it  is  clear  that  the
    judge has to have regard to Section 117A but this does not mean  judges
    have to make certain findings.  He submitted that  the  judge  in  this
    case was free  to  reach  his  own  conclusions  about  the  case.   He
    submitted that  the  judge  assessed  what  weight  to  attach  to  the
    Appellant's situation in the round and I was referred to  paragraph  47
    of the determination about how much weight constitutes "little  weight"
    and the judge being able to  make  his  own  assessment  of  this.   He
    submitted that that is the correct approach.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge has considered the period during which  the  Appellant's  private
    life has been built up and has found that although she  has  been  here
    unlawfully for part of the time, this was because of her  mental  state
    not just because she decided to remain illegally.   He  submitted  that
    the judge has applied the appropriate weight to Sections 117A and B.

16. With regard to the third ground, that  the  judge  misdirected  himself
    when considering the impact of the cost of healthcare under the NHS for
    the Appellant if she continues  to  stay  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he
    submitted that the judge has dealt with this properly and I  was  again
    referred  to  the  said  case  of  Akhalu.   Based  on  that  case  the
    representative submitted that when the balancing  exercise  is  carried
    out, it is necessary to consider the Appellant's medical situation.   I
    was referred to paragraph 45 of Akhalu which states that the judge  has
    to consider every aspect of the Appellant's private life as well as the
    consequences  of  her  health,  if  removed  but  when   dealing   with
    proportionality  the  judge  has  to  compare  the  levels  of  medical
    treatment available, although that will not have any real impact on the
    outcome of the exercise.  This case states that it will be rare  for  a
    case to succeed where this is an important aspect  of  the  Appellant's
    claim.  The consequences of removal for the health of  a  Claimant  who
    would not be able to access equivalent healthcare in their  country  of
    nationality, as was available in  this  country,  is  relevant  to  the
    question  of  proportionality  but  when  weighed  against  the  public
    interest in ensuring that  the  limited  resources  of  this  country's
    health service are used to the best effect for the benefit of those for
    whom they are intended, those consequences do not weigh heavily in  the
    Claimant's favour but speak cogently in support of the public  interest
    in removal.  The representative submitted that the judge has found that
    the Appellant's psychotic illness is a factor which  has  to  be  taken
    into account in the  proportionality  assessment  and  because  of  her
    illness he is satisfied that her unlawful status in the United  Kingdom
    was not wholly deliberate.  The judge finds that  her  unlawful  status
    was not established voluntarily but as a result of the worsening of her
    mental state.  Based on this he has made his decision relating  to  the
    cost of NHS treatment.

17. The representative referred me to paragraph 45 of the determination and
    the case law quoted therein, in  particular  the  case  of  AE  Algeria
    [2014] EWCA Civ 653 in which it is stated

         "I do not consider that it would be inappropriate  for  the  future
         cost and duration of the Appellant's daughter's treatment and  care
         in this country to play a part  in  the  balancing  exercise  as  a
         matter relating to the economic wellbeing of  this  country,  given
         the strains on the public finances."

    The representative submitted that  public  interest  is  a  significant
    factor.  The judge  has  taken  this  into  account  in  the  balancing
    exercise but has still found for clear reasons, that on  balance,  even
    when taking into account the economic cost of  further  treatment,  the
    Appellant's situation is that removal  constitutes  a  disproportionate
    breach  of  her  private  life.   The  representative  referred  me  to
    paragraphs 46 and 47, both  of  which  refer  to  public  interest  and
    Section 117B.  He submitted that  the  judge  found  that  one  of  the
    reasons the Appellant stayed  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  was
    because she was mentally ill.

18. The Presenting Officer then submitted that he does not accept that  the
    reading of  Section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act can  be  considered
    in the  same  way  as  Section  8  of  the  2004  Act  which  is  about
    credibility.  He submitted that the judge  has  to  make  his  decision
    relating to Section 8 on the evidence available to him whereas  Section
    117 relates to public  interest  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position is highly significant.

19. The Presenting Officer referred to the judge's reasoning about  Article
    8 and the case of Akhalu.  He submitted that the only reason the  judge
    has given for allowing the claim is the Appellant's medical  treatment.
    He submitted that the case law makes it clear that public interest  has
    to be considered and only very few rare cases based  on  private  life,
    can succeed when the only matter  in  the  Appellant's  favour  is  her
    medical condition, when this is weighed against  public  interest.   He
    submitted that there is nothing exceptional in this Appellant's medical
    condition which would result in the Appellant's private life succeeding
    over  public  interest.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's  Article  8
    assessment based on the Appellant's health and  her  medical  treatment
    cannot outweigh public interest.  The judge has not identified anything
    to set this case aside as one of the few rare cases referred to in  the
    country guidance case law.

20. The Appellant's representative submitted that Section 8 of the 2004 Act
    and paragraph 5A of the 2002 Act both deal with criteria which have  to
    be taken into account when public interest  is  assessed  and  decision
    makers have to take both into account.  He submitted that that is where
    the similarity  lies.   He  also  submitted  that  when  this  case  is
    considered alongside Akhalu the judge  I   this  case  has  taken  into
    account the  ill-treatment  that  mental  health  sufferers  endure  in
    Nigeria and the judge has looked at the Appellant's personal  integrity
    and found this to be a rare case in his proportionality assessment.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge appears to  have  taken
    into account that the Appellant will suffer ill-treatment on return  to
    Nigeria because of her mental health but the judge has made an error in
    his Article 3 findings and this has coloured his findings  relating  to
    Article 8.  He submitted that there is a clear  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's determination.

Determination

22. With regard to the first ground of application and the Article 3 aspect
    of the claim, I have carefully considered the judge's findings relating
    to the Appellant's medical situation on return to Nigeria.   The  judge
    has considered the said cases of N and D and has accepted  that  it  is
    only in very exceptional cases that an Appellant's  claim  can  succeed
    under Article 3 if there is medical treatment for her condition in  the
    country she comes from, even if it  is  not  as  good  as  the  medical
    treatment she will receive in the United Kingdom.   The  judge  accepts
    that there could be  very  exceptional  cases  where  the  humanitarian
    considerations are compelling and he  then  finds  that  the  Appellant
    would  have  difficultly  receiving  treatment  for  her  condition  in
    Nigeria.  The judge accepts that the Appellant does not cross the  very
    stringent threshold for an Article 3 claim  based  on  medical  grounds
    only.  The judge does not appear to have taken into  account  the  fact
    that the medication which the Appellant  is  receiving  in  the  United
    Kingdom and which is keeping  her  illness  at  bay,  is  available  in
    Nigeria.  The Appellant has family in Nigeria who will support her.  It
    is not clear  why  the  judge  finds  that  the  Appellant  would  have
    considerable difficulty in receiving treatment  for  her  condition  in
    Nigeria.  In any case that is not what has to be considered.   What  is
    relevant is that her medication is available  in  Nigeria  so  she  can
    return and this medication can keep her illness at bay.

23. The judge goes on to deal  with  the  attitude  to  mental  illness  in
    Nigeria.  He quotes two pieces of objective evidence.  The first one is
    dated in 2013 and relates to one specific case and the  second  one  is
    dated in 2003 and is out of date.  The judge gives no particular reason
    for finding that this Appellant will be treated for her mental  illness
    in Nigeria by traditional medicine and faith  healers.   The  objective
    evidence before him shows that this type of treatment is  available  in
    Nigeria but so is official medical treatment.  There must be  an  error
    in his decision when he finds that the Article  3  claim  goes  further
    than a claim based on  medical  grounds  alone.   There  is  no  proper
    reasoning for this finding.  Based on the country guidance case law and
    the objective evidence there would be no breach under Article 3 of ECHR
    if the appellant is removed from  the  UK.   The  fact  that  there  is
    traditional medicine in Nigeria does not mean  the  appellant  will  be
    treated with it.  This finding is based on conjecture for  which  there
    is no basis.  The appellant is doing well on her medication in  the  UK
    so why would she not continue to take that medication in Nigeria?  This
    appellant's claim is based on her medical condition and cannot  succeed
    on         this         basis         under         Article          3.



24. With regard  to  Article  8  the  relevant  cases  are  quoted  in  the
    determination and the judge  accepts  that  the  criteria  set  out  in
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  cannot  be
    satisfied.  The judge however finds that there is a good arguable  case
    to consider this claim under Article 8 of ECHR outside the Rules.   She
    explains this at paragraph 38.  Her  Article  8  findings  are  however
    coloured by her findings under Article 3.

25. The judge accepts that the Appellant has established a private life  in
    the United Kingdom.  She refers to the case of Patel and Others  [2013]
    UKSC 72 which states that Article 8 has limited utility in private life
    cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's moral
    and physical integrity.  The judge has taken into account Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act which states that little weight should be  given  to  a
    private life that is established by a person at a time when the  person
    is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  This applies to  this  Appellant.
    Her private life  was  established  when  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious. She has never had any status in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    judge goes on to consider the definition of "little weight."  What  the
    judge does not appear to have understood is that Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act is a statutory provision.  The judge cannot bend this to  suit
    his needs.  The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2005  illegally
    and her claim to have been trafficked and her asylum  claim  have  both
    been rejected.  The Appellant claimed asylum in  2014.   She  had  been
    hospitalised in 2010 because of her mental health.  For  the  judge  to
    say that her unlawful status in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not  wholly
    deliberate is untenable.  She deliberately came to the  United  Kingdom
    and stayed here with no status for  at  least  five  years  before  her
    illness took over.  This is not an Appellant who  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom with status and then because of her health had to  stay.   This
    is an Appellant whose private life in the  United  Kingdom  has  always
    been unlawful and whose status has always been precarious.   The  judge
    states that her conduct has been largely determined by external factors
    but it is clear from her  history  that  her  conduct  when  she  first
    arrived here was determined by her.

26. What the judge should have looked at is the  Appellant's  situation  at
    the date of the First-tier hearing.  The judge has not explained how he
    finds the possible cost to the NHS  of  dealing  with  the  Appellant's
    illness is outweighed by the  Appellant's  right  to  respect  for  her
    private life and the need to protect her moral and physical  integrity.
    The Appellant's representative submitted that it would not  be  correct
    to say that the Appellant does not have a firm diagnosis of her  mental
    illness by a consultant psychiatrist as it has been found that she  has
    a psychotic illness but the medical report makes it clear that there is
    no firm diagnosis of her mental illness and it is clear  that  she  can
    receive the same medication as she is receiving in the United  Kingdom.
    This  is  keeping  her  health  problems  at  bay.    The   judge   has
    misinterpreted the medical report and the considerable weight which has
    to be given to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  He has gone against  the  statutory  requirement  to  attach
    "little weight" to the Appellant's private life in  her  circumstances.
    The judge has failed to apply the case of Akhalu and has not recognised
    that the countervailing public interest in  removal  of  the  appellant
    must outweigh the consequences for the health of the Claimant  as  this
    Appellant can access healthcare facilities which will  be  satisfactory
    for her condition in Nigeria.  The judge has failed to consider  public
    interest correctly when assessing proportionality (Section  117A(2)  of
    the 2002 Act).  The judge has not taken into  account  the  Appellant's
    ability to speak English and has not considered financial  independence
    when dealing with the balancing exercise so the judge's decision may be
    flawed in this respect but his finding on Article 3, in which there  is
    a material error of law, has coloured his findings relating to  Article
    8 causing material errors of law in his Article 8 findings.

27. There are material errors of law in the judge's determination.

Pr�cis of the Appeal and decision.

This is an Appellant who has been in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since
2005.  Her asylum claim has failed.  She  has  a  mental  illness  which  is
controlled by medication which medication is available in Nigeria where  she
comes from.  For the same reasons as her asylum claim fails her claim  under
Articles 2 and 3 of ECHR and  on  the  humanitarian  protection  issue  must
fail.  She has not been trafficked and Article 3 is  not  engaged  based  on
the evidence before the First-tier Judge.  There is much speculation in  the
judge's reasoning relating to Article 3 and he has made a material error  of
law relating to this.  The Article 3 threshold has not been  reached  within
the claim.  His assessment is flawed. Her claim under the Immigration  Rules
does not succeed under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
Rules.  When public interest is taken into account her  private  life  claim
(she has no family life claim) cannot succeed as  her  time  in  the  United
Kingdom has been with no status and when the statutory provisions are  taken
into account it must be  in  the  public  interest  for  her  to  return  to
Nigeria.  The First-tier Judge's findings under Article 3  which  contain  a
material error of law have coloured  his  findings  under  Article  8.   Her
claim cannot succeed under Articles 3 or 8.

As there are material errors of law  in  the  judge's  determination  I  set
aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

I dismiss the Appellant's asylum appeal,  her  appeal  on  the  humanitarian
protection issue, her claim under the Immigration Rules and her claim  under
ECHR.

No anonymity direction has been made






Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


