
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/04808/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 November 2018                     | On 27 November 2018                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                   Mr P N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background history

This is a matter with a lengthy history.  The appellant is a Sri Lankan
national who was refused asylum as far back as 2011.  It is unnecessary to
rehearse the procedural history that led to the Court of Appeal order dated
9 June 2016.  In that order the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and
remitted the case to the Upper Tribunal.  There was then a period of
unfortunate delay before the matter was first listed before the Upper
Tribunal on 3 January 2018.  At that hearing the appellant had recently
changed solicitors and was represented by Counsel.  New evidence updating
both his protection and Article 8 claims was submitted on the morning of
the hearing.

The Secretary of State accepted that this evidence was significant and that
in the light of the length of time since he had substantively considered
the appellant's claims, it was appropriate to give further consideration to
the new evidence and changed circumstances.   The appeal was therefore
adjourned by consent with directions given to both parties.

The matter next came before the Upper Tribunal on 18 April 2018.  At that
hearing the Secretary of State gave his consent for new matters in the
appellant's supplementary bundle to be considered.  Ms Everett, the
Secretary of State's representative, apologised for the failure to comply
with directions.  However, Ms Everett made it clear at the hearing that the
Secretary of State now accepted that the appellant and his family members
should be granted discretionary leave on the basis of Article 8 of the
ECHR.  Ms Everett indicated that the asylum claim was not conceded, and she
wished to cross-examine the appellant.  A Tamil interpreter was not
available at the hearing and it was therefore again adjourned by consent.

The Upper Tribunal gave directions that included the following: within 14
days the Secretary of State to file and serve a document concerning that
which Ms Everett outlined had been conceded, as well as providing a
position statement or supplementary decision letter that responded to the
appellant's further evidence.  Pausing there, that position statement /
supplementary decision letter was necessary because matters had moved on
considerably since the last decision refusing asylum back in 2011.  Both
parties agreed that it was appropriate for the Secretary of State to
clarify which aspects of the protection claim were in dispute.

The matter was listed before the Upper Tribunal on a third occasion on 15
May 2018.  The Secretary of State did not comply with directions, and in
particular, failed to comply with the direction to file and serve a
position statement / supplementary decision letter within 14 days of 18
April. At the beginning of the hearing Ms Everett confirmed that the
Secretary of State had reconsidered the appellant's asylum claim in the
light of the further evidence provided and intended to grant him asylum,
subject to the necessary checks. There was no clear explanation for the
failure to comply with directions, and no clear explanation of why the
relevant communication could not have been made by the Secretary of State
in advance of the hearing in order to avoid the expense of a further
hearing.  Unfortunately, this was the second time that the Secretary of
State ignored the directions of the Upper Tribunal.  The matter was
adjourned again.  It could not be disposed of at the hearing, as the
Secretary of State had not formally provided the appellant with leave of
any description.  The appeal remained pending.  Both parties agreed that
the relevant provision which gives rise to the statutory abandonment of an
appeal only follows the grant of leave to enter or remain and if all that
is given is an indication, that does not mean that there is an abandonment
- see section 104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
as amended.  Further directions were given requiring the Secretary of State
to file and serve a short position statement attaching a further decision
regarding the appellant's asylum claim, within 28 days.  The Secretary of
State failed to comply with these directions.

The matter was then relisted once again before the Upper Tribunal on 9
October 2018.  At the hearing, Ms Everett confirmed that the Secretary of
State as far back as May 2018 was clear that the appellant should be
granted asylum and his family members leave in line, subject to the
necessary checks, but that the Secretary of State had "only recently
concluded the appeal" such that the files had only been recently
transferred to the Asylum and Documentation Unit in Liverpool to grant
leave.  Given the chronology outlined above, it is very difficult to
understand why the file had not been transferred to enable a grant of leave
well before this.  At that hearing Ms Hassan, who represented the
appellant, outlined that the Secretary of State had failed to comply with
the Tribunal's directions on three occasions and in addition unreasonably
delayed progression of the case from May 2018 onwards without any clear or
reasonable explanation.  Ms Hassan explained the adverse impact (both
financially and emotionally) the delay had on the appellant and his family
members including the children.

Ms Everett made it clear that she would do her best to ensure that there
was confirmation of leave in writing within seven working days and the
hearing was once again adjourned.  Ms Hassan put the Secretary of State on
notice that the appellant wished to make an application for costs.  To
afford the Secretary of State an opportunity to address the appellant's
claim that his conduct of the proceedings was unreasonable, the Upper
Tribunal gave directions for the appellant's solicitors to file costs
submissions before 26 October 2018 and requiring the Secretary of State to
respond to those by 9 November 2018.

The appellant complied with those directions and provided a position
statement dated 26 October 2018.  That confirmed that the appellant had
indeed received confirmation in writing that he was being granted leave as
a refugee.  That was provided on 15 October 2018.  The appellant also
outlined why he should be awarded the costs he had incurred unnecessarily
since January 2018.  Regrettably, the Secretary of State again failed to
comply with the directions, and did not provide a response to the costs
submissions.

    Hearing

At the hearing before us, Mr Clarke represented the Secretary of State.  He
had only been provided with the file recently and was unable to provide any
explanation for the failure to comply with directions on four occasions
since January or to assist with why there had been such delay in providing
the appellant with leave.  We indicated that we were in a position to
determine the appellant's costs application in light of the material
available to us, together with the appellant's costs submissions.  The
Respondent had been provided with every opportunity to respond to these but
failed to do so.  There has therefore been no clear explanation for the
delay.

    Legal framework

Rule 10(3)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 states
that the Upper Tribunal may not make an order in respect of costs or
expenses except in certain set situations.  This includes if the Upper
Tribunal considers that a party or its representative has acted
unreasonably in bringing, defending or conducting the proceedings.

The Upper Tribunal has recently reviewed its costs jurisdiction in
statutory appeals in Thapa (costs: general principles; s 9 review) [2018]
UKUT 54 (IAC).  This emphasises that the power to award costs pursuant to
rule 10 is to be exercised with significant restraint.  We have also taken
into account the Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2018.

    Discussion on costs

When the chronology outlined above is carefully considered it is abundantly
clear that from at least 14 May 2018, the Secretary of State was firm in
his position that the appellant was entitled in principle to refugee
status, subject to checks.  From that date, the Secretary of State has
acted unreasonably in delaying the grant of that leave by failing without
explanation to "conclude" the appeal.  There has been no reasonable
explanation for the delay between 14 May 2018 and 15 October 2018, a period
of some five months.  The appellant incurred unnecessary expenses in having
to attend a hearing in May and then a further hearing in October.

When all the matters are considered in the round, the Secretary of State
has acted unreasonably in the manner in which proceedings were conducted
from 14 May 2018.   From the time that Ms Everett was able to confirm
unequivocally that leave would be granted (subject to checks) there has
been a period of delay which remains unexplained.  The Secretary of State
has been given an opportunity to provide an explanation but there has been
a complete failure to comply with directions on his part.  That must be
viewed against the history of repeated non-compliance with directions on
the part of the Secretary of State from as far back as January 2018.

We do not accept that it can be said that the Secretary of State acted so
unreasonably for the period between 3 January and 14 May 2018, that an
order of costs should be made against him for this period.  We acknowledge
that there has been a patent failure to comply with directions on the part
of the Secretary of State.  However, he was only provided with the new
materials in support of a complex asylum claim on 8 January 2018.  He was
entitled to take time to consider this material and did not act
unreasonably in changing his mind between the April hearing (when Ms
Everett indicated she wished to cross-examine the appellant about his
asylum claim) and the May hearing (when the asylum claim was effectively
conceded).  However, had the Secretary of State acted reasonably and
complied with directions, the May and October hearings and the
unnecessarily incurred expenses associated with them, could have been
avoided.

We have therefore come to the conclusion that in conducting the proceedings
from 14 May 2018 and onwards to 15 October 2018, the Secretary of State has
acted unreasonably.  In reaching this conclusion we have taken into account
the caution of restraint before making an award of costs in Thapa (supra)
and Cancino (costs - FTT - new powers) [2015] UKFTT 59 (IAC).

    Schedule of costs

We have been provided with a schedule of costs which sets out a total of
�3700 in fees incurred from 3 January 2018.  This does not indicate with
the necessary degree of precision the costs that have been incurred from 14
May 2018.  It seems likely that the costs from this date are likely to be
in the region of �1800.  That figure appears to us to be reasonable, but
the accurate figure must be particularised.  We have no doubt that the
parties can properly address that between themselves easily and quickly and
we do not propose to say anything more about that.

    Final matters

The only matter that remains is to formally record that this is an appeal
that has now been abandoned by statute, as the appellant was granted leave
as a refugee on 15 October 2018.

    Decision

The Secretary of State shall pay the appellant's legal costs incurred
between 14 May 2018 and 26 October 2018, including the preparation of the
costs submissions dated 26 October 2018.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     21 November 2018
