

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24 June 2015                             |On : 30 June 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    X M M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Cameroon born on 3 September  1977.  He  came
to the United Kingdom in 2004 and claimed  asylum  in  September  2012.  His
claim was refused on 17 June 2014 and a decision was made on  20  June  2014
to remove him from the United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before the First-tier Tribunal on 7 August 2014 and was dismissed on  asylum
and human rights grounds in  a  determination  issued  on  18  August  2014.
Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 15 December 2014.

It is not necessary to set out the details of the appellant's asylum  claim,
since there has been no challenge to the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the
appeal on asylum and Article 3 human rights grounds. The grounds  of  appeal
challenge only the decision on Article 8.

In his determination,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  noted  that  the
respondent had accepted that the appellant was the  father  of  two  British
children, aged five and three years, who lived with  their  mother,  also  a
British citizen, with whom he was no longer in a relationship. It  was  also
accepted by the respondent that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
relationship with his children and that he had regular  contact  with  them.
The judge accepted that it was not reasonable  to  expect  either  child  to
leave the United Kingdom and that it remained in  their  best  interests  to
have contact with their father. It was conceded before the judge  on  behalf
of the appellant that he could not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
Rules relating to family and private life and  the  appeal  was  pursued  on
Article 8 grounds outside  the  rules.  The  judge  found  there  to  be  no
arguably good case for granting leave outside the rules and  on  that  basis
he found that  he  did  not  need  to  consider  whether  removal  would  be
unjustifiably harsh. He  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal  on  Article  8
grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought and granted on the basis that the judge  had
arguably failed to allow the appeal by virtue  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  given  his  findings  in
relation to the appellant's children.

At the hearing before me, Mr Mills helpfully conceded that  the  appeal  had
to be allowed on Article 8 grounds on the basis that,  pursuant  to  section
117B(6), it was not in the public interest to remove the appellant from  the
United Kingdom.

I accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  re-made
the decision by allowing the  appellant's  appeal.  In  view  of  Mr  Mills'
concession I see no need to set out detailed reasons.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).






                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
