
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
AA/09974/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 March 2016                    |    On 16 May 2016                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B. Jones, Counsel, instructed by the Tamil
Welfare     Association
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 26 April 1985. His
case came before me for an error of law hearing on 10 December 2015 and in
a decision dated 7 January 2016, I found an error of law and adjourned the
appeal to be heard before me at a resumed hearing, which took place on 14
March 2016. The decision of 7 January 2016 is appended.



Hearing

2. The Appellant was called to give evidence. An original letter and
envelope with Sri Lankan stamps was handed up. He was briefly cross-
examined by Mr Clarke, when he confirmed that when unknown people came to
his mother's house they did not show any form of identity and that his
family did not report this to the police but informed the Gramasekava. The
Appellant confirmed that he did not know if there is an outstanding warrant
for him in Sri Lanka but he was asked to sign on and did not and came to
the United Kingdom. He was not re-examined.

3. In his submissions, Mr Clarke for the Home Office sought to rely upon
the refusal letter. He acknowledged that there are a number of preserved
findings regarding the Appellant's brother and sister being LTTE members;
that the Appellant was involved when he was 11 years old; his evidence was
that he was very much limited to bathing and feeding fighters and specific
to working in LTTE camp; that he had no rank or LTTE name and an incredibly
limited profile in 1996. He was arrested in 2005 and 2009 and the First
tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the security forces came to his house in
January 2010, which was post conflict, following his return to Sri Lanka to
see his sick mother, having passed through the airport without difficulty.

4. Mr Clarke acknowledged that in light of the country guidance decision in
GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319
(IAC) a person seeking to destabilize the government of Sri Lanka was a
matter of perception that potentially put that person in a risk category.
In respect of MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829, he submitted that at [50]
the Court noted the considerable vagueness of UNHCR guidelines and that
Underhill LJ held that past activism does not, as such, constitute a risk
factor for Tamils returning to Sri Lanka. The government's concern now is
only with current or future threats to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a
unitary state. He submitted that the Appellant does not come anywhere close
to a risk category and that his diaspora activities had been found not to
be credible. Whilst it has been found that the Appellant was detained and
looked for in 2010, this was due to the agenda the government had at that
time but this is no longer the focus of the government and it is quite
clear from GJ at [323] that when looking at returned asylum seekers that
the government of Sri Lanka have very good intelligence and they would know
when the Appellant returns that he is not someone involved with separatism.
The Appellant has provided more documents relating to alleged interest in
him since 2010, but this is not consistent with the country guidance
decision and the Appellant's profile. He submitted that the credibility of
those assertions should be considered in the round along with the
Appellant's sur place activity.

5. Mr Clarke submitted that PP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1828 does not
assist the Appellant because it is expressly about Tamil women in the
conflict zone/Jaffna and was not to do with someone identified as a past
activist. In respect of 1.3.8 of the CIG dated 28.8.14. in relation to
Tamil separatism and the statement that government forces continue to
detain suspected Tamil sympathisers, he submitted that the Appellant does
not fall into this category and this evidence is simply a consideration of
separatism. He also relied on the decision in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs:
departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC) which sets out
guidance on departing from country guidance at [20] that unless expressly
superseded or inconsistent country guidance is authoritative and at [26]
that it must be followed unless "very strong grounds supported by cogent
evidence are adduced". He submitted that the CIG evidence was not enough to
depart from GJ. He further submitted that if the Appellant was returned to
Sri Lanka there was no evidence of a warrant or court order and he is not
on a stop list cf. [339] of GJ. The Appellant has not instructed lawyers to
see if he is of interest. His mother was visited by persons unknown but
this was not reported to the police. A copy of his passport is in the
Respondent's bundle and it expires in 2019 so he would return on his own
passport and would be able to walk through the airport even if on stop list
cf GJ at [323]. The Appellant is not reasonably likely to be detained and
is not going to be considered as an activist/separatist. Even if he is on a
watch list he is not in any danger. He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

6. In her submissions, Ms Jones relied upon her skeleton argument. She
stated that she was not arguing that the Tribunal needs to depart from GJ
but what she was saying is that this case fits within sub-category
356(7)(a) of GJ. What it says is that individuals who are or perceived to
be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state. It is all
about the government's perception but also about the LTTE. Although they
may be a spent force militarily they are not out of the minds of the
government of Sri Lanka. The 2014 CIG report demonstrates this in that the
government of Sri Lanka continues to be obsessively worried about the
resurgence of the LTTE. This is why the government has still declined to
suspend the Terrorism Act and continues to hold people under anti-terrorism
powers. In this situation she was not arguing there is a separate risk
factor of people going back to the north or bail jumpers, but as simply put
in MP, the factors that may indicate whether or not one falls within the
risk category of GJ. This was how it was put on behalf of the Home Office
at [11] where the primary submission is that there is no inconsistency in
the guidelines and is consistent with them; it is not adding to risk
categories and it is the case that the Tribunal did find that the risk
categories were more stringent that UNHCR guidelines cf Underhill LJ's
judgment in last paragraph of MP. There is a demonstrated risk in this
case, particularly about the fact the last time the Appellant returned to
Sri Lanka; it is beyond the watch list that he should be allowed to return
to home area and be monitored - if it is considered he would be at risk he
would be at risk. The authorities did not wait for him to return to Jaffna.
They went to his last known address in Colombo where he stayed with his
aunt straightaway. There is no reason to believe they would have been
attending at her home other than to pick him up for interrogation. Nothing
has changed in terms of the country evidence. By January 2010 post conflict
arrests are intelligence lead.

7. Ms Jones submitted that the updating letter from the Appellant's mother
was mildly corroborative. She submitted that if I was concerned that the
Appellant's case is outside risk category (a) she would say the DSG test is
met: the USSD report 2014 and OISL [of 16.9.15] and expert report all post
date GJ. If 356(7)(a) is read as saying only diaspora activity is included
that is too narrow. GJ says diaspora activism places a person at risk but
he could still be at risk on basis of activities in Sri Lanka after the end
of the conflict. She asked me to allow the appeal.

Findings

8. The First tier Tribunal Judge who heard the Appellant's appeal accepted
material parts of his claim at [46] viz:

(i) the Appellant's brother and sister were previously LTTE members;
(ii) the Appellant became involved with the LTTE for about 1 and a half
months when he was 11 years of age and helped care for the wounded but
received no military training;
(iii) he was arrested in 2005 on suspicion of being an LTTE member,
detained for 5-6 hours and beaten;
(iv) he went to Malaysia for 2 years, returning on 2 April 2009. On 5 April
2009, he was arrested, detained, tortured and interrogated about his time
in Malaysia. He was released on 28 April 2009 subject to residence and
reporting conditions;
(v) he left Sri Lanka for the United Kingdom on 10 October 2009 but
returned to Sri Lanka on 20 January 2010 to see his mother who was unwell
and was able to pass through the airport without difficulty, however,
security forces called at his uncle's house in Colombo, where he had last
resided, within 3-4 hours of arrival but his uncle said he was abroad so
they left.

9. The Judge further found at [47] that the Appellant had no significant
LTTE involvement after the age of 11; he was not on a stop list nor the
subject of an arrest warrant [48]; but he is on a watch list, possibly as
the result of a record of his past detentions [49]. The First tier Tribunal
Judge did not accept as credible the Appellant's evidence as to his sur
place activities [50]-[51].

10. These findings were preserved by me as part of the error of law
decision. The issue for me to now decide is whether the Appellant would be
at risk of persecution or treatment in breach of Article 3 of ECHR on
return to Sri Lanka, in light of the preserved findings of fact and the
Appellant's evidence at the hearing on 14 March 2016, which was very brief
and essentially confined to his statement of 11 March 2016, in which he
states that his family have informed him that unknown people continue to
visit the family home in Jaffna, asking about him. The Appellant also
adduced the original of a letter from his mother dated 10 February 2016 in
which she informs him that the same men who came to the family home in
Jaffna in December 2015 returned in February 2016, to enquire about him, in
terms of his whereabouts and what he is doing. They were angry because he
was not there and broke the computer screen and the telephone. This
evidence was not subject to serious challenge by Mr Clarke except as to
submit that these visits have not been reported to the police. In cross-
examination, the Appellant stated that they have not, however, they have
been reported to the Gramasekava. I find that the Appellant's evidence,
that persons unknown in civilian clothing have paid at least two visits to
the family home in Jaffna seeking the Appellant, is reasonably likely to be
true, particularly given that it has already been accepted that the
authorities called at his uncle's house in Colombo in January 2010
enquiring as to his whereabouts within hours of his return to Sri Lanka.
The issue is whether, considered in the round, there is a serious
possibility or reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant would be
subject to persecution on account of the authorities' perception of him as
a former LTTE member and from a family where his brother and sister were
also formerly LTTE members.

11. In GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT
00319 (IAC) the UT found at [356] that:

"(7) The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution or
serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise,
are:

(a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity
of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or are perceived to have a
significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the
diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka...

The First tier Tribunal Judge rejected the Appellant's account of his
activities in the diaspora, therefore, the issue is whether the Sri Lankan
authorities would perceive him to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka
as a single state because he is perceived to have a significant role in
relation to the renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

12. I note that the civil war ended in May 2009 and therefore, the
Appellant is an individual who has attracted the attention of the
authorities after the cessation of hostilities. This attention has taken
the form of enquiries by the authorities at his uncle's home in Colombo
within hours of his return to Sri Lanka from the United Kingdom on 20
January 2010 and ongoing enquiries at his family home in Jaffna, most
recently in February 2016. I also bear in mind the following:

(i) adverse attention towards Tamils has been intelligence-led since the
end of the civil war: GJ at [310], [354];
(ii) the Appellant has been found to be on a watch list, which the Upper
Tribunal in GJ found meant that he will be monitored by security services
after his return [356(9)] and if considered to be a destabilisation risk,
may be picked up from his home area [309];
(iii) it was accepted by the Respondent that, due to the prevalence of
bribery and corruption, having left Sir Lanka without difficulty was not
probative of a lack of adverse interest in an individual: GJ at [170];

13. An expert report of Dr Nadarajah dated 8 March 2016 has been submitted,
which asserts that:

(i) human rights abuses, surveillance and a heavy militarised presence in
Tamil areas continues: [14]-[23];
(ii) the Prevention of Terrorism Act remains in force and prolonged
detention of hundreds of people held since the end of the civil war on
suspicion of LTTE connections continues: [15]-[37];
(iii) the risk of torture and death in custody continues and is
particularly prevalent in the interrogation of suspected LTTE cadres,
members and supporters: [38]-[42];
(iv) harassment, intimidation and arrests of actual or suspected former
LTTE members and supporters and their families, including returnees
continues: [43]-[53];
(v) the authorities remain convinced that the revival of the LTTE is a
genuine security threat in the country and "remain committed to a general
mobilisation against potential LTTE resurgence and Tamil separatism": [60];
(vi) his past history, particularly his past arrests based on suspicion of
involvement with the LTTE in Malaysia and the UK, his violation of
reporting conditions in 2009 indicate that he is of adverse interest to the
authorities and were he to be forcibly returned to Sri Lanka, would place
him at risk of arrest and ill-treatment or worse in custody: [74].

14. I find that the opinions of the expert are consistent with the general
background evidence, in particular, the Home Office Country Information
Guidance: "Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism" August 2014 and the USSD report
2014. The former, relying on a Swiss Refugee Council report of 15 November
2012, records at 2.2.3: "Although the LTTE may have been defeated and there
is not the slightest sign that this organisation has survived, the State
machine of Sri Lanka is extremely paranoid and is trying to contain any
resurgence of this group, of the germination of tendencies of independence
alongside the Tamils ... According to several reports, people who return
from abroad are often suspected of maintaining links with the LTTE and are
particularly threatened."

15. I have also considered the post GJ caselaw as invited so to do by both
representatives. In MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829, the Court of Appeal
considered an appeal against the findings and conclusions in GJ (whose
appeal had been allowed). I note that at [43] in allowing the appeal of NT
and remitting it back to the UT, Maurice Kay LJ expressly acknowledged that
paragraph 356(7)(a) embraces the possibility of an applicant who has or is
perceived as having a "significant role in ... a renewal of hostilities
within Sri Lanka" absent some diaspora activity, even though such activity
will usually be the touchstone. My attention was also drawn to the judgment
of Lord Justice Underhill at [50] where he held inter alia:

"... I do not read para. 356(7)(a) of its determination as prescribing that
diaspora activism is the only basis on which a returning Tamil might be
regarded as posing such a threat and thus of being at risk on return. Even
apart from cases falling under heads (b)-(d) in para. 356(7) there may,
though untypically, be other cases (of which NT may be an example) where
the evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that the Government
might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to the integrity of
Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of evidence that he or she
has been involved in diaspora activism."

Thus it is clear that whilst a record of past LTTE activism does not as
such constitute a risk factor for returnees, such a person may be at
current risk if perceived or regarded as posing a current threat to the
integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state and I accept Ms Jones' submission
in this respect.

16. In respect of PP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1828, the key finding is
at [35] where Lady Justice Arden held that: "The high level of
militarisation may be such as to put vulnerable individuals such as members
of household headed by women at risk." However, I agree with Mr Clarke's
submission that this judgment is not pertinent to the particular facts of
this Appellant's case because PP was expressly concerned with the position
of Tamil women (who have suffered sexual violence).

17. Both parties also addressed me in respect of the decision of the Upper
Tribunal in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from CG) Afghanistan
[2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC) as to the circumstances in which a Judge may depart
from country guidance. At [21] the Upper Tribunal cited the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No 2, at paragraph 11:

'"If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue that has not
been considered in the country guidance case or, if a subsequent case
includes further issues that have not been considered in the CG case, the
judge will reach the appropriate conclusion on the evidence, taking into
account the conclusion in the CG case so far as it remains relevant."

And at paragraph 12:

"Where country guidance has become outdated by reason of developments in
the country in question, it is anticipated that a judge of the First-tier
Tribunal will have such credible fresh evidence as envisaged in paragraph
11 above."

18. However, I find that, whilst much of the evidence relied upon by the
Appellant postdates the CG decision in GJ and Others (post-civil war:
returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) it is all of a part with
it, in  that it shows that the Sri Lankan authorities continue to commit
human rights abuses against those it suspects may be involved in a
resurgence of the LTTE and Tamil separatism. The background and expert
evidence makes clear that the risk of persecution or treatment in breach of
their human rights continues for such individuals.

19. Therefore, there is no need to depart from the CG decision of GJ and
Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) on
the particular facts of this case. I am satisfied on the basis of the
findings of fact that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood or a
serious possibility that the Appellant would be of adverse interest to the
Sri Lankan authorities if he were to be returned.

20. I allow the appeal on the basis that the Appellant has a well-founded
fear of persecution in Sri Lanka on account of perceived political opinion.
In the alternative, I allow the appeal on the basis that there is a real
risk that he would be subjected to treatment contrary to Article 3 of ECHR,
in light of the current country information and evidence.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

9 May 2016
