
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/09768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th June 2015                    |17th July 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MING CHUAN CHEN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Duffy, Senior Home Office presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Cole, of Katani & Co, solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a national of China who  arrived  in  the  UK  on  31
January 2007 and claimed asylum. When  he  claimed  asylum,  the  respondent
granted temporary leave subject to reporting conditions. He  absconded  from
Immigration Control  and  was  not  known  again  to  the  respondent  until
November 2010, when there were a number of subsequent  submissions  made  on
his behalf, including a claim to be considered under the so  called  "legacy
policy".

2.    The Secretary of State's decision was  not  made  until  24  September
2014. Against that decision refusing asylum and  rejecting  the  appellant's
claim to face a risk of ill  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3  ECHR,  the
appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    The appeal was heard  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Quigley  ("the
judge") on 2 March 2015. Ms Cole, Solicitor, represented the appellant.  The
respondent  was  unrepresented.  The   judge   heard   oral   evidence   and
submissions. She regarded the appellant as a credible witness and  concluded
that there was a real risk of persecution for the  reasons  claimed  by  the
appellant and therefore allowed the appellant's appeal.

4.    The Secretary of State sought to appeal the decision of the  judge  on
three grounds:

         (1)      The judge should not have determined the appeal.  Instead,
             the judge should have remitted the case to  the  Secretary  of
             State to make a fresh decision.

    We do not know what power of the judge is referred to by the  Secretary
    of State and we find that there is nothing in that ground of appeal.

         (2)      The FTTJ should have taken  the  appellant's  "absconsion"
             (between 2007 and 2010) into account.

    That ground may be viable but it goes nowhere. It  is  correct  to  say
    that Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants
    etc.) Act 2004 provides that the  judge  should  take  account  of  the
    appellant's conduct between 2007 and  2010  as  a  factor  which  works
    against the appellant's credibility.  It  is  impossible  to  say  that
    provisions of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants  etc.)
    Act 2004 would have made a difference to the conclusion reached by  the
    judge.

5.    Ground 3 has greater substance and is set out in the notice of  appeal
as follows:

         "The Immigration Judge has also erred in law  by  failing  to  have
         regard to the country guidance  case  LL  (Falun  Gong,  Convention
         Reason, Risk) China CG [2005] UKIAC 122. The Immigration Judge  has
         accepted the appellant's account that he may be subject to  further
         investigation as a result of his  release  from  prison  (paragraph
         31). However, the Immigration Judge has given no  reasons  why  the
         appellant would undertake activities that would bring  him  to  the
         attention of the authorities on return  to  China  as  required  at
         paragraph 38 of LL. The determination contains no consideration  of
         whether the appellant has undertaken any  such  activities  in  the
         UK."

6.    Ms Cole represents the appellant again today. She tells  us  that  she
was aware of it but did not put LL (Falun  Gong,  Convention  Reason,  Risk)
China CG [2005] UKIAC 122 before the judge because she did  not  propose  to
rely on it. Today, she tells us that  she  has  no  submission  to  make  in
relation to that case.

7.    We have considerable concerns about  what  appears  to  have  been  Ms
Cole's deliberate decision to fail to draw the First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
attention to applicable country guidance. The judge  was  bound  by  country
guidance unless she was provided with reliable evidence  which  would  cause
her to depart from it. In this case, although the appellant  was  caught  up
in a Falun Gong arrest before leaving China, it has  always  been  his  case
that he is not a member of Falun Gong. It was approximately eight years  ago
that he had the difficulties that the judge found proved.

8.    Following LL, there is no basis for concluding that the  appellant  is
currently at risk. The judge therefore made an error in law.

9.    We set aside the decision and on the basis of LL,  we  substitute  our
decision dismissing the appeal on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

Decision

10.   We set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it
contains a material error of law. We substitute the following decision.

11.   The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

