
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/10421/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 November 2016             |On 12 January 2017              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     at
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent's appeal against a decision by First tier Tribunal Judge
Davidson to allow the appeal on article 8 grounds outside the Immigration
Rules came before me for an error of law hearing on 3 October 2016. I found
an error of law [decision appended] essentially for the reasons set out in
the grounds of appeal viz that the First tier Tribunal Judge had failed to
take account of the public interest considerations set out in section 117B
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I adjourned the appeal
for a resumed hearing, at the request of the parties in order to update the
evidence, confined to consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

2. The Appellant was called to give evidence, when he adopted his
statements of 19.9.16 and 24.11.16. He was then cross-examined by Mr Jarvis
and the Appellant confirmed that he was in contact with his uncle by
telephone when he was in Greece and his uncle was in Pakistan. He stated
that he had not had contact with any other family member apart from this
and he had not spoken to his uncle since that time because he no longer has
his number, which he had previously obtained from the agent. The Appellant
confirmed that he was under the control of the agent until he got to the UK
but he did not ask the agent for his uncle's phone number because he
believed it would put his family at risk and the agent was not going to
give him the number as he was not allowed to as far as he knew. With regard
to the two letters from the Red Cross when asked what information the
Appellant gave them to help them make enquiries, he said that he gave them
information and they said it was not enough. He was concerned that there
could be a risk to his family. The Red Cross took his picture to conduct a
"trace the face" to find his brother in Europe. He confirmed that he had
agreed with the Red Cross not to make any further enquiries in Afghanistan.
He said he had told the Red Cross about his uncle in Pakistan and the Red
Cross had said that they could not contact him there because they did not
know the area only that he is in Peshawar but this was not enough. In terms
of [3] of his statement the Appellant said he knew that they are not in his
home area anymore and that his mother and brothers had moved to Peshawar
and he only had his father left in Afghanistan.

3. Upon re-examination, the Appellant stated that he was a Muslim and
practised his faith every Friday when he attended the mosque. However at
[6] of his witness statement he said that people may say he is not
following his religion because his foster carer is Christian and he is very
close to her and lots of his friends know he lives with a Christian family.
He stated that he knows British culture and Christians and has learned a
lot from them and if he goes back to his country because he is very close
to British society, people may think he is not following his religion.

4. The Appellant's foster carer, Asgedet Abay then gave evidence and
confirmed the contents of her statement of 24.11.16. There were no
supplementary questions and she was not cross-examined by Mr Jarvis.

5. I then heard submissions from Mr Jarvis, who also provided a helpful
skeleton argument dated 24.11.16, which he adopted. He submitted that the
"very significant obstacles" threshold for paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the
Rules was a demanding threshold similar to a physical and moral integrity
argument. Whilst account should be taken of the Appellant's own personal
characteristics it would be erroneous to make a finding on serious harm
because the Tribunal was bound by the findings of the First tier Tribunal.
He submitted that insecurity per se was not enough and that whilst the
article 15C authority was old it still stands. There was no evidence to
indicate that he
is suffering from psychological problems;  he is not someone who has
struggled to adapt and has spent his time in the United Kingdom usefully
and has adapted to a different culture and family. The finding by the First
tier Tribunal Judge is that he has been relatively independent from a young
age. He has gained qualifications. He submitted that there were no very
significant obstacles and that the threshold under the Rules was not met.
The role of his foster family does not play a significant part.

6. In respect of Article 8 outside the Rules, Mr Jarvis accepted that there
were exceptional circumstances justifying consideration of Article 8
outside the Rules. He submitted, however, that the Appellant is independent
enough to get work in an urbanized area and that the Tribunal should
approach with caution his evidence about any lack of contact with family,
given that the reality of the evidence is that the enquiries did not go
very far to start with and the Appellant has limited knowledge of where
they are and he did not want to pursue this so as not to put them at risk.
He submitted that his evidence was not credible concerning his family and
his failure to ask the agent for his uncle's telephone number. He drew
attention to the fact that a negative credibility finding had been made at
[32] of the First tier Tribunal decision in this respect and that the
Tribunal should uphold the finding that the Appellant would be able to
contact extended family members on return.

7. In respect of his private life relationship outside the Rules, whilst he
accepted that there would be an interference, nothing would prevent the
Appellant, on his own personal characteristics and on the background
evidence, from re-establishing himself in Afghanistan. He submitted that
return to Afghanistan would be proportionate.

8. In terms of the background evidence, Mr Jarvis sought to rely upon an
unreported decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch decision on the basis
that it has value as an evidential assessment because it considered a very
wide range of background evidence. He accepted that it was not binding and
sought to rely upon it because it supports the Secretary of State's
position. He submitted that the evidence is that a lot of people who have
left have committed significant amounts of money so to do and are economic
migrants. There is pressure from families to make money. The evidence does
not show circumstances or conditions in eg Kabul that would prevent the
Appellant from reintegrating. In respect of the Appellant's religious
observation, he submitted that no-one would know he had lived with a
Christian family and there is no evidence this would cause him problems. He
drew the Tribunal's attention to Tab 2 of the Respondent's background
evidence bundle comprising a letter dated 17.12.15 written in respect of
the unreported case regarding the voluntary departure service, which
provides detailed information about what he would receive viz between �500
and �1500 and the Appellant would qualify if he applied. Mr Jarvis also
relied upon Tabs 3 and 4 regarding enforced removals and voluntary
departures and returns to Pakistan via IOM in support of his submission
that the Appellant would be assisted by arrangement between UK and
Afghanistan.

9. Mr Jarvis also sought to rely upon Tab 6, an Afghanistan Migration
Profile from the IOM prepared in 2014 at pages 128, which shows that
returnees are strongly connected with the community; 221 and 225 that show
that NGOs continue to play an active role. He submitted that the evidence
submitted on behalf of the Appellant does not show that young men cannot
adapt and return. Mr Jarvis submitted that his qualifications and
experience in Greece and the UK were important and the cumulative effect
should be given significant weight. The Appellant has not shown
particularly vulnerable characteristics and it would be proportionate for
him to return to Afghanistan.

10. Mr Bundock, on behalf of the Appellant, sought to rely upon his
skeleton argument of 2.10.16 and his supplementary skeleton argument of
27.11.16.
He submitted that the Appellant has developed a compelling family life in
the UK and that the decision in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 was
applicable. He submitted that there existed very significant obstacles to
the Appellant's integration in Afghanistan in light of the evidence eg. the
"After return" report by the Refugee Support Network, also commented upon
by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch in her unreported decision at [29]-[39]. Mr
Bundock submitted that the Practice Direction in respect of unreported
decisions makes clear that an unreported decision cannot establish a
proposition of fact but is simply an assessment of an individual appellant.
In respect of the points made by Mr Jarvis, he submitted that they do not
stand up to scrutiny and in fact supported the Appellant's claim for
reasons set out at [8] onwards of the supplementary skeleton argument.
"After return" documents 25 young people in the Appellant's position viz
former care leavers. In most situations some have managed to struggle
through but it does not mean that this Appellant would or could do this. Mr
Bundock submitted that there was stigma and discrimination; inadequacy of
support and the IOM funding was not enough to maintain a stable line of
employment. He submitted that 17 out of 22 returnees had been experiencing
difficulties since their return to Afghanistan.

11. Mr Bundock submitted that with regard to the employment situation the
impact on the Appellant's mental health should be considered fully. He also
sought to rely upon the report "Broken futures" - at 6, which is a
precursor to "After Return" and was not fully considered by Upper Tribunal
Judge Finch. He submitted that in light of that report at 6. it was not
open to argue that the Article 15C threshold had not been met, given that
young people are frightened in public spaces and have difficulties. The IOM
was relied upon by Mr Jarvis but their report does not make clear that it
addresses the situation for returnees from everywhere to Afghanistan
whereas the evidence in After return and Broken Futures is more directly
relevant as it deals with figures for those returned from the UK and the
USA. The report from Liza Schuster was to the same effect in that the issue
faced by people on return to Afghanistan is that they are considered to
have been contaminated by their time in the West. Mr Bundock submitted that
the Appellant has adapted and changed significantly since he came to the UK
and that life would now be extremely difficult for him on return. He
submitted that there were very significant obstacles to his integration.

12. Mr Bundock submitted that, in respect of Article 8 outside the Rules
that whilst Rhuppiah found that relationships developed in the UK can only
be given limited weight, his relationships with his foster family go above
and beyond what one could expect from a foster family. At the time of his
asylum interview [page 36 of the bundle] his foster career was asked for
comments and said that the Appellant screamed and sleepwalked at night. He
submitted that the foster mother has no sons and the relationships he has
developed with her and her daughter are compelling and render his removal
disproportionate. The Appellant speaks very good English. He is not
financially independent but the evidence indicates that he would be. The
legislation in terms of the public interest considerations under section
117B of the 2002 Act was not intended to cover the situation of a young boy
alone in an alien environment where a family has welcomed him with open
arms.

Decision

13. The preserved, unchallenged findings of First tier Tribunal Judge
Davidson in respect of Article 8 of ECHR are as follows:

(i) the Appellant is an adult who spent the first 13 years of his life in
Afghanistan and was working in Greece prior to arriving in the UK in August
2012 [48];

(ii) he speaks Pashtu and good English and his ability to speak English and
the qualifications he has gained since being in the UK will help him obtain
employment in Afghanistan [48];

(iii) he is clearly a resourceful and highly intelligent young man who has
survived crossing half a continent unaccompanied and lived in foreign
countries for the past 5 years [50];

(iv) the Judge expressly did not make a finding as to whether the Appellant
has, or could have, contact with his close family in Afghanistan [50] but
found that he is now, as an adult, well able to establish contact with them
himself if he wants to as it is inconceivable that they would not still be
concerned for his welfare and welcome him back on return if they are still
in Afghanistan [51];

(v) the Judge found that the Appellant had not established family life with
his foster mother, foster sister and fellow foster child [53];

(vi) the Judge found that the Appellant had established a private life [54]
and that his removal would constitute an interference with his private life
[57];

(vii) key to his finding that removal would be disproportionate are the
following:

(a) he has formed strong bonds/close personal ties with his foster mother
and her daughter at a crucial stage in his life [62]-[64], [71].
(b) the letters of support from the Appellant's social worker, Amelia Howe
[66], his tutor at college [67] and the Refugee Council [69] all attesting
to the fact that he is polite, hardworking
(c) the evidence of Antonia Cohen of the Refugee Council that he is young
for his age [70];
(d) all those who wrote letters of support were concerned about his well-
being if returned and seemed to doubt that he could survive without close
support such as that provided by a family [70].

14. The issue I am required to determine is whether or not it would be
proportionate to return the Appellant to Afghanistan. The Appellant is now
a young adult, aged 19 at the date of hearing and he has resided in the
United Kingdom since July 2012, approximately four and a half years, having
arrived at the age of 15.

15. The public interest considerations inherent in determining whether or
not removal of an individual is proportionate are set out in section 117B
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Appellant speaks
English, however, in light of the judgment in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803
at [61] this is a neutral factor. Nor do the remaining public interest
considerations assist the Appellant: he is not currently financially
independent because he is still studying [section 117B(3)] and he
established his private life in the United Kingdom at a time when his
immigration status was precarious as an asylum seeker [section 117B(5)]. At
[53]-[54] of the judgment in Rhuppiah the Court held that considerable
weight should be given to Parliament's statement at section 117B(5) and
that compelling reasons would have to be shown why it was not appropriate
to follow that approach eg. where the private life in question has a
special and compelling character.

16. Therefore, I turn to consider the nature of the relationship between
the Appellant and his foster family. The First tier Tribunal Judge found at
[53] that the nature of this relationship did not constitute family life
but he had developed strong bonds/close personal ties with them. The
unchallenged evidence of his foster mother, as set out in her evidence
before the First tier Tribunal is that she would be proud to call the
Appellant her son [62]; that he could live with her as long as he wanted
[62] and that he had a new family here [63]. In her updating statement
dated 24 November 2016, she states as follows: " A is unique to me, and
unique among the children I have fostered. None of them have become so
close to us. None of them have become part of my family in the way A has.
He has now turned 18 and I have no obligation to continue to let him stay
as the fostering arrangement has finished. But he has stayed and as far as
I am concerned he can stay as long as he wants. He is part of our family."
She also describes how the previous week he had bought and decorated a
Christmas tree for the family, to respect and celebrate her religion,
despite remaining a Muslim himself [4] and that he calls her mum and they
cook together [6]. She also describes how much he means to her, her
daughters and granddaughters: "he is so settled with us and so much a part
of my family. He is the only man in the house and in the family. I feel
that even though he would eventually move out of my home, he would always
be there for me. I am sure that whenever I needed him he would do what I
needed. I would be so devastated and worried if he was removed to
Afghanistan. We all would." [7]. None of this evidence was challenged by
way of cross-examination at the hearing.

17. There is also evidence in the form of a letter of support from the
Appellant's foster sister, the biological daughter of his foster mother.
She states that over the time he has lived with them the Appellant "has
become the brother I never had and I consider him to be part of my family.
{he} has integrated himself so effortlessly into our hearts that it is
almost impossible to recall life without him being there... The boy I have
come to know and love has shown so much strength and courage and seeing him
fulfil his potential given the difficulties and challenges he has faced in
the past is truly inspiring to me."

18. The First tier Tribunal Judge at [53] did not consider that the
relationship between the Appellant and his foster family amounted to family
life on the basis that it "does not amount to "family life" as defined by
the jurisprudence of the ECtHR." [53]. However, this is not correct: in
Kopf & Liberda v Austria [2012[] ECHR 50 the ECtHR held:

      "35. In this respect the Court reiterates that the notion of "family
life" under      Article 8 of the Convention is not confined to marriage-
based relationships    and may encompass other de facto "family" ties (see
Anayo v.Germany, no.   20578/07, � 55, 21 December 2010, with further
references). The existence or     non-existence of "family life" for the
purposes of Article 8 is essentially a  question of fact depending on the
real existence in practice of close personal       ties (see K. and T. v.
Finland [GC], no. 25702/94, � 150, ECHR 2001-VII).       Although, as a
rule, cohabitation may be a requirement for such a relationship,
exceptionally other factors may also serve to demonstrate that a
relationship     has sufficient constancy to create de facto "family ties"
(see Kroon and Others  v. the Netherlands, 27 October 1994, � 30, Series A
no. 297-C).

      36. In the case of Moretti and Benedetti v. Italy the Court
considered the   relationship between the applicants as foster parents and
the child entrusted to       them, who had lived with them from the age of
one month for a period of    nineteen months, as falling within the notion
of family life within the meaning       of Article 8 � 1 because there had
been a close inter-personal bond between the       applicants and the child
and the applicants had behaved in every respect like     the child's
parents (Moretti and Benedetti v. Italy, no. 16318/07, �� 49-50, 27
April 2010)."

The Court went on to find at [37] that the relationship between the foster
parents and their former foster child "falls within the notion of   family
life within the meaning of Article 8 � 1." Due to his misapprehension of
the Strasbourg jurisprudence, I find that the First tier Tribunal Judge
failed to consider whether the relationship between the Appellant and his
foster family amounted to de facto family life. I find, on the evidence
before me, that it does and that the relationship - whether private life or
de facto family life - between the Appellant and his foster family private
life in question has a special and compelling character cf. Rhuppiah.

19. Consequently, when considering the proportionality of the Appellant's
removal, I must take into account not only the impact upon the Appellant of
removal from his foster family, but the impact upon them cf. Beoku Betts
(2008) UKHL 39. The Appellant's foster mother states that she and the
family would be devastated if he was taken away from them and removed to
Afghanistan.

20. In his skeleton argument of 2 October 2016, Mr Bundock sets out the
factors material to consideration of proportionality: the Appellant's
vulnerability and concerns of those who know him as to how he would cope in
Afghanistan; the fact he has not lived there since the age of 12 or 13
years; his length of residence in the United Kingdom and his
"westernisation" in respect of which he also relied upon the background
evidence regarding difficulties faced by returnees on account of actual or
perceived westernisation at AB2 41; 55 at fn 348; 314 at fn 545 and the
difficulties returnees face in reintegrating: AB2 313-316.

21. The focus of the hearing before me was on the circumstances pertaining
in Afghanistan. Mr Jarvis sought to rely upon FM an unreported decision of
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch promulgated on 31 August 2016 on the question of
whether or not there were very significant obstacles to integration in
Afghanistan pursuant to paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules.
Article 8 was not considered. The reason Mr Jarvis sought to rely on this
decision was in respect of the Judge's consideration of some of the
background evidence viz  the Refugee Support Network report "After return"
and the package of support potentially available from the International
Organisation for Migration (IOM). Mr Bundock, in reliance upon the Tribunal
Practice Directions at [11.3] which provides: "Permission (to rely upon an
unreported determination) will be given only where the Tribunal considers
that it would be materially assisted by citation of the determination as
distinct from the adoption in argument of the reasoning to be found in the
determination. Such instances are likely to be rare..." I find that the
unreported decision of FM does not establish any novel proposition of law
which would justify its admission, but is confined to its own facts. I do
not rely on it but instead reach my own findings of fact on the evidence
before me.

22. A material issue is the support the Appellant could expect upon return
to Afghanistan. Whilst he is now a young adult, the background evidence
makes clear that integration and indeed, survival, can be challenging
absent a support network. The findings by the First tier Tribunal Judge as
to the Appellant's family in Afghanistan are not consistent in that, at
[51] he found that the Appellant could establish contact with is family if
he wants to and that they would welcome him back if they are still in
Afghanistan; at [50] he made no finding as to whether or not the Appellant
has or could have contact with his close family but at [70] the Judge also
accepted the evidence of the Appellant's foster mother that the Appellant
has tried to trace his family without success. The evidence before me,
which I accept, is that the Appellant has had no contact with any family
members except for his uncle, whilst he was in Greece, which was 6-7 years
ago. Mr Jarvis asked that I make a negative credibility finding in respect
of the Appellant's contact with his family, pursuant to the finding of the
First tier Tribunal Judge at [32]. However, that finding was limited to
whether or not the Appellant's was under the instructions of the agent in
Greece and the Judge found that he was not because he was able to make
comments critical of Greece when he spoke to his uncle on the telephone.
The Appellant's uncle was at that time, 6 and 7 years ago, in Pakistan not
Afghanistan. I accept the Appellants evidence that he has not been in
contact with his family since that telephone call, which was corroborated
by his foster mother. As far as he is aware, only his father remained in
Afghanistan, his mother and younger brothers having relocated to Peshawar
in Pakistan. The Appellant is from Patkowshana village, Pulialam district
of Loghar province, a central province of Afghanistan. The Judge found that
he would not be at risk of persecution there and this was the last known
location of his father, seven years ago. The Appellant claimed that the
family home was sold in order to pay for his journey, however, this
evidence was rejected by the First tier Tribunal Judge on the basis that
there was insufficient time for this to be done prior to him leaving [41].
However, this does not preclude the possibility that the family home has
been sold given the passage of time and the Appellant was informed of this
when he spoke to his uncle in Greece.

23. In light of the above, I find that it would be speculative to find that
the Appellant could return to his village and that his father and family
home would still be there, given his absence from Afghanistan and the
absence of contact with his father for the last 7 years. Therefore, whilst
the Appellant's fear of persecution was not found by the First tier
Tribunal Judge to be well-founded, I have had regard to the UNHCR
Eligibility Guidelines for assessing the protection needs of asylum seekers
from Afghanistan, published in April 2016 with regard to internal
relocation, in order to consider the proportionality of his removal with
regard to the likelihood that this would be to an urban centre, without
family support. At page 84-85, it is advised that consideration is given to
the following factors:

"(i)  the effective availability of traditional support mechanisms,
provided by members of the applicant's extended family or members of his or
her ethnic group;

(ii)  access to shelter in the proposed area of relocation;

(iii)  the availability of basic infrastructure and access to essential
services in the proposed area of relocation, such as potable water and
sanitation, health care and education;

(iv)  the presence of livelihood opportunities, including access to land
for Afghans originating from rural areas; and

(v)  the scale of internal displacement in the proposed area of relocation.


Applicants may be able to fall back on the support of members of their
extended family or members of their larger ethnic group. However, the
existence of such traditional support networks can be assumed to weigh in
favour of the reasonableness of a proposed IFA/IRA only when the members of
the applicant's extended family or wider ethnic group are assessed to be
willing and able to provide genuine support to the applicant in practice,
taking into account Afghanistan's low humanitarian and developmental
indicators and the wider economic constraints affecting large segments of
the population. Moreover, the presence of members of the same ethnic
background as the applicant in the proposed area of relocation cannot by
itself be taken as evidence that the applicant would be able to benefit
from meaningful support from such communities in the absence of specific
pre-existing social relations connecting the applicant to individual
members of the ethnic community in question. The extent to which applicants
are able to rely on family networks in the proposed area of relocation also
has to be considered in light of the reported stigma and discrimination
against those who return to Afghanistan after spending time abroad."

Where the proposed area of relocation is an urban area where the applicant
has no access to pre- identified accommodation and livelihood options, and
where he or she cannot reasonably be expected to be able to fall back on
meaningful support networks, the applicant would likely find him- or
herself in a situation comparable to that of other urban IDPs. To assess
the reasonableness of such an outcome, adjudicators need to take into
account the scale of internal displacement in the area of prospective
relocation, and the living conditions of IDPs in that location. Relevant
considerations in this regard include the fact that IDPs are considered to
be among the most vulnerable groups in Afghanistan, many of whom are beyond
the reach of humanitarian organizations; as well as available information
to the effect that urban IDPs are more vulnerable than the non-displaced
urban poor, as they are particularly affected by unemployment; limited
access to water and sanitation; and food insecurity. The limited
availability of adequate housing must also be taken into account, including
in particular for IDPs, with land allocation schemes reportedly often ill-
managed and marred with corruption (see also Section II.E).

UNHCR go on to state, at page 86 that a proposed internal relocation is
reasonable only where the individual has access to (i) shelter, (ii)
essential services such as sanitation, health care and education; and (iii)
livelihood opportunities and where an individual has access to a
traditional support network of members of his or her (extended) family or
members of his or her larger ethnic community in the area of prospective
relocation who have been assessed to be willing and able to provide genuine
support to the applicant in practice. UNHCR further find that a single able
bodied man of working age without any of the identified specific
vulnerabilities as described above may be able to subsist without family
and community support in urban and semi-urban areas that have the necessary
infrastructure and livelihood opportunities to meet the basic necessities
of life and that are under effective Government control.

24. Whilst the Appellant is a single, able-bodied young man, I bear in mind
that he has been held to be young for his age and considered to be
vulnerable by both his foster mother and Antonia Cohen of the Refugee
Council. I have also had regard to the reports from the Refugee Support
Network "Broken Futures" August 2012 and "After Return" April 2016; the
report of Shuster and Majid "What happens post-deportation?" (2013) and the
PRIO report "Can Afghans Reintegrate after assisted return from Europe?"
The first three reports are also considered in the footnotes to the UNHCR
guidelines (eg fn 545 in relation to family networks). I have also taken
into consideration the background evidence submitted by the Respondent,
particularly the reports and statistics relating to returnees compiled by
the IOM. However, the After Return report found that: "Institutional
support, particularly from IOM has been helpful to a minority of young
people, but the majority have faced substantial barriers to accessing help
and remained either without support or dependent on unsustainable and ad-
hoc assistance." Whilst that report is concerned with the circumstances on
return for 25 former care leavers returned to Afghanistan, in the absence
of any formal monitoring of outcomes for returnees from the UK, the EU and
the USA I do attach some limited weight to its findings. The Appellant has
provided some educational certificates from courses he has undertaken
whilst in the United Kingdom, however, these are basic entry level
qualifications in eg Mathematics and Personal and Social Development and I
do not consider that they would be of great assistance in Afghanistan,
albeit the First tier Tribunal Judge found at [48] that they would help him
obtain employment, this finding does not appear to based on any evidence.

25. I have also had regard to the caselaw and helpful skeleton arguments
referred to by both parties.

26. The question I have to decide is not whether it is reasonable for the
Appellant to internally relocate, but whether, taking all the evidence and
the public interest considerations into account, it would be proportionate
for the Appellant to return to Afghanistan. I have concluded that, whilst I
consider the matter to be finely balanced, when all the factors are
considered cumulatively his removal to Afghanistan would not be
proportionate, for the reasons set out above, in particular: his length of
residence of 5 years in the United Kingdom during his formative years; his
de facto family life with his foster family; the impact upon him of
separation from his foster family and the impact upon them of separation
and concern for him if he were to be returned to Afghanistan; his lack of
contact with his father for 7 years and his lack of knowledge as to the
whereabouts of any family members residing in Afghanistan; his lack of a
support network in Afghanistan, including any proposed accommodation or
employment; the fact that is considered to be young for his age and
vulnerable and the evidence of both UNHCR and the After Return report that
returnees are subjected to stigma and discrimination due to their
"westernisation." Moreover, whilst the Appellant has not established that
he would be at risk of persecution in Afghanistan and the caselaw cf. AK
(Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) found that the level
of indiscriminate violence taken as a whole is not at such a high level as
to mean that, within the meaning of Article 15(c) of the Qualification
Directive, a civilian, solely by being present in the country, faces a real
risk which threatens his life or person, the adverse country and security
conditions that, on the evidence, it is reasonably likely the Appellant
would confront in Afghanistan are also a material consideration in the
assessment of the proportionality of his removal there.

27. I allow the appeal on human rights (Article 8) grounds outside the
Immigration Rules.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

11 January 2016


