
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/10644/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Sent         |
|on 5th June 2013                                |on 12th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              agnes makwembere
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant identities herself as a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on  1st
    February 1974. The First-tier Tribunal Judge discontinued an  anonymity
    direction.  No request  was  made  for  such  an  order  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's fresh claim to recognition as  a
    refugee for reasons explained in a letter dated 13th November 2012.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge McGavin dismissed the Appellant's appeal  for
    reasons explained in her determination dated 15th January 2013.

 4. These are the relevant parts of the Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal:

         2.1  [The judge] failed to apply the ratio  of  RT  (Zimbabwe)  and
             Others v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38 ... The judge concluded that  the
             applicant will be returned to a milieu where  her  loyalty  to
             ZANU-PF will be  assumed  because  of  the  previous  findings
             referred to in paragraph 27 in their decision.  Following  ...
             RT, two factors are crucial:

             (a)  whether the person has a political opinion or one will be
                  imputed to her and

             (b)  whether this opinion may be challenged.

             The principal focus in both (a) and (b) is now the authorities
             in Zimbabwe, not the claimant.  There may have  been  evidence
             as noted by the judge at paragraph 27, but what  is  now  more
             important than  the  claimant  herself  is  the  approach  and
             attitude of the authorities.  The judge erred in holding  that
             the same approach applied as before RT and per the decision of
             the first judge ...

         2.2  [The judge] erred in holding that  '...  it  is  difficult  to
             conclude that [the Appellant] was not ... in  a  milieu  where
             her loyalty to ZANU-PF was assumed' (paragraph 27).   This  is
             clearly based on paragraph 59 in RT.  The word "milieu" can be
             said to mean the circumstances of the area to where  a  person
             will be returned.  Each case will  be  different.   The  judge
             erred by defining this word  (i)  by  reference  only  to  the
             personal circumstances  of  the  claimant;  without  (ii)  any
             reference to the milieu to where she will  be  returning.   In
             particular, the IJ erred in  not  considering  in  detail  the
             objective evidence ... discussing problems in  various  areas,
             including Mudzi, to where the [Appellant] would be returned.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara granted permission to  appeal  on  8th
    February 2013, observing:

         In an otherwise well  reasoned  determination  the  judge  arguably
         erred ... in concluding that the Appellant would be returning to  a
         milieu where her  loyalty  to  ZANU-PF  would  be  assumed;  making
         reference to the fact that she had not been persecuted  during  her
         visits to Zimbabwe in 2006.  The background evidence ... included a
         significant number of examples of persecution of  MDC  members  and
         those suspected of being so, specifically in Mudzi, the Appellant's
         town.  That evidence postdated the determination  of  the  previous
         judge ... in 2008.  Additionally,  the  judge  may  have  erred  in
         finding that the decision in RT was relevant because the  Appellant
         was an MDC member as opposed to politically neutral.

 6. In a response to the grant of permission, dated  8th  March  2013,  the
    Respondent submitted thus:

         The judge was entitled to  base  [her]  findings  on  the  previous
         determination as a starting point ... the Appellant has returned to
         Zimbabwe to her home area where her family are known to support the
         MDC despite attending  some  ZANU-PF  meetings.   On  her  previous
         visits the Appellant was not required to demonstrate any loyalty to
         ZANU-PF.   The judge was entitled to apply the Appellant's previous
         history to [her] evaluation of whether she  would  be  at  risk  on
         return now.  The ultimate finding in  this  determination  and  the
         previous one is that the Appellant will not be perceived to be anti-
         ZANU-PF.  She will be returning to a ZANU-PF  area  where  she  has
         never had any requirements to declare loyalty or  any  difficulties
         despite her family background.

 7. It is convenient to refer here to CM  (Zimbabwe)  CG  [2013]  UKUT  59,
    which was added to the country guidance list on 1 February 2013,  after
    the decision of the FtT.  The headnote reads:


(1) There is no general duty of disclosure on  the  Secretary  of  State  in
asylum appeals generally  or  Country  Guidance  cases  in  particular.  The
extent of the Secretary of State's obligation is set out in R v  SSHD  ex  p
Kerrouche No 1 [1997] Imm AR 610, as  explained  in  R  (ota  Cindo)  v  IAT
[2002] EWHC 246 (Admin); namely, that  she  must  not  knowingly  mislead  a
court or tribunal by omission of material that was known or  ought  to  have
been known to her.

(2)   The  Country  Guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  EM  and   Others
(Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) on the position in Zimbabwe  as
at the end of January 2011 was not vitiated in any respect by the  use  made
of anonymous evidence from certain sources in the Secretary of State's  Fact
Finding Mission report of 2010. The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that
there had been a durable change since  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]
UKAIT 00083. The Country Guidance in EM does not require to be  amended,  as
regards the position at that time, in the light of-

     (a) the disclosure by the Secretary of State of any of  the  materials
    subsequently disclosed in response to the orders of the Court of Appeal
    and related directions of the Tribunal in the current proceedings; or


     (b) any fresh material adduced by the  parties  in  those  proceedings
    that might have a bearing on the position at that time.

(3)  The only change to the EM Country Guidance  that  it  is  necessary  to
make as regards the position as at the end of January 2011 arises  from  the
judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38.  The  EM  Country  Guidance  is,
accordingly, re-stated as follows (with the change underlined  in  paragraph
(5) below):

    (1)      As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.


    (5)      A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)      The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)  Internal relocation from a rural area to  Harare  or  (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.


    (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)     As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.


    (11)  In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.

(4) In the course of deciding CM's appeal, the present Tribunal has made  an
assessment of certain general  matters  regarding  Zimbabwe  as  at  October
2012. As a result, the following country information may  be  of  assistance
to decision-makers and judges. It is, however, not Country  Guidance  within
the scope of Practice Direction 12 and is based on  evidence  which  neither
party claimed to be comprehensive:

    a) The picture presented by  the  fresh  evidence  as  to  the  general
       position of politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe as at October
       2012 does not differ  in  any  material  respect  from  the  Country
       Guidance in EM.


    b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.


    c) In the light of the evidence regarding the activities of Chipangano,
       judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular regard to whether a
       person, who is reasonably likely to go to Mbare  or  a  neighbouring
       high density area of Harare, will come to the adverse  attention  of
       that group; in particular, if he or she is reasonably likely to have
       to find employment of a kind that Chipangano  seeks  to  control  or
       otherwise exploit for economic, rather than political, reasons.

    d) The fresh evidence regarding the position at  the  point  of  return
       does not indicate any increase in risk since  the  Country  Guidance
       was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007]  UKAIT
       00094. On the contrary, the available evidence as to  the  treatment
       of those who have been returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the
       absence of any reliable evidence of risk there means that  there  is
       no justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded by
       the CIO as an MDC activist.

 8. Mr Bryce provided a clear and detailed written submission of ten pages,
    which should be read herewith.  The culmination of his argument  is  as
    follows.   The  judge  erred  in  her  consideration  of  the  previous
    determination; by misapplication of HJ [2010] UKSC 31 and of RT; and by
    misapplication of country guidance.  Her decision ought to be set aside
    and remade in the light of paragraphs (2) and (8) [as  numbered  within
    headnote (3)]  of the head note of CM, which was to be read along  with
    EM on internal relocation.  The Appellant is at risk in her home  area;
    for reasons related mainly to her ethnicity,  she  cannot  relocate  to
    Bulawayo; due to unemployment and harsh economic conditions, she cannot
    relocate to Harare; and her  appeal  should  therefore  be  allowed  on
    Refugee Convention grounds.

 9. Mrs  O'Brien  adopted  the  Rule  24  response.   She  agued  that  the
    determination did not fall to be set aside, but even  if  the  decision
    were to be remade, the appeal would fail in light of CM.  The Appellant
    on return would have no greater political profile than that of a failed
    asylum seeker with no significant connection to the MDC.  The judge was
    correct to find no real likelihood that she would come to the attention
    of the authorities in such a way as to be required to  demonstrate  her
    loyalty.  Alternatively, although the  Appellant's  origins  are  in  a
    rural area, there is nothing forcing her to go there.  The Secretary of
    State did not accept that she would at risk in that rural area, but  in
    any case she could relocate to Harare (which  would  be  the  point  of
    return).  Her objection to that was mainly economic, and was not  well-
    founded.  From 1995 until 2000 she worked in Zimbabwe at two banks as a
    teller.  From 2001 until September  2004  she  studied  at  the  London
    School of Management, obtaining a diploma in  hospitality  and  tourism
    management.  From September 2004 for one year she  studied  hospitality
    and tourism management at Queen Margaret University College, Edinburgh,
    graduating BA (Hons).    She has also worked in the UK.  She has a work
    history  and  worthwhile  qualifications.   Her  history   pointed   to
    resourcefulness,  ability  to  maintain   herself,   adaptability   and
    worthwhile skills.   The  Respondent  provides  return  packages  which
    would help her to re-establish herself in Zimbabwe.  There was economic
    difficulty, but not such as to render it  unduly  harsh  to  return  an
    individual such as the Appellant.  She  had  the  advantage  of  family
    support.  There was no need to pursue the alternative of relocation  to
    Bulawayo, given that the Appellant had no family there and was  not  of
    the predominant ethnic background.

10. Mr Bryce argued that there  was  ample  recent  background  information
    regarding the Appellant's home area of Mudzi, in Mashonaland  East,  to
    demonstrate continuing anti-MDC violence.  The Appellant said from  the
    outset that she has a ZANU-PF connection, but the  link  is  to  a  now
    disgraced former bodyguard of Mugabe, and likely to be of little use to
    her now.  The true  issue  in  the  case  became  internal  relocation:
    whether the Appellant could be expected to relocate  to  Harare,  where
    she has two sisters and a brother.

11. Mr Bryce sought to lead further oral evidence  from  the  Appellant  on
    internal relocation, on the grounds that it had not so far been focused
    as the live issue.  Mrs O'Brien did not object, and I  agreed  to  hear
    the evidence, under reservation of whether error in law might be found.

12. In evidence-in-chief the Appellant  said  that  her  family  in  Harare
    comprises her sister Redemption, her sister Rodwicker, and her  brother
    Alois.  Each sibling has two children.  The children of her sisters are
    under 18, while the children of her brothers  are  now  over  18.   Her
    brother has a horticultural business, growing  and  selling  seedlings.
    He has no employees.  Her sisters are  both  unemployed.   Redemption's
    husband runs a butchery,  also  a  one  person  business.   Rodwicker's
    husband is a telecommunications officer in a private company.  It would
    be difficult for the appellant to live with her siblings  because  they
    are all struggling and finding it difficult to meet  expenses  such  as
    school fees.  They would not throw her out  onto  the  street,  but  it
    would impose great pressure on them if they had to  support  her  also.
    She would be wary of putting their lives in danger,  having  been  away
    from Zimbabwe for a considerable time and having  sought  asylum.   She
    has another sister in the UK, working as a mental  health  nurse.   The
    Appellant lives with her and receives support from  her.   This  sister
    has no immediate family of her own.  She sends  support  to  her  other
    siblings and to their parents in Mudzi.  While studying in the UK,  the
    Appellant  worked  as  a  support  worker  with  people  with  learning
    disabilities, and in the  Hilton  Hotel.   She  believes  it  would  be
    extremely difficult to find a job in Harare.  Unemployment is high  and
    she would not be favoured as an asylum seeker absent from  the  country
    over the last thirteen years.  People would rather help somebody  else.
    Bulawayo would be worse, because she has never  been  there,  does  not
    speak Ndebele and has no relatives or other contacts.

13. In cross-examination the Appellant said that her sister Redemption last
    worked as a teacher in 1999 or 2000.  She stopped work not because  she
    had a family but  because  there  was  no  further  work.   Her  sister
    Rodwicker was also a teacher,  until  about  2003.   Both  sisters  are
    supported by their husbands.  Her brother's  children  are  working  in
    South Africa.  Her brother supports his wife and himself and  helps  to
    support her parents.  Both parents  are  retired.   Her  father  was  a
    teacher and her mother a housewife.  Her father has a pension,  but  it
    is very small, and they now rely on their children.   Her  brother  and
    her sister Redemption own their own properties.   Rodwicker  rents  her
    home, and her children are still at school.  She and  her  husband  are
    paying the school fees.  She is aware that she could obtain  assistance
    to help her on her return, but that would  not  continue  in  the  long
    term, and she does not  have  the  contacts  required  to  establish  a
    business.

14. There was no re-examination.

15. In further submissions on  the  internal  relocation  issue,  Mr  Bryce
    referred to the Respondent's Country of Origin Information Report dated
    13th  July  2012  at  paragraphs  2.07  or  2.08.   2.07  notes  a  90%
    unemployment  rate,  whereas  2.08  quotes  a   2008   paper   by   the
    International Labour Organisation stating that despite a sharp fall  in
    formal sector employment, the unemployment rate has remained below 10%.
     Mr Bryce acknowledged  that  the  stark  difference  between  the  two
    figures must reflect different treatment of  the  formal  and  informal
    employment sectors.  He argued that the Appellant's bleak view  of  her
    likely employment prospects was realistic.  It was a  greater  hardship
    to  impose  unemployment  through  relocation  on  a  person  who   had
    qualifications and experience but was unable to find a  use  for  them.
    Although the Respondent would provide assistance which  might  help  to
    start a business, the Appellant was on  her  own  with  no  partner  to
    assist, and possibly not "streetwise" so as to accommodate  herself  to
    the intense competition of the marketplace.  Enormous changes had taken
    place over the thirteen years since she left Zimbabwe,  and  she  would
    have a huge problem with adjustment.  The case should not fail  on  the
    internal relocation alternative.

16. Mrs O'Brien pointed out that in the suggested and most likely  area  of
    relocation the Appellant would  have  substantial  family  connections.
    Her siblings all had their own accommodation, two of them owning  their
    properties.  No doubt they were not in affluent circumstances but  they
    had small businesses, they could pay school fees, and they  managed  to
    get by.   The circumstances the Appellant would face in Harare were not
    comparable to those she enjoyed here, but that was not  the  test,  and
    the circumstances she faced were far from the worst.  As to ability  to
    adjust, she had come to the UK to study and her  personal  history  did
    not suggest that  she  lacked  ambition  or  positive  abilities.   The
    evidence showed that her extended family members constitute  a  network
    of mutual support.  Against that background and the  support  available
    from Refugee Action, funded principally by the Secretary of State,  the
    Appellant's situation did not amount to undue hardship on return.

17. I reserved my determination.

18.  The  relevant  comparison   is   firstly   between   the   Appellant's
    circumstances in her home area and in her proposed place of relocation,
    i.e. between Mudzi and Harare, not between conditions in the UK and  in
    Harare.

19. There is nothing to establish that the Appellant would be worse off  in
    Harare than in Mudzi (absent fear of persecution).  The  reverse  might
    well be true.  Her economic prospects in either area are not as good as
    in the UK, but no worse than most of the population  in  Zimbabwe;  and
    given  her  personal  background  and  family  circumstances,   and   a
    relocation package, her prospects are better than many others.

20. The expectation that the Appellant might  relocate  to  Harare  is  not
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.  (There is no need to test whether  there
    might be  other  less  attractive  but  still  viable  alternatives  in
    Bulawayo or elsewhere.)

21. I resolve the other issues as follows.

22. The judge erred by considering the HJ Iran principle and  the  decision
    in RT to be irrelevant.  The Appellant's position as someone who  would
    say that she did support ZANU-PF was stronger not weaker than that of a
    person of no political belief.  That was an error of legal approach.

23. It was possible to find, notwithstanding that error, that the Appellant
    was not at risk of being called upon to demonstrate  loyalty,  but  the
    error was a significant one, connected to the vital issues.   I do  not
    think it would be satisfactory for the determination to stand.

24. The Appellant might well go unchallenged in Mudzi, but  the  background
    evidence to which Mr Bryce referred and the country guidance  mentioned
    at headnote (2) is sufficient to show a real risk.

25. The decisive issue is as identified at headnote (8)  and  as  discussed
    above.  The Appellant has a realistic option of internal relocation  to
    Harare.  Although the case on her behalf was  mounted  with  skill  and
    care, that point is ultimately decisive against her.

26. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following decision is substituted: the appeal, as brought to the First-
    tier Tribunal, is dismissed.


[pic]

11 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
