
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/11639/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 October 2016                       |On 26 October 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                 MOHSEN [F]

                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Muman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni      (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the Upper Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dhaliwal hereinafter "the Judge") made after a
hearing of 22 March 2006, to dismiss his appeal against the  Secretary  of
State's Decision of 10 August 2015 refusing to grant  him  asylum  or  any
other form of international protection.  For reasons which will soon  become
apparent to a reader of this determination, it is a short one.

2.    Permission had been granted on  the  specific  basis  that  the Judge
might have erred in law  in  failing  to  adequately  consider  whether  the
appellant might have to follow the Christian faith (it is accepted he  is  a
Christian convert from Islam) discreetly in order to avoid persecution  such
that a  grant  of  asylum  would  be  appropriate  (see  HJ (Iran)  and  HT
(Cameroon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  UKSC 31).
It was also suggested, as a related point, that the Judge might have  erred
in failing to consider whether he would be able to continue to practice  his
current faith in the branch of Christianity he had adopted once returned  to
Iran.

3.    By way of brief background, the appellant is an Iranian  national  and
was found, by the Judge, to be a genuine convert to Christianity.   He  had
converted whilst in Iran.  The Judge had also accepted that the authorities
in Iran made an attempt to arrest him,  as  a  result  of  his  interest  in
Christianity (see paragraph 31  of  the  determination)  and  that  he  had
subsequently left that country and continued to practice his  faith  in  the
UK.   The Judge  had  decided  that  he  had  carried  out  only   limited
evangelising activity in the UK and that he would not  carry  out  any  such
activity in Iran and would, therefore, not be  at  risk  of  persecution  in
that country. That was because ordinary converts (that is to say  those  who
did not seek to pass on the faith) would not be at risk. The Judge had also
seemingly  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  left  Iran  illegally   (see
paragraph 44 of the determination) but did not think he would  be  at  risk
upon return on that account alone  relying,  for  that  proposition,  on  SB
(Risk On Return - Illegal Exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.

4.    Permission having been granted, a  hearing  was  convened  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could  be  given  as  to
whether the Judge had erred in law and, if so, what should flow from  that.
Representation at that hearing was as indicated above.

5.    Mrs Aboni, at the outset, said that she would accept that the Judge's
decision was flawed. That was because the appellant  had  been  accepted  by
the Judge as having been of adverse interest to  the  authorities  who  had
attempted to arrest him in Iran and, in consequence, in light  of  what  had
been said in the recent country guidance decision of  SSH  and  HR  (Illegal
Exit:  Failed Asylum Seeker (Iran) CG 2016 UKUT 00308 (IAC) he would be at
risk in consequence of being  a  person  who  had  departed  Iran  illegally
having earlier come to the adverse attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities.
Although that specific point was not taken in the grounds of appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal it was squarely raised in a skeleton argument which Mr Muman
had provided.

6.    Given Mrs Aboni's conciliatory  submissions,  should  it  be  thought
necessary for me to do so, I amend the grounds in order  to  encompass  that
particular proposition. I should add that Mrs Aboni did not  merely  invite
me to set aside the Judge's decision but  she  went  on  to  invite  me  to
substitute my own decision allowing the appellant's asylum appeal.

7.    It does seem to me that, in fact, the Judge did  err  in  the  manner
Mr Muman now contends and Mrs Aboni unreservedly accepts he did.  As I say,
it seems to have been accepted that he  had  departed  Iran  illegally.   He
would, therefore, be returning as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  who  had  left
illegally.  As was stated in SSH and  HR,  cited  above,  ordinarily,  those
matters of themselves would not be sufficient to lead  to  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious ill-treatment upon  return.   However,  in  analysing
matters the Judge appeared to have lost sight  of  his  acceptance  of  the
attempted arrest on the basis of the appellant's interest  in  Christianity.
So, not only would the appellant be returning as a failed asylum seeker  who
had exited Iran illegally,  he  would  also  be  returning  as  a  Christian
convert whose  conversion  or  interest  in  Christianity  had  excited  the
interests of the authorities to the extent that they had  sought  to  arrest
him.  Further, he would be returning as a  man  who  had  previously  evaded
their clutches.  I conclude the cumulative effect of all of  that  would  be
to place him at risk.  Indeed there is now  agreement  between  the  parties
that that is so.

8.    In light of the above I set aside the Judge's decision.  I go  on  to
remake the decision and, in so doing, I allow the appeal on  asylum  grounds
and also, on the same basis, on human rights grounds under Article 3 of the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  That decision is set aside.

In remaking  the  decision  I  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision of 10 August 2015.  I do so on asylum grounds
and on human rights grounds (Article 3).

I make no anonymity direction.  None was made  by  the  First-tier Tribunal
and none was sought before me.


Signed:                           Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway          26 October 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and, therefore, there can be no fee award.


Signed:                           Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway          26 October 2016


