
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11055/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 5th June 2013                                |On 6  June 2013            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              NATALLY NYAKABAWA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mrs F Farrell, of P G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on  6th  June  1988.   She
    says that she entered the UK unlawfully in 2004.  She sought asylum  on
    20th March  2009.   Her  appeal  against  refusal  of  that  claim  was
    dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge  J  G  Macdonald   by   determination
    promulgated on 20th July 2009.  The Appellant had exhausted her  appeal
    rights by 21st December 2009.  Following  a  judicial  review,  further
    representations were refused with no right  of  appeal  on  4th  August
    2011.  The Appellant was encountered on 18th  October  2012,  following
    which she again made further representations.  Those were  refused  for
    reasons explained in the Respondent's letter dated 27th November  2012,
    under reference to RT [2012] UKSC 38 and to RN Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT
    0083.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  by
    determination dated 17th January 2013.  The Appellant was  again  found
    to be a witness lacking  in  credibility,  having  accepted  in  cross-
    examination that her claim to be an MDC supporter was a lie, and having
    given conflicting accounts.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal are to the  general  effect
    that RT and RN require the appeal to be allowed.

 4. On 8th March 2013 permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted, on the view that there was an arguable issue as to whether the
    judge followed country guidance or gave valid reasons for not doing so.

 5. It is convenient to set out here the current country guidance, which is
    CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059.
    The case was added to the country guidance list on 1st  February  2013,
    after the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  and  of  the
    grounds (although prior to the grant of permission).  It  is  headnoted
    as follows  as follows:

 (1) There is no general duty of disclosure on the  Secretary  of  State  in
asylum appeals generally  or  Country  Guidance  cases  in  particular.  The
extent of the Secretary of State's obligation is set out in R v  SSHD  ex  p
Kerrouche No 1 [1997] Imm AR 610, as  explained  in  R  (ota  Cindo)  v  IAT
[2002] EWHC 246 (Admin); namely, that  she  must  not  knowingly  mislead  a
court or tribunal by omission of material that was known or  ought  to  have
been known to her.

(2)   The  Country  Guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  in  EM  and   Others
(Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) on the position in Zimbabwe  as
at the end of January 2011 was not vitiated in any respect by the  use  made
of anonymous evidence from certain sources in the Secretary of State's  Fact
Finding Mission report of 2010. The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that
there had been a durable change since  RN  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]
UKAIT 00083. The Country Guidance in EM does not require to be  amended,  as
regards the position at that time, in the light of-

     (a) the disclosure by the Secretary of State of any of  the  materials
    subsequently disclosed in response to the orders of the Court of Appeal
    and related directions of the Tribunal in the current proceedings; or


     (b) any fresh material adduced by the  parties  in  those  proceedings
    that might have a bearing on the position at that time.

(3)  The only change to the EM Country Guidance  that  it  is  necessary  to
make as regards the position as at the end of January 2011 arises  from  the
judgments in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC  38.  The  EM  Country  Guidance  is,
accordingly, re-stated as follows (with the change underlined  in  paragraph
(5) below):

    (1)      As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


    (2)   The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case of a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South. Such a  person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).


    (3)   The situation is not uniform across the relevant rural areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.


    (4)    In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
         A person may, however, be able to show that his or her  village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.


    (5)      A returnee to Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.


    (6)      A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


    (7)      The issue of what is a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.


    (8)  Internal relocation from a rural area to  Harare  or  (subject  to
         what we have just said) Bulawayo is, in  general,  more  realistic;
         but  the  socio-economic  circumstances  in   which   persons   are
         reasonably likely to find themselves will need to be considered, in
         order to determine whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         to expect them to relocate.


    (9)  The economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since  the  period
         considered in RN. The replacement of the Zimbabwean currency by the
         US  dollar  and  the  South  African  rand  has  ended  the  recent
         hyperinflation. The availability of food and other goods  in  shops
         has likewise improved, as has  the  availability  of  utilities  in
         Harare. Although these improvements are not being felt by everyone,
         with 15% of the population still requiring food aid, there has  not
         been any deterioration in the  humanitarian  situation  since  late
         2008. Zimbabwe has a large informal economy,  ranging  from  street
         traders  to  home-based  enterprises,  which  (depending   on   the
         circumstances) returnees may be expected to enter.


    (10)     As was the position in RN, those who are or have been teachers
         require to have their cases determined on the basis that this  fact
         places them  in  an  enhanced  or  heightened  risk  category,  the
         significance of which will need to be  assessed  on  an  individual
         basis.


    (11)  In certain cases,  persons  found  to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid.

(4) In the course of deciding CM's appeal, the present Tribunal has made  an
assessment of certain general  matters  regarding  Zimbabwe  as  at  October
2012. As a result, the following country information may  be  of  assistance
to decision-makers and judges. It is, however, not Country  Guidance  within
the scope of Practice Direction 12 and is based on  evidence  which  neither
party claimed to be comprehensive:

    a) The picture presented by  the  fresh  evidence  as  to  the  general
       position of politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe as at October
       2012 does not differ  in  any  material  respect  from  the  Country
       Guidance in EM.


    b)  Elections are due to be held in 2013; but it is unclear when.


    c) In the light of the evidence regarding the activities of Chipangano,
       judicial-fact finders may need to pay particular regard to whether a
       person, who is reasonably likely to go to Mbare  or  a  neighbouring
       high density area of Harare, will come to the adverse  attention  of
       that group; in particular, if he or she is reasonably likely to have
       to find employment of a kind that Chipangano  seeks  to  control  or
       otherwise exploit for economic, rather than political, reasons.

    d) The fresh evidence regarding the position at  the  point  of  return
       does not indicate any increase in risk since  the  Country  Guidance
       was given in HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007]  UKAIT
       00094. On the contrary, the available evidence as to  the  treatment
       of those who have been returned to Harare Airport since 2007 and the
       absence of any reliable evidence of risk there means that  there  is
       no justification for extending the scope of who might be regarded by
       the CIO as an MDC activist.

 6. Mrs Farrell submitted that the determination was  wrong  in  its  legal
    approach as matters were understood at the time  of  the  hearing,  and
    that on a  correct  application  of  RT  and  of  RN  she  should  have
    succeeded.  However, she correctly accepted that if the  decision  were
    to be remade, then CM had to be followed, and in  that  light  no  real
    argument could be mounted for the appellant, given the findings on  her
    individual circumstances.

 7. I formally reserved my determination.

 8. The FtT judge did consider RT  and  RN.   He  also  looked  at  updated
    background information at paragraphs  38  and  39,  which  led  him  to
    conclude at paragraph 40 that the appellant would be of no interest  to
    the authorities on return.  No error of law is to  be  detected  there.
    In any event, if the decision were to be remade the  outcome  would  be
    the same, applying CM.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

10. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


[pic]

5 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
