


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/11194/2013
     AA/11195/2013
      AA/11196/2013
     AA/11197/2013
      AA/11198/2013
     AA/11206/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 16 April 2015                            |On 20 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                  SNE (+5)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by Lawrence & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The first appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  in  1950  and  is  the
husband  of  the  second  appellant  and  father  to  the  third  to   sixth
appellants. The appellants claimed asylum on 20 December 2011. Their  claims
were refused on 6 December 2013 and they appealed against  the  decision  to
remove them from the United Kingdom.

The appellants' appeals were heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  16  July
2014  and  were  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Morris   in   a
determination issued on 18 September  2014.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal was sought by, and granted to, the appellants on  4  November
2014.

In an error of law decision dated 29  January  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Chana found there to be material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge R J N B Morris and set aside her decision  in  its
entirety. She directed that the decision in the  appeals  be  re-made  at  a
resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal at a date to be decided.

The appeals were listed for a resumed hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  on
16 April 2015. However, in light  of  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
appellants and in view of the request by the respondent for  an  adjournment
of the proceedings, it  was  decided  to  convert  the  hearing  to  a  Case
Management Review Hearing.

At the Case Management Review Hearing submissions were  made  before  us  in
regard to the re-making of the decision in the appeals. On  the  basis  that
First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris's  decision  had  been  set  aside  in  its
entirety and that there was to be a fresh hearing  which  may  involve  oral
evidence from witnesses, and upon the application of Mr Bazini on behalf  of
the appellants, it was agreed that, contrary to  the  directions  previously
given, the appropriate course would be for the case to be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any  judge  aside  from  Judge  R  J  N  B
Morris.

    Anonymity
    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original Appellants. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
