
                             [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: AA/13670/2015

                                AA/13671/2015

                                      AA/13673/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Liverpool                  |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 August 2017                    |  On 8 August 2017                      |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between


                          Mr A T, mrs z m, mr m t,
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                           v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L. Mensa, counsel instructed by AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for an error of law hearing on
28 April 2017. In a decision dated 22 May 2017, I found an error of law and
adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing before me, on the basis of
submissions only. That decision is appended.

2.  The Appellant's solicitors provided an updated bundle for the hearing,
sent on 28 July 2017 and received by the Upper Tribunal on 31 July 2017.
This includes inter alia a spoken Arabic assessment report dated 20 July
2017 in respect of the third Appellant. An updated country expert report
from Dr Rebwah Fatah dated 3 August 2017 was sent by fax the same day.

Hearing

3. At the beginning of the hearing, Mr McVeety indicated that in light of
the linguistic report and the updated expert report that the third
Appellant would be suspected as a Daesh/ISIS supporter by the State
authorities thus there could be no internal relocation and he accepted that
he would be at risk on return to Iraq.  He indicated that he was
maintaining the SSHD's challenge in respect of the first Appellant but to
the extent only that he sought to rely on the refusal letter dated 9
November 2015.

4. Ms Mensah handed up brief biographies of the first and second Appellants
which she submitted showed that they are both eligible to apply for jobs on
the shortage occupation list: the first Appellant is a highly qualified
multidisciplinary professional in Power Electronics & Control Engineering
and Distributed Software Development, which fields of specialty are on the
current list of shortage occupancies at SCO 2123 and SOC 2136. He obtained
a PhD in Electronic Engineering & Electronics from the University of
Liverpool in 1990. His wife, the second Appellant is a highly qualified
Software Developer, who obtained her MSc in Computer Based Information
Systems from Sunderland University in 2007. Her field of specialty is also
currently on the shortage occupancy list: SOC 2136.

5. In respect of risk on return to Iraq, Ms Mensah submitted that:

5.1. The first two Appellants have a mixed Sunni/Shia marriage in that the
first Appellant is Sunni & the second Appellant is Shia, but the children
are seen as Sunni because they follow their father's line. Dr Fatah in his
report sets out the risk from non-State actors in Baghdad in that Shia
militia have been employed to support the fight against Daesh and Al Qaeda,
which forces Sunni Muslims to flee into ever smaller circles in Baghdad, so
for the Appellants the starting point is that they are in a mixed marriage.

5.2. The first two Appellants have been out of the country (Iraq) for 19
years. They are professionally qualified and there is a list of
professionals that have been targeted and killed in the bundle and the
witness statement of Professor Ali Al-Thamir at pages 71-73 of the bundle
confirms the killings of a number of professionals and the fact that he
fled from Iraq on 21 July 2003 and that two of his close colleagues were
killed and another colleague was assassinated shortly after he fled.

5.3. The second Appellant is a highly educated woman, which was acceptable
at the time she left Iraq but she would be returning back to a very
different country where the position of women is different and women are
vulnerable,

5.4. The Appellants do not have in place a support network in Baghdad. As
is set out in his supplementary witness statement, the first Appellant had
relatives who were part of the Ba'ath party and this would give rise to
suspicions of him as a result and he would not be able to obtain
employment. He would also be vulnerable to attack in Baghdad.

5.5. Ms Mensah submitted that all of those features taken together would
lead to the Appellants being perceived as Western and will place them in a
higher category of risk. They would also be perceived as wealthy because
they are coming from the West and would be vulnerable to kidnap. Whether it
would be on the basis of religious grounds or perceived political opinion
there would be no sufficiency of protection for them and the fear of
persecution was from non state agents. This was in contrast to the risk to
the third Appellant, their son, who would be at risk from the State
authorities because of his Jordanian accent and the resulting perceptions.
Whilst the country information report from the Home Office makes reference
to the support that could be accessed in the absence of sufficiency of
protection, there are no family members in Baghdad and whilst the second
Appellant has relatives in Kerbala, this is one of the areas that there has
been particular violence and the expert evidence makes clear that those in
a mixed marriage can only realistically live in Baghdad. She submitted that
there was a heightened risk to the family which was clear from the language
analysis and expert evidence. They are a family unit and the family will
attract all of the wrong attention because all of the features they carry.

6. Ms Mensah also sought to rely on the Upper Tribunal decision in BA
(Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC), in particular, the
fact that kidnapping remains a significant problem; there is sectarian
violence and the Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militia and
Sunni men are likely to be targeted; individual characteristics which do
not, in themselves, create a real risk on return might amount to a real
risk if considered cumulatively. The authorities were unable and unwilling
to provide protection to Sunni complainants. Ms Mensah invited me to allow
the appeal on refugee grounds for all of the family members.

7.  In respect of Article 8, Ms Mensah accepted that the Appellants did not
meet the partner or parent requirements of Appendix FM of the Rules. She
submitted that the Appellants did meet the private life requirements under
paragraph 276ADE(vi) of Appendix FM in that there would be very significant
obstacles to their integration into Iraq. It is clear from the medical
evidence that the third Appellant has very serious mental health problems
and that there would be serious discrimination against the family members
on the basis of the Sunni religion of the first and third Appellants and
the fact that the first and second Appellants are in a mixed marriage. All
of those things would make employment extremely difficult. Moreover, IDPs
in Baghdad are living in extreme poverty. All of these factors amount to
very significant obstacles.
8. In respect of consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules, they could
meet the financial and English language requirements. Whilst their private
life was developed at a time when their private life in the UK was
precarious, they were here lawfully. The first and second Appellants'
daughter is here in the United Kingdom and has refugee status and the
relationship has now been re-kindled. It has been accepted on the evidence
that their son cannot return to Iraq and it cannot be proportionate for the
family to be severed, given the young ages of the daughter and son and the
fact that the first and second Appellant are the only family they have and
the emotional and physical dependency. The relationships between the
parents and children would be severed and their son has never lived without
his parents. The first Appellant and thus the rest of the family has lost
residency in Jordan and the first Appellant has lost his pension as well.
They are clearly able to work and there would be no burden upon the State.
Ms Mensah submitted that the public interest does not weigh in favour of
them leaving and that the Immigration Rules do not recognize these unique
circumstances. She submitted that there were exceptional circumstances and
in the alternative there were very significant obstacles to private life in
Baghdad.

Decision and reasons

9. I allow the appeals on refugee protection grounds and in the alternative
with reference to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules and Article 8 human
rights grounds. I announced my decision at the hearing. I now give my
reasons.

Third Appellant

10. The essential facts of the appeal by the third Appellant, MT are that
he is a national of Iraq, born on 1 March 1999 in Jordan and he has never
lived in Iraq. The medical evidence makes clear that he suffered a
deterioration in his mental health and began self-harming in the Summer of
2014, arising from a fear of being returned to Iraq following the refusal
by the SSHD to extend his father's Tier 2 visa. He was at that time 15
years of age and he was referred to the child psychiatrist at Alder Hey and
then to the child and adolescent mental health team, following which his
condition improved but relapsed when he discovered that the family's asylum
application had been refused, as a consequence of which he was unable to
complete his GCSE examinations in June 2016.

11. The First tier Tribunal Judge accepted the third Appellant's medical
condition but found it did not reach the Article 3 threshold [67] and
whilst it was in the third Appellant's best interests to remain in the UK
[81] it would not be disproportionate to expect the family to return to
Iraq [83]. However, further evidence was produced to the Upper Tribunal,
including:

(i) expert report of Dr Rebwah Fatah dated 23 November 2016;
(ii) spoken Arabic assessment report dated 20 July 2017;
(iii) supplementary report of Dr Rebwah Fatah dated 3 August 2017.

12. The first expert report of Dr Fatah at [168] identifies that the third
Appellant would be at risk as a Sunni Arab and see [173]-[205]. I note that
the Upper Tribunal reached the same conclusion generally in respect of
Sunni males in BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC)
although they found that "Sunni identity alone is not sufficient to give
rise to a real risk of serious harm". At [230] of his report, Dr Fatah
opined that if the third Appellant had a Jordanian accent, this would be
likely to cause him to be treated with suspicion wherever he may relocate
to in Iraq, particularly in Baghdad.

13. The Appellant's solicitors commissioned a report concerning the spoken
Arabic of the third Appellant, by Ali Sarmemy, a professional interpreter
who has produced "numerous expert reports, which have been commissioned for
the First-tier Tribunal, Home Office and the Police in the UK and Europe."
Mr Sarmeny concludes, having conducted a number of tests that the third
Appellant speaks Jordanian Arabic and not Iraqi Arabic.

14. The supplementary report of Dr Fatah makes clear at [38]-[39] that this
Appellant's Jordanian accent is likely to put him at risk or at least put
him under suspicion in any encounter with Shia militias who control the
security apparatus in Baghdad as Sunni Arab males are often targeted by
these militias for their perceived association with ISIS and other
insurgent groups. Jordan is one of the countries that has a high number of
ISIS fighters in Iraq and Syria and prior to that within Al-Qaeda in Iraq
(AQI) that sought to destroy Shia rule in Iraq and were responsible for
provoking the civil war and whose leader was a Jordanian national.

15. The issue of individualized risk in respect of this Appellant was not
put forward at the previous hearing, given his young age and because it was
only upon receipt of the first report of Dr Fatah in November 2016 that
this head of claim emerged. The appeal was conceded in light of the
evidence produced prior to the hearing before the Upper Tribunal. I
consider that Mr McVeety on behalf of the Home Office was correct to
concede his appeal. However, for the avoidance of doubt, in light of the
expert evidence, the country guidance decision in BA (Returns to Baghdad)
Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC) and the fact that the third Appellant is a
Sunni male with a Jordanian accent I allow the appeal of the third
Appellant on refugee protection grounds.


First Appellant

16. The first Appellant's evidence - that he is an academic with a profile;
his family members (his brother and his cousin) were Level 3 Divisional
members of the Ba-ath Party (ie above rank and file) and that his marriage
is "mixed" in that he is Sunni and his wife is Shia - was accepted by the
First tier Tribunal Judge and his findings at [32]-[39] were unchallenged
in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and are preserved. The
Respondent in the refusal letter of 9 November 2015 found that the
Appellant would not be at risk for these reasons. The issue is, whether in
light of the expert evidence that post dates the SSHD's decision and that
of the First tier Tribunal Judge, the first Appellant has a well-founded
fear of persecution if returned to Iraq.

17. I have had regard to the first expert report of Dr Fatah dated 23
November 2016, who concludes as follows in respect of risk to the first
Appellant:

(i) Sunni Arabs (the majority group of the Baath apparatus) fear being
perceived by Shias as inherently pro-Baathist simply for protesting against
the government and this phenomenon is perhaps most manifest in the killings
of Iraqi academics, who were regarded as agents of the Baath regime even if
membership was simply expedient [158]-[159];



(ii) All civilians are at risk of indiscriminate violence in Baghdad
however the first and third Appellants are at greater risk of targeted
violence because of their Sunni identity [202];

(iii)  Should the Appellants feel at risk from Shia militias in Baghdad
they cannot rely on the police for protection [280].

18. I have also had regard to a witness statement of Professor Ali Al-
Thamir dated 15 August 2016, who states that the first Appellant worked
under him at the University of Technology in Baghdad from 1990 to 1993 and
1995 to 1998; that from 2003 professionals such as University professors
and their families were regularly targeted, 300 were killed and that he was
forced to flee on 21 July 2003, following the killing of two of his close
colleagues. He also stated that one of his colleagues, Dr Saad Al-Shaaban
returned from Jordan in 2010 and was assassinated the following month in
Baghdad.

19. I accept Ms Mensah's submission in light of the background evidence
including that set out in the CIG in respect of Iraq; Sunni (Arab) Muslims
August 2016 (recently updated in June 2017) that, whilst the number of
mixed Shia Sunni areas in Baghdad is reducing due to attacks by Shias,
these are the only neighbourhoods where the Appellants could live. I have
given careful consideration to the CG decision of the Upper Tribunal in BA
(Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC). Reference is made
therein at [24] to the conclusions of the ECtHR in JK and Others v
Sweden (Application no. 59166/12) (23 August 2016) at  [116] which records
that the Home Office Country of Origin Information report dated 2014,
single out certain particularly targeted groups, such as interpreters,
Iraqi nationals employed by foreign companies, and certain affiliated
professionals such as judges, academics, teachers and legal professionals,
as being at risk of persecution. The Upper Tribunal reached inter alia the
following conclusions:

(iv) Kidnapping has been, and remains, a significant and persistent problem
contributing to the breakdown of law and order in Iraq. Incidents of
kidnapping are likely to be underreported. Kidnappings might be linked to a
political or sectarian motive; other kidnappings are rooted in criminal
activity for a purely financial motive. Whether a returnee from the West is
likely to be perceived as a potential target for kidnapping in Baghdad may
depend on how long he or she has been away from Iraq. Each case will be
fact sensitive, but in principle, the longer a person has spent abroad the
greater the risk. However, the evidence does not show a real risk to a
returnee in Baghdad on this ground alone.

(v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of US-led
coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen in 2006-2007. A
Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias in Baghdad. The
evidence indicates that Sunni men are more likely to be targeted as
suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni
identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious
harm.

(vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create a real
risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real risk for
the purpose of the Refugee Convention, Article 15(c) of the Qualification
Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed on a cumulative basis. The
assessment will depend on the facts of each case.

(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
Sunni complainants, are likely to be unwilling to provide sufficient
protection."

20. I have concluded in light of the expert and background evidence and the
CG decision set out above, that the first Appellant has a well-founded fear
of persecution if returned to Iraq on a cumulative basis viz his Sunni
religion; his mixed marriage and his profile as an academic with family
links to the Baath Party. I allow his appeal on refugee protection grounds.

21. In respect of the second Appellant, she is a dependant on her husband
and I did not hear submissions specifically on the issue of risk on return,
save that she is a professionally qualified woman and this would cause her
difficulties on return to Iraq as women are vulnerable. Whilst I accept
that this may well be the case, there is an absence of evidence before me
to show that the second Appellant would be at risk specifically on account
of her gender. The First tier Tribunal Judge considered and rejected her
claim to be at risk on account of her daughter's behaviour viz drinking and
smoking, which had been published on facebook. She may at risk on account
of her mixed marriage but the evidence does not go as far as to state this
in terms. Consequently, her appeal falls to be allowed on the basis that
she is a dependant of her husband.

22. I go on to consider in the alternative, whether removal of the
Appellants would be contrary to their private life pursuant to Article 8 of
ECHR. I have had regard to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules and whether:
"there would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration
into the country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."
In light of my findings as to the risk on return to the first and third
Appellants I find that there are very significant obstacles to their
integration into Iraq. In respect of the second Appellant, I have
considered whether there are compelling reasons justifying consideration of
Article 8 outside the Rules and I have concluded that there are, bearing in
mind that her daughter has been granted refugee status in her own right and
the SSHD has conceded her son's appeal. Whilst both children are now
adults, having been born in 1998 and 1999 they are very young adults and
careful consideration must be given to splitting a family. I have had
regard to section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and the fact that she (and her
husband and son) speak English and are financially independent. I bear in
mind that the private life of each family member has been established at a
time when their status in the United Kingdom was precarious.  I have
concluded, when all the factors are considered cumulatively, that it would
not be proportionate for the family to be separated, with the result that
the appeals are allowed, in the alternative on human rights grounds.

23. I was invited to consider making a costs order pursuant to rule
10(3)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the basis
that the Secretary of State acted unreasonably in defending proceedings. I
have given careful considered whether to do so and I have concluded that it
would not be appropriate in light of the fact that the evidence that tipped
the balance in respect of the third Appellant was submitted only shortly
before the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, in that the bundle containing
the spoken Arabic assessment report dated 20 July 2017 was only received by
the Presenting Officers Unit and the Upper Tribunal on 31 July 2017 and the
supplementary expert report of Dr Fatah was dated 3 August 2017 and was
only received on the date of the hearing.

Decision

24. The appeals of all three Appellants are allowed on the basis of refugee
protection grounds (in respect of the first and third Appellants in their
own right and in respect of the second Appellant, as a dependant of her
husband, the first Appellant).

25. The appeals are allowed, in the alternative, on human rights grounds
(family and private life) protected by Article 8 of ECHR.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
7 August 2017
