
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: AA/13674/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 24 August 2016                   |On 12 October 2016                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                 mASTER A U
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs A. Mughal, legal representative, Montague Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                 _____________________________

                  ERROR OF LAW & REASONS
                 _____________________________

1. The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 2 December 1997. He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 December 2014 and claimed asylum. The
basis of his claim is that his family are involved in an active blood feud
with the Biba family and he feared he would be killed if he had remained or
had to return to Albania. This application was refused by the Respondent on
17 December 2015. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his
appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese for hearing on 9 June
2016. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 27 June 2016, he dismissed
the appeal. He held at [20] "I found this appellant not to be credible in
relation to firstly the core of his claim that he and his family are being
subjected to a blood feud in Albania." The Judge further relied upon
documentary evidence obtained by the Respondent from the Albanian Ministry
of Interior, which identified the Appellant's family and stated "Following
verifications, the above mentioned nationals and their family members do
not have conflicts, revenge or blood feuds connected with them and are not
confined".

2. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time on the basis that the Judge failed to give any reasons for not
finding the Appellant credible apart from the document at D1-D2. This
document fails to state what checks were conducted and by whom and the
Judge failed to assess this document correctly.

3. Permission to appeal was granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
the basis that:

      "I do not have a copy of the Appellant's Bundle in the file of papers
and can     only accept that in fact that reliance on the documents was in
fact in dispute.       For these reasons I am satisfied that there is an
arguable error of law in the      decision in that the Judge did not make
proper findings on the evidence before  him."

Hearing

4. At the hearing before me, Mrs Mughal submitted that the whole of the
findings had been put into two paragraphs and there had been no proper
consideration as to the key issues viz the Appellant's credibility and
Convention reason. She submitted that great weight has been attached at D1-
D3 of the Respondent's bundle and that the whole determination turns on
those alone. She stated that it was the Appellant's case that he does not
accept the document at D1-D2 as it is unclear from the report which checks
were made and there should have been a clear indication as to where the
authorities went and who they questioned.

5. In his response, Mr Avery submitted that it was important to bear in
mind the country guidance decision: EH (Blood Feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT
00348 (IAC) and the finding of the Upper Tribunal that active blood feuds
are few and declining and that the Appellant must produce evidence of his
profile as a potential target and whether he has been in self-confinement.
He submitted that it was conspicuous from the Appellant's account that he
does not satisfy either of those points. In terms of the Judge's assessment
of the claim at [14] which alleges that there was a conflict between his
family and the Biba family, this is a conflict based on the actions of his
brother's father's paternal cousins. The only evidence the Appellant was at
risk was that he was in a forest and there were gunshots. It is clear from
what he said that the police were contacted by his parents and that his
father approached the police to obtain protection. This is important in the
context of the documents produced by the Secretary of State that there is
no family feud. If there was there should have been a record since the
authorities were contacted.
In the circumstances, the Judge was quite right to place significant weight
on D1 and D2 of the Respondent's bundle which detailed enquiries made of
the Albanian authorities as to the existence of a blood feud and this is
the only reliable evidence before the Judge. The Appellant did not produce
any evidence to show that he was subject to a blood feud. Even on his own
evidence the Appellant failed to establish he was subject to a blood feud
and the Judge's findings were entirely adequate.

6. In her reply, Mrs Mughal submitted that, with regard to the country
guidance decision no proper findings were made; none of this has been said
in the determination or why the conclusions have been drawn. She had not
seen the Memorandum of Understanding between the British and Albanian
authorities but did not take a point on the secure and confidential
exchange of information given that this is a non-state agents case.

7. I confirmed that the Appellant's bundle had been re-sent and it was on
the Tribunal file. I reserved my decision in order to check the terms of
the Memorandum of Understanding between the UK and Albanian authorities.

Decision

8. I have been unable to find the Memorandum of Understanding regarding the
exchange of information between the UK and Albanian authorities, referred
to in the letter at D1-D2 of the Respondent's bundle. This is a letter from
the British Embassy in Tirana dated 24 June 2016 which gives this
Appellant's name and date of birth and is entitled: "Results of checks
undertaken by the General Directorate of Civil Registry at the Ministry of
Interior of Albania relating to the Albanian national: Amarildo Ukkaj." The
author of the letter states that, with the assistance of trusted colleagues
at the Albanian Ministry of the Interior, he has successfully conducted
checks with the Directorate of Civil Registry at the Albanian Ministry of
the Interior.
Mrs Mughal, on the Appellant's behalf, did not seek to challenge the
genuineness of the document from the Albanian authorities but rather
submitted that the weight to be attached to it must be reduced by virtue of
the fact that no indication was given as to the source(s) of the
information or the questions asked.

9. It is the case that the document is lacking in detail as to the
"verifications" undertaken by the Albanian authorities, except that it they
were conducted through official channels ie the Directorate of Civil
Registry at the Albanian Ministry of the Interior. Nevertheless, the burden
of proving his case is upon the Appellant, who does not dispute the
accuracy of the recording of his family members' names or his father's date
of birth, the name of his village or when or how he left Albania, via
Montenegro. Nor has he produced any evidence to counter the evidence
contained in the letter from the British Embassy dated 24 June 2016. In
these circumstances, I consider that the First tier Tribunal Judge was
entitled to place weight on the document in question and find that,
contrary to his claim, the Appellant's family were not involved in a blood
feud. For these reasons, I find no material error of law in the decision of
First tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

11 October 2016
