
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/13493/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2016                          |On 7 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     nbd
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K. Jarkun,  counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co solicitors (Harrow office)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Vietnam, born on 16 December 1997. He
arrived in the United Kingdom illegally in August 2014 and claimed asylum
on 3 December 2014. He was referred to the National Referral Mechanism on
27 April 2015 and the Respondent subsequently accepted that he is a victim
of modern slavery having been trafficked to the United Kingdom. On 26
November 2015, his asylum application was refused on the basis that his
fear of persecution was not objectively well-founded and he appealed
against this decision. His appeal came before Judge of the First tier
Tribunal Scott for hearing on 11 May 2016, when the hearing proceeded
absent any evidence by or on behalf of the Appellant, who was not present
at the hearing, nor represented.

2. The appeal was dismissed in a decision and reasons dated 7 July 2016. An
application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made on 25
July 2016 out of time but time was extended on the basis that the Appellant
only received the decision on 11 July 2016. The grounds in support of the
application for permission to appeal asserted that neither the Appellant,
social services nor his legal representatives had been informed of the date
of the appeal hearing on 11 May 2016 and thus there had been a breach of
natural justice resulting in unfairness and procedural impropriety.
Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes
on 4 August 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that albeit unknown to
the Judge there was a procedural irregularity in that the Appellant's
solicitors had been removed from the record in error and, whilst the notice
of hearing had been sent to the Appellant's last known address, he was only
18, requires an interpreter and has been found to be the victim of
trafficking and it was understandable that he would have assumed that his
solicitors would have notified him of the hearing.

3. At the hearing before me, Mr Kotas, on behalf of the Secretary of State,
readily accepted that there had been procedural unfairness arising from the
administrative error which resulted in the Appellant's representatives
being removed from the record and thus no hearing notice was sent to them
informing them of the date of the appeal hearing. There is on the Tribunal
file a letter dated 11 August 2016 to the Appellant's support worker at
Islington Young People's Service, acknowledging the administrative error
and apologizing.

4. Therefore, I allow the appeal on the basis that the reason for the
absence of the Appellant and his representatives at the hearing before the
First tier Tribunal was because his representatives had been mistakenly
struck from the record and the Appellant had moved house and had not
received the notice of hearing. Whilst he should have informed the Tribunal
that he had moved, I find in light of the Respondent's acceptance that the
Appellant is a victim of trafficking, his young age and limited English
that it is understandable that he did not and that he would rely on his
representatives to inform the Tribunal of his change of address and any
appeal hearing date. The fact that the appeal proceeded absent any evidence
from or on behalf of the Appellant was thus procedurally unfair. Given that
the Appellant does wish to prosecute his appeal and appeared before me in
person and with counsel instructed by his solicitors, I remit the appeal
for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

5 December 2016
