
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
DA/00462/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 March 2019                         | On 16 April 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Marco Alexandre Vaz Moreno Martins
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Turpin Miller,
solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  of  the  respondent  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State that the present  respondent  should  be
deported.

2. The respondent (hereinafter the claimant) is a citizen of  Portugal.   In
very broad terms he is an EEA national who has been in the  United  Kingdom
and has acquired rights as an  EEA  national  which  makes  him  harder  to
deport.

3. In any cases involving EEA  nationals  it  is  fundamental  to  establish
precisely what  rights  have  been  acquired.   Very  often  a  person  has
established a permanent right of residence and that makes  him  irremovable
unless there are serious grounds.  Sometimes a person will have established
ten years' rights of residence  and  can  only  be  removed  on  imperative
grounds.  Not many people are in that category because of the way  the  law
operates.  Frequently a period of imprisonment, which prompts a deportation
order, will break the term of continuous residence and with the result  the
"imperative grounds" test is not the relevant test.

4. It is often not entirely straightforward to determine from a  quick  look
at the papers whether  a  person  has  acquired  the  necessary  period  of
residence and whether or not it has been interrupted.  In such a case where
it is appropriate  to  make  a  concession  then  a  concession  should  be
encouraged because it will save a great deal of unnecessary court time.  It
will only be very unusual circumstances where the Secretary of  State  will
seek to deport somebody where the imperative grounds test  applies  because
it is a very hard test to satisfy.  It is plain, as Mr Walker has conceded,
(but in doing so he was doing no more than stating the  glaringly  obvious)
that this is not a case where the imperative  grounds  test  is  satisfied.
There are no imperative grounds for this person's deportation.

5. When the case came to be decided in the First-tier Tribunal it  is  quite
clear that the judge thought that the Secretary of State had conceded  that
the imperative grounds test was relevant.  The judge  has  been  approached
and has made a short statement.  It has been disclosed to the parties,  and
I set out now the judge's comments.  He said:

  "I recall this specific appeal because it  was  acknowledged  by  Mr  XXX
  (that is the Presenting Officer)  that  the  SSHD  had  not  applied  the
  correct test which should have been 'Imperative Grounds'.  It was an area
  that I was not familiar with and had to  undertake  some  legal  research
  before I was able to prepare  my  written  decision.   I  agree  with  Mr
  Gilbert's  recollection  on  this  point.   I  could  have   phrased   my
  observation in my decision at para 8 more clearly  by  stating  that  the
  sole issue related to imperative grounds.  As indicated  it  was  not  an
  area of law that I was familiar with and hence noted down that which [the
  Presenting Officer] had highlighted from the outset of the hearing."

6. Thus the judge who tried the case  said  that  "imperative  grounds"  was
agreed to be the relevant test.

7. I have played a part in this  case  before  the  hearing.  I  have  given
directions and in response to those directions there is  a  statement  from
Counsel and from the Presenting Officer.

8. Counsel was Mr Andrew Gilbert and in a statement dated  23  October  2018
he said that he recalled and confirmed from his contemporaneous record that
the Presenting Officer had said during  his  closing  submissions  "on  the
evidence he (the claimant) has  certainly  been  exercising  treaty  rights
since 2001, and on his evidence since 1999.   The  imperative  ground  test
must be taken as the  test".   In  other  words  Mr  Gilberts  recalls  the
Presenting Officer conceding  that  the  imperative  ground  test  was  the
relevant test.

9. This was all a bit of a  surprise  to  the  Presenting  Officer  who  has
produced a statement in which he makes clear  that  that  is  not  what  he
thought he had done and it was not  his  intention  and  that  makes  sense
because, quite unlike Mr Walker's concession this  morning,  it  is  not  a
concession that is obviously right.

10. However in order to find any weight in the Secretary of State's  case  I
either have to find that the judge and Counsel are wrong in what they  tell
me happened or that they are right but the concession had no effect in law.
 I cannot see any reason why the last argument should carry any weight  and
Mr Walker did not advance it.  The concession was a concession of fact  and
in broad terms such concessions are binding.

11. The only sensible conclusion that I can reach  is  that  the  Presenting
Officer said something he did not mean to say.  Very few of us can  say  we
have never done something like that but it  was  acted  on  and  binds  the
Secretary of State and  I  can  see  no  alternative  but  to  dismiss  the
Secretary of State's appeal because the decision that was complained of was
made on a concession made by the Presenting Officer which the Tribunal  was
entitled and probably obliged to accept.

12. It follows therefore that I dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 April 2019                  |



