
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
DA/00152/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 June 2019                          |On 04 July 2019                    |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Ahmed Abukar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by Portway Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated on 23 April 2019 allowing the claimant's
appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to deport him, dated
6 December 2017, under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission to appeal on 16 May
2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge materially erred
regarding the public interest assessment of removing an EEA national with
the lowest level of protected rights given the offending background.  All
grounds were allowed to be argued.

We have received the Rule 24 response from the claimant dated 14 June 2019
and the Secretary of State's skeleton argument of 14 June 2019, which we
have read and considered in addition to the submissions from the two
representatives.

The claimant first came to the United Kingdom aged 14 in 2003.  Thereafter,
he accumulated some nine criminal convictions for relatively minor offences
committed between 2008 and April 2017, one of which resulted in a custodial
sentence.  However, ultimately he was arrested and prosecuted for
possession with intent to supply class A crack cocaine and heroin, to which
he pleaded guilty, and in due course received sixteen months' imprisonment,
his first custodial sentence.  Thereafter followed the stage 1 deport
decision of 13 November 2017 and the following month, on 6 December, the
deportation decision and order, made and certified under Regulation 33.  He
was in fact removed from the United Kingdom in February 2018 before his
appeal was lodged but was allowed to return for the appeal hearing. We
understand that he is now back in the Netherlands.

The grounds of application submit that there was a material misdirection in
law, that the judge failed to adequately assess the risk of further
offending and the seriousness of his previous offences.  It is also said
that the judge failed to resolve a discrepancy in the risk offending
between an OASys Report and a PSR report.  It is suggested that the
offending history showed a series of escalating offences and it was pointed
out that the claimant's wife and child did not prevent him from committing
further offences.

In the assessment of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, we note that
not only does the decision of the Secretary of State have to be justified
on grounds of public policy, public security or public health but it must
be proportionate, and the claimant's personal conduct must represent a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the
fundamental interests of society by reference to factors set out in
Schedule 1 of the Regulations. That last consideration, the fundamental
interests of society, has been described in Mr Tufan's submissions as the
public interest.

Mr Tufan placed emphasis on consideration of Schedule 1, in particular
paragraphs 7(f), (g) and (h), which he submitted were not adequately
addressed in the decision, if at all. It is also suggested that when
observing that the claimant had not offended since the index offence the
judge failed to recognise that he could not do so because following the
completion of his criminal sentence he remained in immigration detention,
until he was removed from the UK to the Netherlands.

Having carefully considered both the submissions made to us and the
evidence placed before the judge, we have concluded that there was no
material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. We are
satisfied that the conclusions on the relevant issues were open to the
judge on the evidence and for which cogent reasons were provided.

Contrary to the argument advanced by the Secretary of State, the judge did
not choose one risk assessment over the other but very properly (at
paragraph 64) considered both assessments as part of the overall
information available to her. The judge bemoaned the lack of a more recent
assessment but she could only work with the materials put before her.  It
is clear from paragraph 64 that she had taken account of both the two risk
assessments when assessing whether the claimant is a genuine, present and
sufficiently serious threat.  Further, it is worth noting that the OASys
assessment indicated that the claimant was then at a medium risk of
reoffending over a period of two years from the date of that report.
Obviously, those two years have now elapsed.  The earlier PSR report,
prepared for his sentencing, assessed him at low risk of reoffending.  The
judge was not required to choose between one or the other, or to reconcile
one with the other as has been submitted.  We accept Mr Georget's
submission that the judge's task was to make her own assessment of the risk
of reoffending in consideration of all relevant factors.

Contrary to the submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, we are
satisfied that the judge did adequately address the relevant factors of
Schedule 1. The matters considered are clearly set out in the decision and
whilst the judge did not specifically mention paragraphs 7(f), (g) or (h),
we are satisfied that she properly considered the key relevant criteria
between paragraphs 62 and 67 of the decision, and did so in a carefully
structured way so that the absence of reference to 7(f), (g) or (h) makes
no material difference to the outcome of the appeal. In particular, we are
satisfied that the judge adequately assessed the key issue, the risk that
the claimant presented for committing further offences. It is clear that
the judge adopted a balanced approach. She took into account his string of
previous offences and, at paragraph 62, made a number of findings that were
unfavourable to him, including commenting on his unwillingness to accept
responsibility for his behaviour.  However, it was not wrong for the judge
to observe that the index offence was his first custodial sentence and that
the sentence had been reduced for both his guilty plea and for being his
first offence, to a total of sixteen months' imprisonment, a relatively low
sentence for drug dealing offences.

She also took account of the claimant's evidence and that of his wife and
the documentary evidence before her as well as other factors that are set
out in Schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations.  In particular, the judge
considered the history showed a propensity to offend.  However, the judge
also found that the claimant had shown some understanding of the effect of
his behaviour, had expressed remorse, noted that he is complying with the
requirements of the shelter where he is living in the Netherlands, and that
has not committed further offences, as far as one knows. In regard to this
last point, Mr Tufan pointed out that the claimant could not have committed
any offences because he was in immigration detention before being removed
and then removed to the Netherlands. However, the fact remains that the
claimant has essentially lived an ordered life since the index offence,
which was sometime back in 2016.  Matters have moved on and his life is
measurably different now than it was then.

All in all, we are satisfied that the judge took all relevant factors into
consideration.  On the claimant's history, one might describe the decision
to allow the appeal as perhaps a generous one but we cannot say that it was
in any way irrational, perverse or unreasonable.  A different judge may
have reached a different conclusion but that is not to say that there is
anything that amounts to an error of law in this decision.  We are
satisfied that the findings were open to the judge on the evidence and find
that cogent reasoning has been given for those findings. Having carefully
considered the submissions from both parties, we are satisfied that the
judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that the claimant was not now a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to public policy, public
security or public health and, ultimately, that in the light of all the
circumstances the decision was not proportionate.

In the circumstances, the Secretary of State's appeal must fail.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law such as to require the decision to be
set aside.

We do not set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the claimant's appeal
remains allowed in accordance with the decision of Judge Beach.


No anonymity direction is made.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 26 June 2019

