
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00245/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2018                           |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AQ
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Blundell, Counsel, instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bond, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/291)
We make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  in  this
decision.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. Her date of birth is 16
December 1962. We have anonymised the Appellant to protect the identity of
her grandchild, a minor, and because of the sensitive nature of the
evidence relating to one of the witnesses.


2.   On 23 November 2003 the Appellant was convicted with three others of
two counts on a five-count indictment. She was convicted of conspiracy to
supply and possession with intent to supply crack cocaine. One of the co-
defendants is the father of her youngest son. She was sentenced to 15 years
imprisonment. She was released on licence on 2 December 2010. She remained
in immigration detention until February 2011. Her licence expired on 2
August 2018.


3.   On 17 January 2013 the Respondent made a deportation order pursuant to
Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 1971.  The Appellant appealed. There
has been much litigation culminating in a decision of the Court of Appeal:
Secretary of State for the Home Department v AQ (Nigeria) & Ors [2015] EWCA
Civ 250, [2015] Imm AR 990.  Following this, the Appellant's appeal was
allowed by First-tier Tribunal (FTT) Judge Newberry in a decision that was
promulgated on 16 February 2016.  This decision was set aside by Upper
Tribunal Judge Martin, who found that Judge Newberry had materially erred.
The matter came before us to re-hear the matter afresh.


4.   We had before us an Appellant's bundle comprising 100 pages. It
includes witness statements from the Appellant, her son (O), her daughter
(T), a pastor (KA) and Ms Williams (the Appellant's offender manager). But
for T, they attended the hearing and gave oral evidence and signed and
dated their witness statements where necessary.  T's statement remained
unsigned and undated. The Secretary of State relied on a bundle of
authorities, the original Respondent's bundle and a supplementary bundle.
We had before us skeleton arguments from both representatives.


5.   The Appellant was granted entry clearance as a visitor on 28 January
1988 for three months.  She arrived here on 4 February that year.  On 13
April 1988 she was granted an extension to 4 August 1988.  Her eldest
daughter, D, was born on 19 April 1988.  On 23 November 1988 she made an
application through her solicitors for further leave to remain on the basis
of her marriage to a British citizen.  This application was refused on 28
December 1989. She did not have a right of appeal against this decision.
On 11 October 1991 the Appellant's second daughter, T, was born.


6.   The Appellant next came to light when an application was made on her
behalf on 14 February 1994 on the basis of her marriage to a British
citizen.  However, the Secretary of State's view was that there was no
evidence that she had separated from her former spouse or that her current
husband had separated from his spouse.  On 21 May 1999 she applied for
indefinite leave to remain with her two daughters.  On 20 December 1999 D
was naturalised as a British citizen.  On 12 June 2000 the Appellant and T
were granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  On 10 October 2000 O
was born. On 29 April 2003 she applied for naturalisation as a British
citizen. This was refused on 27 April 2004 because of her criminality.


7.   The salient parts of the judge's sentencing remarks can be found in
the original Respondent's bundle and read as follows:


"You have all been convicted of a most serious offence.  Those who sit in
these courts, as I do, day after day, see the havoc and destruction caused
by drugs on young people who come before these courts.  It is a major
source of crime and it is a major cause of crime and I have no doubt that
the four of you were prepared to peddle drugs to convert cocaine salts into
crack cocaine, which is the most addictive form of drug, entirely for gain
and to your own advantage, without a moment's thought of the destruction
you are causing to other people and other people's families.


I have read with care the letters I have received and no-one could be other
than moved by the letters that have been received from [AQ]'s children.
They are suffering the very deepest distress, as I suspect are all the
dependants and families of the four of you; but not a moment's thought was
given to that before embarking on this criminal activity.


I am dealing with a total of something of the order of twelve kilos of
cocaine of high purity and high value.  It is quite clear to me that this
was a well-organised arrangement which would have continued had it not been
stopped by the timely search by the police at the time when they did.  You
must appreciate, all of you, as must anyone else who deals in this sort of
crime and these sort of drugs, that society takes the most serious view and
you must face a term of imprisonment of considerable length.


As between the four of you, I am prepared to make an exception to a certain
extent so far as Mr Ogunyemi is concerned.  I am prepared to accept that he
was not in the middle of this conspiracy, but was collecting further
supplies which would have gone into the kitchen at Seabut Road to make yet
more crack cocaine and more suffering.


Apart from that, I am not able to distinguish between you.  Let me say at
once that I have not been helped by the various versions that have been
given of the facts.  It is difficult to detect precisely where each one of
you stood and I have come to the conclusion that, so far as the other three
of you are concerned, you are all equally guilty and equally involved.


I am asked to be as merciful as possible and I will attempt to do that,
consistent with my public duty; but it seems to me that the very least
sentence which I can pass in respect of this conspiracy in respect of [AQ],
Mr Ogunsola Oteniola and Mr Adebayo is a sentence of fifteen years'
imprisonment.  In respect of you, Mr Ogunyemi, the sentence will be one of
twelve years' imprisonment.


I have considered the issue of a recommendation for deportation and I am
quite satisfied that the potential detriment to this country by your
presence is considerable.  I have considered the question of hardship in
relation to your dependants and families and apart from you, [AQ], I can
find no justification for allowing you to remain.  So, at the end of your
sentence, in respect of Mr Ogunsola, Mr Adebayo and Mr Ogunyemi, in each of
your cases I will make a recommendation for deportation.  I do not make
that recommendation in the case of [AQ], largely because you clearly have
children who in due course will depend upon you."


The Appellant's evidence


8.   The Appellant's evidence is contained in her witness statement which
she adopted as her evidence-in-chief. It can be summarised. She obtained a
BA (Hons) in Sociology and Education Needs after her release from prison.
She has three children and one grandchild, all of whom are British citizens
and here in the UK. Her daughter, T has a son who was born on 21 November
2008.


9.   The Appellant admits her actions have been wrong. She is remorseful
that they have negatively impacted on her family.  She has since strived to
make the life of her family easier and more joyful.  She has worked hard to
rebuild and strengthen relationships with her children and she is grateful
to them for their generosity, patience and forgiveness.  She is involved in
the process of managing difficulties that occur in their lives and she is
well-informed about their personal lives and leisure activities.  She has
worked with the church since her release as a charity worker and a part-
time administration assistant.  She has made the most of the time that she
has with her family and friends.


10.  T has suffered the most from the Appellant's absence.  She was aged 11
when the Appellant was imprisoned and she was released shortly before her
20th birthday.  She was taken into care and she is yet to fully recover
from the effect of this.  She had her own child when she was aged 16 and
struggled to cope with the pressure of motherhood and the intensity of her
emotional pain.  Her son is in care. He is aged 9. The Appellant and T have
repaired their relationship.  T has made great personal progress and is
currently working.


11.  The Appellant's greatest fear is that she will be separated again from
her children. Her son, O, is now aged 18. He is doing extremely well, but
in the absence of his mother may end up in the same place as T.    O has
been a "rock of support" since the Appellant was released from prison.  Her
relationship with him is the strongest.  It is not viable for him to join
her in Nigeria.  He is in year 13 at school and looking forward to going to
London Guildhall Drama School or Essex University. His sisters have their
lives here. She could not ask them to sacrifice and look after O.  They
have already suffered enough.  They have a different father to O.


12.  The Appellant completed educational courses in prison. She has found a
legitimate job and is law-abiding.  She was well behaved in prison. She has
not once missed an appointment with the Probation Service or the Home
Office.  The Appellant is looking forward to gaining custody of her
grandson who is very fond of her and asks when he can come and live with
her.


13.  In cross-examination the Appellant said that she supports O. She said
that she has lived with him since release from prison in 2011.  He attends
the church as a volunteer. He attends church on Sunday and Wednesday.  When
she went into prison he spent six months here in the UK with her sister and
then he moved to live with relatives in the United States where he remained
for seven years. She was asked to describe her daily routine. She told us
that she makes breakfast for O every day.  He does not know how to cook.
She takes him to school when it is cold in the winter or even if the
weather is good when he is tired, otherwise he catches the bus. He is in
sixth form studying for A levels.  He is a member of the National Youth
Theatre.  He attended a four -week course in the summer. She said in
response to a question from Mr Blundell that the course was non-residential
and she took him there in the morning and collected him at the end of the
day.  She said that O wanted to go to the Guildhall Drama School or Essex
University.  If he went to Essex University, he would not live on campus.
He would remain living with her.


14.  The Appellant was asked about O's friends.  She said he has friends
from church and school. She did not know the names of his school friends.
She then mentioned the name "Michael" when pressed. She told us that she
did not want his friends to come home because of the things that are
happening in society. She cannot keep an eye on other people's children.  O
always comes home straight from school.  He likes to go to church and he
hangs out with his friends from church.  She named four friends from
church. She described his activities at home, stating that he watches TV
and reads.  She talks to him about his studies.  She checks his school work
and reminds him to do course work.


15.  Her eldest daughter, D, was currently in Portugal.  She went two weeks
ago.  She did not provide a statement in these proceedings because the
Appellant did not think it was necessary.  However, she sees her every
weekend.  She comes to the house to be fed.  She lives in Chigwell, which
is about half an hour's drive away.  She has a partner.  However, they talk
every day. They have a good relationship.


16.  T lives in Barking. She visits the Appellant two or three times a
week.  Recently T has been drinking heavily and has lost her job.  She
helps to support T. She gives her money and food.  The Appellant has
contact with T's son who is in care. He comes to the Appellant's home every
weekend.  She then said that she has contact with him every two to three
months. She then said that she sees him every eight weeks when she visits
him in care and every four weeks the child's carer brings him to the
Appellant's home and he spends the weekend with her. In 2011 she tried to
take formal steps to have more contact with him. She was told that this was
not possible because she had not been out of prison for two clear years,
she did not have accommodation of her own and her immigration status.  Only
the threat of deportation now presents an obstacle.  O does not often see
his sisters.  If there is something wrong they will look after him.
However, T is not stable. D has her own life.


O's evidence


17.  We heard evidence from O. He relied on his witness statement which he
adopted as his evidence-in-chief.  His evidence can be summarised. He has a
close relationship with his mother. She encourages him.  He plans to go to
London Guildhall Drama School or Essex University to study psychology.  In
oral evidence he said that he has applied to study at London Guildhall
Drama School, The Royal Central School of Speech and Drama and Bristol Old
Vic and confirmed to us that he would live in Bristol if successful.


18.  His mother keeps him grounded and understands him. She tries her best
to make sure that he is not exposed to peer pressure.  He feels safe and
confident with her.  She is his favourite person and source of inspiration.
He would be distraught and his world would be turned upside down should she
leave.  He does not know Nigeria.  He has always lived in the UK, save when
he lived in the United States, during the time his mother was in prison.
His education would be disrupted if he is forced to return to Nigeria.  His
nephew and sisters are also extremely close to his mother and would find it
difficult to cope without her.


19.  In oral evidence he told us that he spends weekends and evenings
working on applications, auditions and monologues. About his daily routine
he told us that he occasionally has breakfast. He gets himself cereal.  He
goes to school on his own using public transport.  If he is late his mother
will take him.  The course that he attended in the summer was a residential
course at Goldsmith University. He does not have many friends at school. He
named M, L, O and E.  He goes to church every Sunday.  He does not really
go in the week.  He considers everybody at church members of his family and
did not feel able to single out specific friends.  His friends visit him at
home albeit not often.  Recently his friend E visited him at home.  His
mother was there. She considers his friends as her sons and makes them
comfortable when they visit.  She knows E very well.


20.  He could not say how often he sees T, but it was less frequent than
every week.  He cannot say when he last saw D.  He could not turn to T for
support.  She has her own son.  He sees him once a month.  Sometimes the
child comes to the house or they go and get something to eat together.  He
does not stay overnight with them.  They may collect him from his carer's
home, but they do not go into the house.


Ms William's evidence


21.  Ms Williams evidence is contained in a letter she prepared in support
of the Appellant's appeal of 9 November 2018.  The Appellant reported to Ms
Williams until the expiry of her licence.  The Appellant made excellent
progress and regained the sole care of her three children. They have grown
up and made excellent achievement in their chosen fields. They are doing
well and are contributing positively to society.  The Appellant has an
excellent record of compliance and engagement which has continued
throughout her licence period.  She would be described as a "model service
user".  She gained employment immediately on release and has worked in his
role since. She works in a permanent role as an administrator for the
church.  She enjoys her job.  She helps counsel people who are facing
hardship and has been awarded for her commitment to help others.  She is
seen as a pillar of strength and hope by the people she has helped within
the church community.


22.  The Appellant was allocated permanent housing from Newham Council. She
graduated in November 2016.  She completed a victim awareness course whilst
in custody. Although she was not directly involved in drug dealing, she
shows understanding of the impact drugs have on the community and society.
She has learnt a lot from the offence.  It is highly unlikely that she
would be na�ve if she entered into a future relationship. There had been no
concerns with negative association or partners since her release.  She is
assessed as presenting a low risk of harm.  She has no previous
convictions.  Her first encounter with the criminal justice system took
place over fifteen years ago.  She has been in the community for almost
nine years and there have been no issues or police intelligence suggesting
any offending behaviour.


23.  Ms Williams voiced her concerns about the Secretary of State having
"taken the case to court" over seven times to request that she is deported.
 She has no family in Nigeria other than her elderly mother. The Appellant
is a single parent of three children and a grandmother.  The Appellant
would like to apply to have custody of her grandson. In oral evidence she
confirmed that what she knows about the Appellant's contact with her
grandson is based on what she has been told by the Appellant.


KA's evidence


24.  KA gave evidence. He is a pastor. He adopted his witness statement.
His evidence is that he has known the Appellant for over 25 years as a
parishioner and as a committed member of staff of the church in the past
five years. He is aware of her criminal history.  He is her surety and why
she was released from immigration detention on 18 February 2011.  The
Appellant and her son are inseparable.  They attend the church midweek and
Sunday services together although in oral evidence he stated that he does
not often see the Appellant's son during the week but that he attends every
Sunday.


25.  The Appellant makes sure that she is involved in all aspects of her
son's life.  He has never experienced the love and affection or validation
of a father and his whole life revolves around his mother.  He meets up
with his mother at work every day of the week so that they can travel home
together.  He once witnessed O come home from school whilst his mother was
still at work meeting scheduled deadlines and when he realised his mother
had yet to return he cried uncontrollably.  The bond of love between the
Appellant and her son cannot be exaggerated.


26.  The years of separation had a significant impact on T. She was forced
to live with different family members because she could not cope with
life's pressures.  She ended up living under the care of Social Services
and gave birth to a child at the age of 16.  Such an event would not have
occurred under the guidance of her mother.  She suffered from her mother's
absence.  The change in T since her mother's release has been remarkable.
She now has a new sense of wellbeing and is in full-time education with
career prospects.  If she is deported history might repeat itself and O
might suffer in the same way as T did.


27.  Her impact as a part-time administration assistant for the charity
cannot be overstated.  She regularly goes above and beyond the call of duty
and has helped many people.  She is well-known to the church's
congregation.  He is worried about the distressing effects of her returning
to Nigeria and leaving her family behind.


28.  In oral evidence KA told us that he has met D. He believes she is in
Portugal. He knows T very well.  He described the Appellant devoting many
hours a day to her job at the church.  She arrives at 10am and may not
leave until 9pm.  He sees her son on Sunday and occasionally on Wednesday
at church.


T's evidence


29.  T's evidence is contained in her undated witness statement. T's
evidence is that she has attempted to commit suicide on a number of
occasions and has resorted to self-harming.  Her life is in chaos.  The
Appellant was a loving and caring mother towards all her children prior to
her arrest and imprisonment.  She and her siblings are now confident that
their mother has learnt from her mistakes and genuinely wishes to lead a
normal life. T's son loves the Appellant, his grandmother. T is worried
about the distressing effect of her mother's return, particularly on O, who
still needs to be nurtured.


Other evidence


30.  There are documents in the Appellant's bundle which we have taken into
account, including two offender manager's reports


Submissions


31.  We heard submissions from both Mr Blundell and Ms Bond, which we will
summarise.  Mr Blundell submitted that the appeal now turns on Article 8.
There can be no appeal on EU grounds. O is now an adult.  The key issue
here is the presence of very compelling circumstances in the context of
Exceptions 1 and 2 of the 2002 Act.  Mr Blundell referred us to the
decision of the Court of Appeal in AQ and specifically paragraphs 73, 74,
77 and 78[1].


32.  Mr Blundell referred us to the sentencing remarks of the judge and
highlighted the following;  the offence was committed entirely for the
Appellant's own gain with no thought of the consequences, she was well
aware of the impact on her children, it was a well-organised arrangement
which would not have stopped if the police had not searched the properties
and the judge was merciful but the very least sentence that he could impose
on the Appellant was one of fifteen years.


33.  Mr Blundell referred us to the evidence.  He accepted that O was an
entirely credible witness who gave straightforward, honest and convincing
evidence.  He was an impressive individual and has made considerable
progress despite difficult circumstances.  The Appellant was not a witness
of truth.  Her evidence was vague and inconsistent with O's.  The evidence
about breakfast was inconsistent.  She said she made his breakfast every
day. This was not his evidence.  Whilst this in itself may not seem
significant, the Appellant has built a fictitious account of family life
between her and her son. She said that she took him to school when the
weather was bad, but this was not his evidence.  He stated that he got the
bus to school and that if he is late, his mother will take him.  The
evidence was inconsistent in relation to the Appellant's son's friends.  He
said he has friends at school and that his mother treats them all like her
own sons.  It is not credible that she would not be able to name his school
friends.


34.  The Appellant said that her son goes to church with her on Sunday and
Wednesday.  Although it was accepted that they have a close link to the
church he does not go, according to his evidence and that of AK, every
Wednesday.  The Appellant's evidence was that O attended a non-residential
course whereas O's evidence was that the course he attended was
residential.  O's evidence was that he has made an application to study at
Bristol Old Vic and if successful he would live in Bristol.  This was a
significant omission in the Appellant's evidence.


35.  The Appellant said that T comes to her house two or three times a week
whereas her son did not corroborate this.  It is not clear what has
happened to D.  There was no witness statement from D despite her being a
key witness.  Mr Blundell said that there may be more behind it.  He
accepted that he could not "prove" this, but said that the absence of
evidence from her is significant and supports his submission that the
Appellant's evidence was vague. Much was made about the links the Appellant
has with her grandson.  Her evidence is that she visited him in care every
eight weeks and that he stayed with her at weekend and that stays were
overnight.  However, this is at odds with O's evidence.


36.  The Secretary of State accepts that the Appellant has been convicted
of one offence only and that she presents a low risk of harm and
reoffending.  It is accepted that she has a relationship with O and T. Any
relationship with D is unclear.


37.  Mr Blundell turned our attention to the extreme seriousness of the
offence and that the Appellant had been here lawfully for only three years
prior to the offence. He submitted that since conviction, she has remained
here under the shadow of deportation.  She knew that there was a real
possibility that she would be deported.


38.  Mr Blundell accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State that
deportation will have an impact on O.  He submitted that O has survived in
very difficult circumstances.  He was not in the UK between the age of 4 to
11.  He is now 18 and an adult.  He is strong and independent. He is not
dependent on his mother.  There is no Article 8 family life.  Mr Blundell
relied on the cases of Kugathasv Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2003] INLR 170and Singhv Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2016].


39.  Mr Blundell submitted that if there is Article 8 family life so as to
engage the Convention, this would not give rise to very compelling
circumstances.  There are other family members here.  Although it is
accepted that the Appellant's son does not have particularly strong
relationships with his sisters, he has a strong idea about where he is
going in the future. There are no very compelling circumstances to outweigh
the very strong public interest in deportation and no reason to allow this
appeal outside of the Rules.


40.  Ms Bond made submissions. She drew our attention to the judge's
sentencing remarks and that he did not recommend deportation as far as the
Appellant was concerned. There was no reason why the Appellant would have
considered herself at risk of deportation. She could be forgiven for
thinking that there would be no intention to deport her.  She was released
in 2011 and the Secretary of State is relying on a 2013 decision to deport
her.  She has for a long time lived in the shadow of deportation as a
result of protracted litigation.  She accepted that Zambrano applies to a
child and that she did not pursue a claim under EU law.  However, she
emphasised the strength of the relationship between the Appellant and her
son.  She asked us to bear in mind that witnesses can exaggerate and that
the Appellant in this case is desperate not to be separated from her son.


41.  Ms Bond submitted that there was family life between the Appellant and
O so as to engage Article 8. She provides food for him, pays bills and
works to support the family. He is still at school, single and in the
middle of an A level course.  She relied on the cases of Ghising (family
life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160and AA v United Kingdom
(Application no. 8000/08). Ms Bond relied on the following paragraphs of
Ghising:-


"53. In Kugathas, at [14], Sedley LJ cited with approval the Commission's
observation in S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196:


'Generally the protection of family life under Article 8 involves
cohabiting dependents, such as parents and their dependent, minor children.
Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the circumstances of
the particular case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year
old son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the protection
of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence of further elements of
dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties.'


54.  Sedley LJ accepted the submission that 'dependency' was not limited to
economic dependency, at [17].He added:


'But if dependency is read down as meaning 'support' in the personal sense,
and if one adds, echoing the Strasbourg jurisprudence, 'real' or
'committed' or 'effective' to the word 'support', then it represents in my
view the irreducible minimum of what family life implies.'


55.  Arden LJ said, at [24] - [25]:


'24. There is no presumption that a person has a family life, even with the
members of a person's immediate family. The court has to scrutinise the
relevant factors. Such factors include identifying who are the near
relatives of the appellant, the nature of the links between them and the
appellant, the age of the appellant, where and with whom he has resided in
the past, and the forms of contact he has maintained with the other members
of the family with whom he claims to have a family life.


25.  Because there is no presumption of family life, in my judgment a
family life is not established between an adult child and his surviving
parent or other siblings unless something more exists than normal emotional
ties... Such tie might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
or vice versa.'


56.  We accepted the Appellant's submission that the judgments in Kugathas
had been interpreted too restrictively in the past and ought to be read in
the light of subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg courts.


...


61.  Recently, the ECtHR has reviewed the case law, in AA v United Kingdom
(Application no 8000/08), finding that a significant factor will be whether
or not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If he is still
single and living with his parents, he is likely to enjoy family life with
them. The Court said, at [46] - [49]:


'46. The Court recalls that in Bouchelkia v France, 29 January1997, � 41
Reports of Judgments and Decisions 1997, when considering whether there was
an interference with Article 8 rights in a deportation case, it found that
'family life' existed in respect of an applicant who was 20 years old and
living with his mother, step-father and siblings. In Boujlifa v France, 21
October 1997, � 36, Reports 1997-VI, the Court considered that there was
'family life' where an applicant aged 28 when deportation proceedings were
commenced against him had arrived in France at the age of five and received
his schooling there, had lived there continuously with the exception of a
period of imprisonment in Switzerland and where his parents and siblings
lived in France, In Maslov, cited above, � 62, the Court recalled, in the
case of an applicant who had reached the age of majority by the time the
exclusion order became final but was living with his parents, that it had
accepted in a number of cases that the relationship between young adults
who had not founded a family of their own and their parents or other close
family members also constituted 'family life'.


47.  However, in two recent cases against the United Kingdom the Court has
declined to find 'family life' between an adult child and his parents. Thus
in Onur v United Kingdom, no. 27319/07,� 43-45, 17 February 2009,the Court
noted that the applicant, aged around 29 years old at the time of his
deportation, had not demonstrated the additional amount of dependence
normally required to establish 'family life' between adult parents and
adult children. In A.W. Khan v United Kingdom, no. 47486/06, � 32, 12
January 2010. the Court reiterated the need for additional elements of
dependence in order to establish family life between parents and adult
children and found that the 34 year old applicant in that case did not have
'family life' with his mother and siblings, notwithstanding the fact that
he was living with them and that they suffered a variety of different
health problems. It is noteworthy, however, that both applicants had a
child or children of their own following relationships of some duration.


48.  Most recently, in Bousarra, cited above, � 38-39, the Court found
'family life' to be established in a case concerning a 24 year old
applicant, noting that the applicant was single and had no children and
recalling that in the case of young adults who had not yet founded their
own families, their ties with their parents and other close family members
could constitute 'family life'.


49.  An examination of the Court's case-law would tend to suggest that the
applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides with his mother and
has not yet founded a family of his own can be regarded as having 'family
life'.'


42.  Ms Bond submitted that the Appellant has made a real effort to
rehabilitate herself. She relied on Secretary of State for the Home
Department v Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225 and what she described as the
scope of flexibility in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] UKSC 58.


43.  Mr Blundell responded insofar as the judge's sentencing remarks were
referred to by Ms Bond and he stated that that was the picture in 2003.
However, the situation is now that the Appellant's children are all adults.


The Law


44.  The statutory framework applicable in this case is s. 117B, C and D of
the 2002 Act[2] and paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules[3].
Because the Appellant is a foreign criminal, it is in the public interest
that she should be deported.  Because of the length of the Appellant's
sentence of imprisonment, in order to succeed it is common ground that she
has to establish that there are very compelling circumstances over and
above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules or those set
out at s.117C (4) and (5) of the 2002 Act ("Exception 1" and "Exception 2")
and our reference to "very compelling circumstances" in this decision
should be understood in this context.  We take into account that the public
interest in deportation includes the deterrent effect upon all foreign
citizens (irrespective of whether they have a right to reside in the UK) of
understanding that a serious offence will normally precipitate their
deportation (See DS(India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2009], para 37, Rix LJ). The Appellant has to establish very compelling
circumstances.


45.  In Hesham Ali the Supreme Court said as follows:-


"38. The implication of the new rules is that rules 399 and 399A identify
particular categories of case in which the Secretary of State accepts that
the public interest in the deportation of the offender is outweighed under
article 8 by countervailing factors. Cases not covered by those rules (that
is to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences of at least four
years, or who have received sentences of between 12 months and four years
but whose private or family life does not meet the requirements of rules
399 and 399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight should
generally be given to the public interest in the deportation of such
offenders, but that it can be outweighed, applying a proportionality test,
by very compelling circumstances: in other words, by a very strong claim
indeed, as Laws LJ put it in SS (Nigeria). The countervailing
considerations must be very compelling in order to outweigh the general
public interest in the deportation of such offenders, as assessed by
Parliament and the Secretary of State. The Strasbourg jurisprudence
indicates relevant factors to consider, and rules 399 and 399A provide an
indication of the sorts of matters which the Secretary of State regards as
very compelling. As explained at para 26 above, they can include factors
bearing on the weight of the public interest in the deportation of the
particular offender, such as his conduct since the offence was committed,
as well as factors relating to his private or family life. Cases falling
within the scope of section 32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest
in deportation is outweighed, other than those specified in the new rules
themselves, are likely to be a very small minority (particularly in non-
settled cases). They need not necessarily involve any circumstance which is
exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel for the
Secretary of State accepted, consistently with Huang [2007] 2 AC 167, para
20), but they can be said to involve "exceptional circumstances" in the
sense that they involve a departure from the general rule.


         .....


50.  In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries out its task on the basis
of the facts as it finds them to be on the evidence before it, and the law
as established by statute and case law. Ultimately, it has to decide
whether deportation is proportionate in the particular case before it,
balancing the strength of the public interest in the deportation of the
offender against the impact on private and family life. In doing so, it
should give appropriate weight to Parliament's and the Secretary of State's
assessments of the strength of the general public interest in the
deportation of foreign offenders, as explained in paras 14, 37-38 and 46
above, and also consider all factors relevant to the specific case in
question. The critical issue for the tribunal will generally be whether,
giving due weight to the strength of the public interest in the deportation
of the offender in the case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently
strong to outweigh it. In general, only a claim which is very strong indeed
- very compelling, as it was put in MF (Nigeria) -will succeed."


46.  In NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ662 the Court of Appeal stated:-


         "29. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C (6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which  we
             have held is to be read into section 117C (3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  'there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in pares  399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.


         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.


         ...


         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.


Conclusions


47.  We were not impressed by the Appellant.  We found her not credible.
We understood from Ms Bond's submissions that she accepted that the
Appellant's evidence was inconsistent with O's. Ms Bond asked us to
consider the Appellant is desperate to remain here with her son.  Whilst
this may give her a motive to exaggerate and in parts fabricate aspects of
her relationship with her son and his life, it does provide a reasonable
explanation for doing so. She has significantly embellished and exaggerated
her evidence in many respects as properly identified by Mr Blundell.  The
Appellant has attempted to create an impression of a level of dependency on
her by O which is unsupported.  We accept O's evidence and we found him to
be honest and credible.   We consider whether there is family life in the
Kugathas sense and conclude in the Appellant's favour, having accepted O's
evidence.  We accept that O is a young adult, having recently reached
adulthood, still living with his mother and in full-time education.  He
does not live independently.


48.  Notwithstanding the level of dependency between the Appellant and O,
he is an able and determined young man with a significant support network
comprising church, friends and family.  This was obvious from his evidence.
 If the Appellant left the UK, he can continue studying here.  There is a
possibility according to his own evidence that he would leave home to start
university in 2019 in any event.  We do not find that he is vulnerable or
as dependent on the Appellant as she would have us believe. He has a good
future ahead of him. He would not have to or chose to return with his
mother to Nigeria.  He would of course be able to visit her there.  We do
not believe that he is at risk of falling by the wayside. His circumstances
cannot be compared to those of T. Fear of him ending up like T was
expressed by the Appellant and AK. T was aged 11 when her mother was
incarcerated. O was much younger and did not suffer as she did. He did not
reside with his mother from 2003 - 2011. He is now aged 18 and better
equipped to deal with his mother's absence than an 11- year old child. He
presented as a resilient and capable young man. We do not underestimate the
disappointment and upset he will suffer from his mother's deportation, but
we do not find that the impact of it would be as serious and significant as
advanced by the Appellant.  There is a support network. Separation as we
see it in this case is a consequence of the Appellant's criminality.


49.  The Appellant's case was not advanced on the grounds that she could
meet Exceptions 1 and/or 2.  However, we make it clear that the evidence
does not establish very significant obstacles to integration. She has not
been here lawfully most of her life. It is difficult to establish that she
is socially and culturally integrated in the light of such serious
offending and the relatively recent expiry of her licence.


50.  We found that the Appellant exaggerated the frequency of contact she
has with her daughters.  We are concerned by the lack of evidence from D.
It is surprising that she is not in the country at the time of her mother's
appeal and has not chosen to make a witness statement in support. The
Appellant's evidence about D was vague. We accept O's evidence that there
is a relationship between the Appellant and D, but the evidence does not
establish that they are close otherwise she would have supported her
mother's appeal. T has a relationship with her mother but does not see her
as frequently and is not as dependent on her as suggested by the Appellant.
The Appellant told us in oral evidence that T was heavily drinking and had
lost her job. This was at odds with the evidence of Ms Williams and T's own
evidence. Whilst it is clear that T has had historic serious problems
culminating in losing custody of her son, we find that the Appellant has
exaggerated T's circumstances in her evidence at the hearing to support her
case that T would not be able to offer O any support and to seek to
establish that T has a greater level of dependency on her than is the case.



51.  We attach weight to the evidence of Ms Williams.  We accept the risk
of reoffending is low and what she said about the Appellant's attitude and
behaviour.  We accept that the Appellant is rehabilitated and that she has
turned her life around.  We have no reason to believe that the witness
intended to mislead us in any way.  However, we are mindful that her
conclusions in relation to the Appellant's family life with her grandson
are dependent on what she has been told by the Appellant. Whilst nothing
turns on this, we make the following observations about Ms William's
evidence; the sentencing judge's comments do not refer to the Appellant
being na�ve or having negative associations in so far as she was in some
way led astray. The sentencing comments and sentence imposed indicate that
the Appellant was found to be a main player and very much involved in drug
dealing. We attach weight to KA's evidence. We accept that the Appellant is
not only rehabilitated but she is hard working and engaging in genuinely
good work for the church.  His oral evidence was not entirely consistent
with the evidence in his statement. This is likely to be because he is
talking about historic events in his statement rather than the position at
the date of the hearing. It is clear from the evidence that it is no longer
the case that O meets his mother at work every day.


52   We have considered the Appellant's relationship with her grandson.
There is no independent supporting evidence of this although we have no
reason to disbelieve O's evidence and we accept that she has contact with
the child. However, she has exaggerated the extent of this and future
intentions. The Appellant's evidence suggests an intention that the child
will eventually reside with her. There is simply no support for this.
There is no evidence that the Social Services may increase contact at some
stage in the future. If this is on the cards we would have expected to see
some evidence from the Social Services. It is likely that the Social
Services are facilitating contact with the Appellant. However, it is likely
that the Social Services are working on the possibility of the child being
reunited with his mother.  The Social Services will no doubt have concerns
about the Appellant' criminality.


53.  Ms Bond referred us to the sentencing comments of the judge in
response to Mr Blundell's submission that the Appellant was aware of the
risk of deportation from the time of her conviction in 2003.  We take on
board what the judge said in 2003. This suggests that the Appellant may not
have thought at that time that deportation was something on the horizon
because of her children. However, she was not given any reason to believe
that she could stay here indefinitely notwithstanding her criminality.  It
must have become clear to her as time went by and her children were
approaching adulthood that she was at risk of deportation.  She was
released from immigration detention in 2011. Efforts were made in 2012 to
deport her.  We did not understand Ms Bond to be specifically relying on
the issue of delay.  This was not a matter on which the Appellant has
previously relied.  However, there was no delay by the Secretary of State.
It was reasonable to wait until the conclusion of the Appellant's sentence
being taking action to deport the Appellant.  The delay between release
from detention and deportation is not significant. There has been a
significant delay following protracted litigation.  Neither party is at
fault.  However, the Appellant has benefited from this. It has allowed her
to remain in the UK to look after O until he reached adulthood. We accept
that the delay has enabled the Appellant to strengthen an Article 8 claim
and factor this into the assessment.


54.  We briefly engage with specific points raised by Ms Bond in her
skeleton argument and/or oral submissions which we did not find to be of
any assistance to the Appellant.  The cases of Secretary of State v
Robinson [2018] EWCA Civ 85 and Bouchereau [1978] ECR 732 have no material
relevance in this case.  In Garzon the Appellant came here aged 11 and it
was found that he would be a stranger in his home country.  The Appellant
was an adult when she came here and has ties to Nigeria.  The trigger
offence in Garzon was far less serious than those committed by this
Appellant. McFarlane LJ said at [26]:-


"The purpose of an Article 8 evaluation  which is conducted after a foreign
criminal has failed to bring his case within s.117C or the express
provisions in the rules, is to look at the same factors again, together
with other relevant factors not specifically covered within the terms of
the statute or the rules, within the context of Article 8 albeit with due
regard to the public policy in favour of deportation of foreign criminals
and expressly taking account of the 'very compelling circumstances'
threshold."


55.  At [27] McFarlane LJ considered a similar challenge in the case of
Mwesezi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1104
where the Secretary of State had succeeded before the Upper Tribunal in
overturning a FTT decision in favour of an Appellant in circumstances which
involved a foreign criminal who had come to this country at a young age and
had committed offences as an adult and in respect of whom there were no
very significant obstacles to integrating back into his country of origin.
In this latter case the offending was said to be considerably more serious
and placed him in the category of serious offender for the purposes of
s.117C, and reference was made to NA (Pakistan).


56.  Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC does not assist the Appellant. Any limited degree
of flexibility under S117a (2) (a) cannot conceivably advance her case.


57.  Notwithstanding the very distressing consequences for the Appellant's
family here, particularly O, she has failed to identify matters in her
favour which are capable of amounting to very compelling circumstances and
which shift the balance to any meaningful extent in her favour. Looking at
all matters collectively there are no circumstances drawn to our attention
capable of giving rise to a particularly strong Article 8 case to outweigh
the high public interest in deportation. However serious and tragic the
consequences of deportation, we remind ourselves of what Sedley LJ said in
Lee [2011] EWCA Civ348 at para 27 about the tragic consequences of
deportation following an Appellant's bad behaviour. In the absence of
compelling circumstances, we dismiss the appeal under Article 8. We
conclude that the decision to deport the Appellant is proportionate to the
legitimate aim and there are no properly identified circumstances to allow
her appeal outside of the Rules.


Notice of Decision


The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under Article 8.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------

         [1]"73.  Nowhere in its determination did the FTT assess the weight
         of circumstances sufficient to outweigh the public interest in
         deportation against the standards set by the rules.  AQ was
         sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for an offence of conspiracy to
         supply class A drugs.  In such a case paragraph 399 provides that
         the Secretary of State would expect to find 'very compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and
         399A' before deciding that the public interest was outweighed by
         other factors.  There was no attempt by the FTT to engage with this
         statement of the strength of the public interest in deportation.


74.  Further, of relevance to the present case was the fact that AQ's son
had lived in the United States between the ages of four and ten years.  He
had resumed living in the UK with his mother in 2011 and since had
continuous residence with AQ for only two years before the deportation
decision was made.  Even if AQ had qualified for consideration under
paragraph 399(a) she would not have met the requirement that her son, being
a British citizen, had lived continuously in the UK for at least seven
years before the deportation decision was made.  In my view, despite the
tribunal's lengthy and careful assessment of relevant factors, there was no
attempt to see the public interest through the lens of the rules and, for
this reason, the tribunal made a significant error of law.


77.  I agree with Mr Drabble QC that the question to be examined by the
tribunal was a practical and not a hypothetical one.  In my judgment, this
is the effect of the decisions of the Court of Justice in Dereci and the
decision of this court in Harrison (Jamaica).  I cannot accept the
Secretary of State's position that the tribunal was only required to
consider the ability of others to care for the child in the UK and was
bound to ignore questions such as whether a family member would be willing
to provide care or was under any familial or other responsibility to do so.
 As the Court of Justice said in Dereciit is for the domestic court to
verify whether state action would deny the child enjoyment of the substance
of his rights as a EU citizen.  I do not consider this a question for the
European Court and I would decline to make a reference.  In my view, the
domestic tribunal is entitled to examine all the circumstances provided
that its focus is upon the practical consequences of deportation.  In the
present case, for example, it seems that none of the witnesses were asked
whether she would care for AQ's son if the only alternative was that he
would be required to leave the UK with his mother.


78.  I am grateful to King LJ for drawing attention to the fact that in
considering the question whether a Union child would be compelled to leave
the Union in the absence of the primary carer it is relevant to consider
the measures available to local authorities who have duties to children in
need under section 17 of the Children Act 1989.  Local authorities are
under an obligation to promote the upbringing of children within their
families and for this purpose they are provided with powers and subjected
to duties under Schedule 2 Part 1 to the Act.  The use of measures that are
available to local authorities for the assistance of a child in need and to
support their families may well impact upon the judgment whether a member
of the family will in fact act in substitution for the absent primary
carer."



[2]117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
       interest.

    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons  who
       seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
       English, because persons who can speak English-

       (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

       (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
       of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,  that  persons  who
       seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
       independent, because such persons-

       (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

       (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)  Little weight should be given to-

       (a)    a private life, or

       (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

       that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in  the
       United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
       person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)  In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
       public interest does not require the person's removal where-

       (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
       with a qualifying child, and

       (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom.

117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
criminals

    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

    (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
    greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

    (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public  interest
    requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

    (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

       (a)    C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
       C's life,

       (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
       and

       (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
       into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

    (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation
    on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

    (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest
    requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

    (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken  into
    account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
    foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the  decision
    was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

117D Interpretation of this Part

    (1)  In this Part-

    "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;



    "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and who-

       (a)    is a British citizen, or

       (b)    has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
       seven years or more;

    "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

       (a)    is a British citizen, or

       (b)    who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning  of
       the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

    (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

       (a)    who is not a British citizen,

       (b)    who has been convicted in the United Kingdom  of  an  offence,
       and

       (c)    who-

         (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  12
         months,

         (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm,
         or

         (iii)    is a persistent offender.

    ..."



[3]Deportation and Article 8

    398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
    the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,
    and

        (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
        public good because they have been convicted of an offence for which
        they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  4
        years;

        (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
        public good because they have been convicted of an offence for which
        they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  4
        years but at least 12 months; or

        (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
        public good because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
        offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent  offender
        who shows a particular disregard for the law,

    the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider  whether
    paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does not, the  public  interest
    in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where there are
    very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

    399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -

        (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
        with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

          (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

          (ii)    the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least
          the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
          decision; and in either case

            (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live  in  the
            country to which the person is to be deported; and

            (b)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the
            UK without the person who is to be deported; or

        (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in  the
        UK, and

          (i) the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
          (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status was
          not precarious; and

          (ii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
          country to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
          compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described   in
          paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

          (iii)   it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
          UK without the person who is to be deported.

    399A.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
    if -

        (a)   the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
        his life; and

        (b)   he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

        (c)   there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
        into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


