
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00535/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 March 2019                     |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Aleksejs [A]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Alice Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sean F Ell, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in the case of Aleksejs [A]
against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 22 January 2019
allowing an appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to deport
the claimant under the European Economic Regulations 2016, Regulation 27.

The grounds of appeal as stated by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who
granted the application for permission to appeal assert in essence that the
judge materially erred in failing to give adequate or sustainable reasons
but allowing the appeal in light of findings of fact he had made and the
totality of the evidence before him.  The grounds of appeal are set out in
detail in the reasons for appealing given by the Secretary of State.

In her oral submissions, Ms Holmes for the Secretary of State said that the
judge did not properly take on board all of the evidence before him.  In
particular, she pointed out that the claimant had been in employment when
he committed the index offence and she asserted that he had not broken all
links with those who had had a bad influence on him because one of them was
his brother.  She said that he had "parked" the point about not having
admitted his guilt and that there was a flawed basis for his findings.

In his Rule 24 response and in his oral submissions, Mr Ell, Counsel for
the claimant, said that there was no identifiable error of law in the
determination of the judge, who had applied the law correctly, made clear
findings and provided sufficient reasons for doing so.  He submitted that
the grounds advanced by the Secretary of State constituted mere
disagreement with the conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

We are satisfied that the judge correctly identified the test which he had
to apply in considering this appeal.  At paragraph 24 he stated:

"Having considered all the circumstances in the round, I find on balance
that it is not proportionate to deport the claimant.  On the balance of
probabilities, I do not consider him to pose a genuine, present and
sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of society. The
factors which tip the balance are the evidence that he has secured gainful
employment, is in a stable relationship with his partner, has no
significant ties to Latvia and, as stated in the OASys assessment, does not
pose a serious threat to society."

In our view, there is no error relating to the evidence in the factors
which the judge identified as tipping the balance in the claimant's favour.
 They were, as he said, first of all that he has secured gainful
employment.  The Judge was aware that the claimant had been in employment
at the time he committed the offence, but what the judge was pointing out
was that since his release from prison he had once again secured gainful
employment.

The second point which the claimant made was that he was in a stable
relationship with his partner.  There is no challenge to that.

The third point, that he had no significant ties to Latvia, is not
challenged and the fourth point, that, as stated in the OASys assessment,
he does not pose a serious threat to society, is not challenged either by
the Secretary of State.  Accordingly, the judge, having correctly
identified the test which he had to apply, clearly identified the factors
based on the evidence which tipped the balance in favour of the claimant.

We agree with Mr Ell that, in essence, all that the grounds of appeal
amount to are a disagreement with the ultimate findings on the evidence
made by the judge.

There having been no error of law and no irrationality on the part of the
judge, we dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      10 June 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

