
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00815/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Skype for Business               |On 3 December 2020                   |
|On 4 November 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Mr Adrian Leu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Attendance by or on Behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against a decision of the respondent made on 19
November 2018 to deport him pursuant to Regulation 23(6)(b) of the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  That appeal was
certified pursuant to Regulation 33.  It appears that there was no human
rights decision made and although a notice issued under section 120 of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was issued to the appellant he
has not responded to it. The appeal was previously determined in the
appellant's favour but that decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge
Kekic in her decision of   a copy of which is annexed to this decision.

The appellant did not attend the hearing today.  I note also that he did
not attend the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal nor did he attend the
hearing before my colleague Judge Keki? when she considered whether the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law.
 I note also despite the fact that emails had been sent to the email
address given by the appellant in his appeal forms he has not responded to
any of them.  Indeed, it is fair to say that the appellant has not engaged
with either the First-tier Tribunal, or this Tribunal, in any way.  He has
not, for example, provided any evidence to either Tribunal nor is there any
detail whatsoever in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. They
are, in effect, silent.

The appellant was, as Judge Keki? noted, advised to keep in contact with
the Tribunal were he to be removed.  There is no indication that he has
done so and in all the circumstances I am satisfied that it would be just
to proceed to the hearing to determine the appeal today and I have chosen
to do so.

I heard brief submissions from Ms Cunha on behalf of the Secretary of State
and I now proceed to give the reasons for my decision.

The facts are as set out in the decision of Judge Keki? at paragraphs 1 to
6.  In summary, the appellant is a Romanian national born on 20 August 1974
who entered the United Kingdom in June 2018.  Shortly thereafter he was
sentenced to one year's imprisonment following a conviction at North Kent
Magistrates' on a guilty plea for dangerous driving.  I note that this is a
case which the Magistrates' thought so serious that their sentencing powers
were insufficient and for that reason the matter was referred to the Crown
Court for sentence to be passed.  The appellant was sentenced also to a
disqualification from driving for 27 months.  On 19 November 2018 the
respondent was notified of the decision to make a deportation order.

The nature of the incident is not entirely clear.  What I can glean from
the incident that led to the proper conviction is that the appellant, as
set out in the sentencing remarks from Judge Brown, that the appellant had
engaged in a disgraceful and very dangerous piece of driving which took
place over a sustained period.  That is clear because the judge says:

"Even if, as I accept, you may have become confused as to your location,
you must have realised that driving the way you did was a real risk to you
and more particularly to all the other road users on a busy motorway in the
mid to late afternoon.  I'm satisfied that attempts were made to alert you
to the need to stop but you continued nevertheless and if you had not slept
since the previous day, that might explain why you behaved in this way but
it certainly doesn't excuse it.  As a professional driver it is your
personal responsibility to make sure that you are fully rested.  If you
were given a job which was not capable of being completed safely, then as
the driver of a van, which has the capability of killing people, you should
have declined that job.  It was a prolonged period of dangerous driving
involving several dangerous manoeuvres and I quite accept the assessment of
the police officers that you were very fortunate that nobody was killed or
injured."

I accept those are the facts.  there is little evidence of any other
factors to be taken into account and there is in reality little evidence
before me regarding the appellant.  All I do know is that he has been
removed to Romania but beyond that, as he has failed to engage with the
Tribunal, there is nothing to be added.

The starting point for any assessment as to whether the deportation is
justified is Regulation 27 of the EEA Regulations.

 1. Regulation 27 provides as follows:-

         27. -    (1)  In this regulation, a "relevant decision" means an
             EEA decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public
             security or public health.

             (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic
             ends.

             (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a
             person with a right of permanent residence under regulation 15
             except on serious grounds of public policy and public
             security.

             (4)  A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

                  (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                  decision; or

                  (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                  is in the best interests of the person concerned, as
                  provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child
                  adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on
                  20th November 1989

             (5)  The public policy and public security requirements of the
             United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred
             by these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental
             interests of society, and where a relevant decision is taken
             on grounds of public policy orpublic security it must also be
             taken in accordance with the following principles-

                  (a)  the decision must comply with the principle of
                  proportionality;

                  (b)  the decision must be based exclusively on the
                  personal conduct of the person concerned;

                  (c)  the personal conduct of the person concerned must
                  represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
                  threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
                  society;

                  (d)  matters isolated from the particulars of the case or
                  which relate to considerations of general prevention do
                  not justify the decision;

                  (e)  a person's previous criminal convictions do not in
                  themselves justify the decision.

                  (f)  the decision may be taken on preventative grounds,
                  even in the absence of a previous criminal conviction,
                  provided the grounds are specific to the person.

             ...

             (8)  A court or Tribunal considering whether the requirements
             of this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
             the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of
             public policy, public security and the fundamental interests
             of society etc.).

 2. It is important to note Dumliauskas [2015] EWCA Civ 145 at [40]

         "I have to say that I have considerable difficulty  with  what  was
         said by the Advocate General in relation to rehabilitation. In  the
         first place, it had no, or very little, relevance to the  questions
         referred to the Court, which concerned the meaning  of  "imperative
         grounds of public security". Secondly, it is only  if  there  is  a
         risk of reoffending that the power to expel arises [emphasis added]
         It is illogical, therefore, to require the competent authority  "to
         take account of factors showing that the decision adopted (i.e., to
         expel) is such as to prevent the risk of re-offending", when it  is
         that very risk that gives rise to the power to make that  decision.
         Secondly, in general "the conditions  of  [a  criminal's]  release"
         will be applicable and enforceable only  in  the  Member  State  in
         which he has been convicted and doubtless imprisoned. ..."

The sentence highlighted is confirmed at paragraph [55].

In principle, it is only if there is a risk of reoffending that the power
to expel arises.  It is not suggested in this case that the appellant
benefits from any of the enhanced protections against deportation as there
is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that that he had been in the United
Kingdom for anything more than a few months let alone the five years of
exercising Treaty Rights to acquire permanent residence.

I bear in mind what is said in Regulation 27(5).  The core issue is whether
the appellant represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  I am satisfied from
the sentencing remarks that what had occurred in this case was a sustained
period of dangerous driving, not one incidence but several in which the
appellant persisted despite the fact that the police were trying to stop
him.  That is, I consider, a serious matter and indicates his attitude
towards the offending which he must have known he was doing.  He pleaded
guilty but that does not indicate that he has any remorse from what he has
done or that he would not seek to do so in future.  The fact that he is a
professional driver only aggravates this matter, as the judge noted.

I find that the appellant who has shown no remorse and has provided no
proper explanation for driving in such a dangerous manner, while not
stopping when he should have done, has shown scant regard for the norms of
lawful behaviour. He persisted in a course of action he must have known to
be unlawful which I find strongly indicative that he will act in the same
manner again

Taking all of these factors into account, and bearing in mind that the
appellant has no previous convictions, I am satisfied that the Secretary of
State has shown that this appellant presents a genuine, present and
sufficiently serious threat to society.  There is no indication provided
that he would not carry out exactly the same thing again and I note that he
did so within a very short period of arriving in the United Kingdom.  To
drive in such a way is in my view a serious matter.  It affects a very
large number of people who are driving on the road as well as him and in
that sense, bearing in mind what is set out in Schedule 1, I am satisfied
that the test set out in Regulation 27(5) is met by the Secretary of State.

I must now go on to consider whether nonetheless the decision is
proportionate.  There is before me simply nothing to show what the effect
would be on the appellant of removal.  He has been removed, his life in the
United Kingdom is very limited, there is no evidence of any regular re-
employment, there is no evidence of any family connections and, taking
these matters as a whole, I consider that the need to protect the public in
light of the appellant's actions and likely to offend again in future is
such that it outweighs any of the factors that there may be in his favour
and therefore his deportation is proportionate, having had regard also to
the matters set out in Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations.

Accordingly, for these reasons I am satisfied that the Secretary of State's
decision was proportionate and in accordance with the Regulations and I
therefore dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set it aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Signed   Date 25 November 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
