
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00171/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2019                           |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Tomas Lusas
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Lanigan, Counsel, instructed by BIDS
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Lithuania against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to dismiss his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State on 22 February 2019 to make the him  the  subject  of  a
deportation order.  The appellant appealed on the sole  permissible  ground
that the decision breaches his rights under the EU Treaties.  Permission to
appeal to the Upper Tribunal was given on all grounds although  the  First-
tier Tribunal drew attention to one ground as being the most promising.  It
was described as "just  about  arguable".   I  mean  no  disrespect  to  Ms
Lanigan's entirely sensible (if not ultimately persuasive) submissions that
the real complaint is that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have  proper
regard to the obligation to allow the appeal  unless  satisfied  that  "the
personal conduct of the  person  must  represent  a  genuine,  present  and
sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
society, taking into account past conduct of the person and that the threat
does not need to be imminent".

2. I begin by considering the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   The
appellant said he arrived in the United Kingdom in August  2009  and  first
came to the attention of the tax authorities as a taxpayer in the tax  year
ending in April 2011.   In  November  2016  he  was  detained  having  been
homeless and served with the appropriate  notice  that  he  was  liable  to
removal.  He appealed against that decision successfully and the notice was
withdrawn in December 2017.

3. The appellant has misbehaved.  On 23 January  2019,  after  he  had  been
convicted of a number of offences over the years,  he  was  served  with  a
notice  of   liability   to   removal.    He   responded   in   handwritten
representations but the Secretary of State decided to deport him  and  made
him the subject of a deportation order that was signed on  22  March  2019.
The core point is that he had been convicted of "thirteen offences in a six-
seven year period".  It was accepted that he  had  been  exercising  treaty
rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  more  than  five
years but less than ten years.  His criminal behaviour  is  persistent  and
shows dishonesty and irresponsibility.  Of particular significance  is  the
conviction for being in charge of a motorcar with  excess  alcohol  in  his
body in January 2012.  He was also convicted of  possessing  class  A  drug
methadone in October 2014.  Still more seriously, on 5  June  2018  he  was
convicted of two sexual assaults against a female person and one  of  using
threatening, abusive or disorderly words or behaviour.  For  these  matters
he was sentenced to nine weeks' imprisonment suspended  for  twelve  months
and made the subject of a rehabilitation order and an order  to  do  unpaid
work and to be registered as  a  sex  offender  for  seven  years.   On  28
November 2018 he was convicted of supplying false information in  purported
compliance with an  obligation  imposed  by  the  penalty  for  the  sexual
assaults and, consequentially, of committing a further offence  during  the
operation  period  of  a  suspended  sentences  of  imprisonment.   He  was
imprisoned for two weeks.

4. The First-tier Tribunal found the appellant was a  "persistent  offender"
in law.  The judge recorded fifteen offences in nine years.  Although there
were significant gaps in the offending the judge found that  the  appellant
had reoffended after receiving medical or other support and indeed after he
had been made aware of his liability for removal.   The  judge  also  noted
that the appellant had committed offences whilst in employment  and  whilst
having accommodation.  He was also enrolled as a student at the  University
of Suffolk.  The judge noted how  the  absence  of  such  things  as  work,
shelter and purpose  can  sometimes  be  seen  as  triggers  to  committing
offences.  They were all present on at least some  of  the  occasions  that
this appellant committed offences.  His failure  to  surrender  to  custody
when required and to  provide  accurate  information  for  the  purpose  of
registration as a sex offender were matters that concerned the judge.   The
judge also noted that the appellant  had  not  been  at  liberty  since  he
completed the methadone detoxification programme.

5. At paragraph 22 of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  the  judge  specifically
considered matters that were in the appellant's favour  and  point  to  his
having improved prospects within the United  Kingdom.   These  include  his
obtaining a certificate in employability and certificates on elements of  a
foundation course. The judge also notes that there were  intervals  between
the offences and the appellant had been capable of legitimate employment as
well as starting a business studies course.  The appellant had also  agreed
to take part in the methadone detoxification programme and had insight into
the possibility of relapse.  The judge did not know if any  work  had  been
done with the offender by the probation service.

6. Perhaps paragraph 23 is pivotal.  There the judge says:

  "Given the appellant's relapse and  reoffending  after  he  engaged  with
  medical and other services in or about October 2014, the very short  time
  which has passed since he has completed the methadone programme, the very
  limited evidence of other work having been done to sustain his  recovery,
  the lack of evidence to show other work done to address any other  causes
  of the appellant's offending and the fact that he has remained in custody
  since the methadone programme ended I am not satisfied that the appellant
  is sufficiently secure in his recovery to have materially  minimised  the
  risk of reoffending."

7. The judge then went on  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   The  grounds  do  not
complain about the judge's self-directions.  Rather they say the judge  did
not follow her own directions that have been given.

8. Five grounds are identified.

9. Ground 1 is summarised as  the  "sufficiently  serious  threat".   It  is
clear that the appellant has not committed the most serious offences.   The
most  unpleasant  punishment  he  has  actually  suffered  is  two   weeks'
detention.   However  the  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  made  a   rounded
evaluative exercise.  It is right that  the  appellant  had  interludes  of
apparently lawful behaviour.  The judge comments on it specifically.  It is
also right that the judge recognised a professed a change of heart  on  the
part of the appellant.  The judge found  no  evidence  to  show  that  that
profession was well-founded.  I do not see how that can be criticised.

10. There is no basis for complaining that the judge  erred  in  determining
that  the  appellant  posed  a  sufficiently  serious  threat  to   justify
deportation as the  offences  were  not  sufficiently  serious  to  justify
interference with his EEA rights.  The offences vary in severity but  I  do
not regard any of them as trivial.

11. I do not expect that honest travellers on the railway take  very  kindly
to subsidising criminals or honest shoppers take very kindly to subsidising
people who steal from shops.  Any offence involving a mixture of  motorcars
and excess alcohol is a serious matter.  Possession of class A drugs  is  a
serious matter if only because the craving for the drug is so often  linked
with further criminality.  A sexual assault against a female person  varies
in its seriousness but it is rarely, if ever, not serious.

12. The problem with the appellant's offending, as  was  clearly  understood
by the judge, is their persistence and their erosion of the good  order  of
society as a whole.  People who commit  sexual  assaults  intimidate  women
generally so they are reluctant to go about their lawful business in public
places even if the risk to them  is  only  very  slight.   People  who  use
threatening and abusive and disorderly words and behaviour likely to  cause
alarm or harassment again upset the peace for law-abiding people  and  make
them frightened, or  at  least  disinclined  to  go  visit  public  places.
Cumulatively these offences are plainly enough to justify  a  finding  that
the appellant has a propensity to further  criminal  acts  of  sufficiently
grave kind to justify his removal even though he is an EEA national  unless
there was some reason to think that the appellant had changed his lifestyle
so that there was minimal risk of reoffending.  The judge looked for such a
thing and this has led to her being accused  of  reversing  the  burden  of
proof but that is wholly  unjustified.   All  the  judge  did  was  show  a
willingness to accept the possibility of the appellant having  changed  his
mind but then decided that the evidence that this appellant had changed his
mind was not sufficient.  I reject the criticism that the judge placed "too
much weight placed on past convictions".  Past convictions are  facts  that
have to considered.  They  justify  a  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is
engaged in escalating criminality and irresponsibility  that  may  be  drug
fuelled.  In this category I include fuelled by alcohol craving.

13. I do not accept there  is  any  speculative  finding  regarding  alcohol
dependency.  The appellant plainly has had a problem with alcohol.   If  he
had not had a problem with alcohol he would  not  have  been  convicted  of
being in charge of a motor vehicle with excess alcohol in his  body.   That
does not prove that he is an alcoholic or that that kind of behaviour is in
any way typical but it is a problem with alcohol and he had it.

14. The most recent events of sexual assault  and  disorderly  behaviour  on
the appellant's own account were facilitated by intoxication.

15. There is no error in finding that the decision  is  proportionate.   The
appellant is not deeply settled in the United Kingdom.  He does not rely on
any close family links or long history of stable employment.  His own  life
is in an unhappy state and he  has  inflicted  that  unhappiness  on  other
people.  The decision that it was proportionate was  clearly  open  to  the
judge.  There is not too much weight on past convictions.

16. I have considered Ms Lanigan's  submissions  as  well  as  the  grounds.
With respect they  add  nothing.   The  grounds  were  very  full  and  her
submissions were, appropriately, brief.

17. I appreciate the economy of her submissions but I  dismiss  the  appeal.
The problem here is not that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  but  that
the appellant cannot behave.

Notice of Decision

18. No error of law has been established and I dismiss this appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 18 November 2019               |



