
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00526/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2021                      |On 01 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ASPARUH KUNEV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr. J Collins, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant in this matter is referred to as the 'Secretary of State' in
the body of this decision, the respondent as the 'claimant'.

The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal Dean ('the Judge') who allowed the claimant's appeal against
a decision by the Secretary of State to deport him from the United Kingdom
under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016
Regulations). The decision of the Judge was sent to the parties on 22
December 2020.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant granted the Secretary of State
permission to appeal by a decision dated 6 January 2021.

Remote hearing

The hearing before me was a Teams hearing held during the Covid-19
pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field House. The hearing room
and the building were open to the public. The hearing and its start time
were listed in the cause list. I was addressed by the representatives in
the same way as if we were together in the hearing room. I am satisfied:
that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the open justice
principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that,
insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is
justified as necessary and proportionate.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not issue an anonymity order and neither party
sought one before me.

Background

The claimant is a national of Bulgaria and presently aged 39. He asserts
that he entered the United Kingdom in 2014 and commenced working soon
after.

Index offences

In November 2015 the claimant attended the home of his former partner in
the early hours of the morning determined to attack her. His former partner
received a text message from her brother detailing that there was a man
outside of her property. She opened a window and saw the claimant. Upon
opening the front door, the claimant pushed past her and made his way
inside the property. He stabbed his former partner in the stomach and then
continued thrusting the knife towards her, resulting in defensive cuts to
her hand. The injuries resulted in grave and long-lasting injuries,
particularly to the stomach area.

The mother of the appellant's former partner intervened in a brave effort
to protect her daughter and was also stabbed.

The women eventually managed to get the claimant out of the property and
called the police. They were taken to hospital. The claimant later
presented himself at hospital with a wound to his hand.

Following psychiatric assessment it was concluded that at the time of the
attacks upon the victims the claimant was 'floridly psychotic' suffering an
acute phase of experiencing hallucinations and/or delusions without
interruption.

In September 2016 the claimant pleaded guilty to 2 counts of wounding with
intent to do grievous bodily harm, contrary to section 18 of the Offences
against the Person Act 1861.

The claimant was sentenced at Wood Green Crown Court on 28 October 2016.
HHJ Browne QC observed that the attack was premeditated and was intended to
be directed 'on two women in their own home who were utterly defenceless
and quite frankly at your mercy.'

HHJ Browne QC took care to recognise the enormous impact that the
claimant's actions had on the lives of two innocent women. Their victim
impact statements identified their continuing to fear for their own
personal safety, their being nervous in public places and their being
'still absolutely frightened and terrified' of the claimant.

HHJ Browne QC identified this matter to be a 'disturbing case'and observed
that in ordinary circumstances it would have been a category 1 case for the
purposes of the relevant sentencing Guidelines attracting a starting point
of 12 years imprisonment with a level of sentencing ranging between 9 and
16 years.

HHJ Browne QC had a full psychiatric report before him authored by Dr Reid,
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, dated 10 September 2016, as well as an
addendum dated 18 October 2016. He also considered a shorter report from Dr
King, a Forensic Doctor at Chase Farm Hospital, dated 24 October 2016.

In addressing the appropriate sentence, HHJ Browne QC observed, inter alia:

         'The tragedy of this case is at the time you committed these very
         serious offences you were very seriously mentally ill, suffering
         from a form of paranoid schizophrenia and I'm sure that Dr Reid is
         right when he tells me in evidence today that you've been ill for
         several years with delusional beliefs.'

         '... You are of previous good character. Your life is not
         complicated as is so often the case before these courts, by other
         crimogenic lifestyle features such as drugs, alcohol, gambling and
         the like.

         Having said all that these offences, as I have already indicated,
         are at the top end of s.18 cases, I am satisfied that the best
         course for me to take for the protection of the public and for your
         own long-term health benefit, is that the disposal I should make is
         under the provisions of the Mental Health Act 1982 (as amended).

         I am satisfied that a bed is available for you where you are
         presently held and I am sure that for the protection of the public
         and to treat your very serious illness, it is overall in the
         interest of justice that this case is met by a s.37 order under the
         Mental Health Act 1983. I so make an order on count 2 and 3 to run
         concurrent.'

In addition to the hospital order made under section 37 of the Mental
Health Act 1983 HHJ Browne QC subjected the claimant to identified
restrictions under section 41 of the same Act, which provides at (1) and
(2):

         '(1) Where a hospital order is made in respect of an offender by
             the Crown Court, and it appears to the court, having regard to
             the nature of the offence, the antecedents of the offender and
             the risk of his committing further offences if set at large,
             that it is necessary for the protection of the public from
             serious harm so to do, the court may, subject to the
             provisions of this section, further order that the offender
             shall be subject to the special restrictions set out in this
             section; and an order under this section shall be known as "a
             restriction order".

         (2)  A restriction order shall not be made in the case of any
             person unless at least one of the registered medical
             practitioners whose evidence is taken into account by the
             court under section 37(2)(a) above has given evidence orally
             before the court.'

The Mental Health Tribunal conditionally discharged the claimant in August
2019. He remains subject to section 41 restrictions. Since his discharge
the claimant has been taking medication and has secured employment.

Deportation decision

The Secretary of State wrote to the claimant on 22 July 2019 and informed
him that she intended to make a deportation order on grounds of public
policy in accordance with regulation 23(6)(b) and regulation 27 of the 2016
Regulations. The claimant responded by letter dated 19 August 2019 setting
out reasons as to why he should not be deported.

By means of a decision dated 18 October 2019 the respondent confirmed her
decision to make a deportation order.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The hearing of the claimant's appeal was held at Taylor House on 14
December 2020. Both parties were represented. The Judge had before her the
following medical evidence:

          i) Psychiatric report of Dr Reid, dated 14 September 2016

         ii) Dr Reid's addendum to his report, dated 18 October 2016

        iii) Report of Dr King, dated 24 October 2016

         iv) Psychiatric report of Dr Hewitt, Consultant Forensic
             Psychiatrist, dated 31 July 2019

Filed with the Tribunal was a witness statement from Dr Bartlett, a
Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist, dated 28 January 2019. Dr Hewitt was the
claimant's Responsible Clinician, a role subsequently undertaken by Dr
Bartlett.

The Judge observed at �16 of her decision that the psychiatric evidence
provided a detailed narrative which followed the claimant's mental illness
from first diagnosis to the present day. She further observed that although
it was accepted that at the time of the index offences the claimant was
very seriously mentally unwell, suffering from paranoid schizophrenia, he
was not diagnosed with that condition until four months after being placed
on remand.

Dr Bartlett attended the hearing and addressed the claimant's current risk.
The Judge concluded at �22 that Dr Bartlett's written and oral evidence was
to be given full evidential weight.

In respect of future risk, the Judge noted Dr Hewitt's evidence that the
claimant has always been compliant with his oral medication and the
clinical risk assessment completed by the multidisciplinary team indicated
that he is at 'very low risk of repeat offending' and that the index
offences occurred solely as a result of his untreated mental illness.

The Judge found that the claimant did not qualify for the enhanced
protection provided by regulation 27(3) and (4) of the 2016 Regulations
because he had not acquired a permanent right of residence at the date of
decision. Consequently, he was only entitled to the basic level of
protection provided by regulation 27(1): �8.

The Judge correctly noted that the burden of proof was born by the
Secretary of State. Consequent to considering the evidence before her the
Judge concluded, at ��32-25:

         '32. Having examined the totality of the evidence before me, I find
            that the [claimant] committed the index offences solely as a
            result of his untreated mental illness. I find that he has
            subsequently received treatment which has led to him being
            assessed by two Consultant Psychiatrists as posing a very low or
            low risk of harm to others. I find that neither Dr Hewitt nor Dr
            Bartlett have expressed any concern about the [claimant's]
            current or continuing mental health. The evidence demonstrates
            that the [claimant] is taking his medication and has integrated
            into his community and is in employment. I find that this was a
            man who was very seriously mentally unwell but who, over the
            course of four years, has rehabilitated himself through
            treatment and, more recently, education and employment. I also
            find that since the [claimant's] discharge from hospital no
            concerns have been expressed about any adverse behaviour or
            actions. Based upon the totality of the evidence before me I
            find that the [claimant] has now recovered from this tragic
            episode in his life and is able to lead a normal life.

         33. The [Secretary of State] relied heavily upon the JSR [Judge's
            sentencing remarks], which in turn were informed by the reports
            of Dr Reid, all of which date from 2016, to frame her conclusion
            about whether or not the [claimant] poses a genuine, present and
            sufficiently serious threat. Although there is a brief mention
            of Dr Hewitt's report in 2019, this is limited to her
            observation that the [claimant] had had no contact with
            psychiatric services before the index offences, has no history
            of substance abuse and no criminal convictions ... In short, the
            [Secretary of State] did not engage with the detailed substance
            of Dr Hewitt's report and, in particular, Dr Hewitt's risk
            assessment and evaluation of the [claimant's] more recent mental
            health. Instead, heavy reliance is placed on the historical
            situation as it stood in 2016 which I find does not advance the
            claim that the [claimant] poses a genuine and present threat.

         34. The evaluation of the current situation is to be found in the
            substance of Dr Hewitt's reports, together with Dr Bartlett's
            written and oral evidence, as well as the supporting evidence of
            Mr. Gutu, Mr. Ergul and the Hostel Assistant Manager. None of
            this was challenged or undermined by the [Secretary of State] at
            the Hearing. I give this body of evidence full weight because it
            provides a recent and wide-ranging account of the [claimant's]
            current circumstances. More particularly there is no evidence
            before me which expresses concern about any adverse behaviour or
            actions by the [claimant] which, when taken with the assessment
            of him posing a low risk, I find goes against finding that the
            [claimant] poses a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
            threat.

         35. The burden of proving to the required standard that the
            [claimant] represents a genuine, present and sufficiently
            serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
            society is an exacting test for the [Secretary of State] to
            discharge. As set out in paragraph 33 above, the evidence she
            relied upon is from 2016. However, I find that the more recent
            body of expert medical evidence submitted by the [claimant]
            demonstrates that his mental health has substantially changed
            and is now materially different such that it undermines the
            [Secretary of State's] conclusion. Accordingly, looking at the
            totality of the evidence before me, together with my findings
            ... above, I find that the [Secretary of State] has failed to
            discharge the burden of establishing on the balance of
            probabilities that the [claimant] represents a genuine, present
            and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
            interests of United Kingdom society. Because the [Secretary of
            State] has not discharged that burden ...  there is no need for
            me to consider the issue of proportionality. I therefore allow
            this appeal.'

Grounds of Appeal

The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal can properly be identified as
follows:

          i. The Judge erred in concluding that the Secretary of State had
             not discharged the burden placed upon her.

         ii. The Judge erred in failing to have regard to the
             considerations established in Schedule 1 of the 2016
             Regulations in respect of public policy, public security and
             the fundamental interests of society.

The claimant filed a rule 24 response authored by Mr. Collins. The
Secretary of State relied upon a skeleton argument authored by Mr. Bates, a
Senior Presenting Officer, dated 10 May 2021.

Decision on Error of Law

From the outset I express my sympathy for the victims in this matter, who
suffered a violent and life-changing attack upon them. However, it is trite
that an appellate Tribunal is to consider the lawfulness of a decision
reached by a first instance judge and not impermissibly substitute its own
views. Appellate courts are to exercise caution when interfering with
evaluative decisions of first instance judges: Biogen Inc. v. Medeva plc
[1997] RPC 1; Piglowska v. Piglowski [1999] 1 W.L.R. 1360; McGraddie v.
McGraddie [2013] UKSC 58, [2013] 1 W.L.R. 2477; Fage UK Ltd v. Chobani UK
Ltd [2014] EWCA Civ 5; and Lowe v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62.

There is no duty on a judge, in giving her reasons, to deal with every
argument presented by counsel in support of their case. Her function is to
reach conclusions and give reasons to support her view, not to spell out
every matter as if summing up to a jury. Nor need she deal at any length
with matters that are not disputed. It is sufficient if what she says shows
the basis on which she has acted: Customs and Excise Commissioners v. A
[2002] EWCA Civ 1039; [2003] 2 W.L.R. 210; Bekoe v. Broomes [2005] UKPC 39;
Argos Ltd v Office of Fair Trading [2006] EWCA Civ 1318.

Mr. Lindsay clarified at the outset of the hearing that the Secretary of
State pursued her appeal on one ground alone, identified as a challenge to
the Judge's consideration as to whether the claimant is 'a genuine, present
and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
of United Kingdon society': regulation 27(5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations.

Reliance was placed upon para. 5 of the Secretary of State's skeleton
argument as detailing the substance of the challenge:

         '5. It is contended that the FTTJ clearly misunderstand [sic] that
            the SSHD's reasons for deportation. Para 32-35 did consider the
            latest evidence then available (see para 3) pointing to the
            appellant being viewed as a very low risk of repeat offending
            and low risk of harm; but considered the risk in the event of
            relapse to be unacceptable when considered against the
            fundamental interests of society (see also para 73). The risk
            not needing to be imminent and the decision being therefore
            taken on preventative grounds (para 33/34). Such a conclusion
            was hardly irrational or perverse in light of the evidence of Dr
            Bartlett ... that 'if he becomes unwell he will present a danger
            to others. His index offence was very serious' (emphasis
            added).'

Mr. Lindsay candidly accepted that the Tribunal would be required to
'wrangle' with the grounds of appeal as drafted to identify the challenge,
but he submitted that the grounds consist of 'broad brush strokes' and are
sufficiently 'broadly drawn' to permit the challenge now advanced.

The thrust of the Secretary of State's case, as now formulated, is that, in
Mr. Lindsay's words, the 'biggest problem' with the determination is that
it is entirely silent as to the appellant being subject to a restriction
order because of the threat he poses to the public. The Judge was required
to look at the conditions imposed, and the reasons as to why they were
imposed. Mr. Lindsay placed reliance upon Secretary of State for the Home
Department v. KE (Nigeria) [2017] EWCA Civ 1382, [2018] 1 W.L.R. 2610, in
particular [5]:

         '5.  Under a hospital order without restriction, the power to
             release the individual from detention lies in the hands of
             clinicians. However, where such an order is coupled with a
             restriction order under section 41, discharge of the patient
             can only take place with the consent of the Secretary of State
             or order of the appropriate tribunal. A restriction order can
             only be made where, on sentence, it appears to the court that,
             having regard to the nature of the offence, the antecedents of
             the offender and his risk of committing further offences if
             set at large, it is necessary to make such an order for the
             protection of the public from serious harm (section 41(1) ).
             No doubt because predictions about the future course of the
             relevant mental disorder - and, thus, about the risk posed -
             are difficult, restriction orders must now be made unlimited
             in time (section 41(1) of the 1983 Act, as amended by section
             40 of the Mental Health Act 2007). An order remains in place
             until lifted by the Secretary of State (under section 42 of
             the 1983 Act) or discharged by the appropriate tribunal, i.e.
             in England, the First-tier Tribunal (under sections 73 or 75
             of that Act). A direction by the Secretary of State or order
             of the tribunal releasing an offender into the community may
             be conditional (in which case, the offender is liable to
             recall) or absolute. Not only is the period of a restriction
             order indeterminate when imposed, it is common for orders
             never to be absolutely discharged because, even if an offender
             is conditionally discharged into the community, the risk of a
             recurrence of the mental disorder or its symptoms - and thus
             of danger to the public - remains.'

Though acknowledging the professional assessment that the likelihood of
relapse is low, Mr. Lindsay contended that the Judge had erroneously
allowed the appeal on the basis of the claimant's presently identified low
risk of harm when failing to factor into her consideration the ongoing risk
to the public in circumstances where the claimant resides in 24-hour
accommodation and requires support as to his medication. Ultimately,
consideration should properly have been given to the risk to the public
when such support was not provided.

Mr. Lindsay further submitted that it was unclear from the decision as to
whether the Judge understood the hospital order to be a custodial sentence.


Having carefully considered the papers placed before me, I conclude that
the fundamental problem for the Secretary of State is that it is not
possible to read into the grounds of appeal the challenge advanced at the
hearing.

The grounds of appeal run to 9 paragraphs over 3 pages. Mr. Lindsay
confirmed that no reliance could properly be placed upon para. 9. Paras. 1
to 3 are introductory statements of fact. Para. 4 asserts that the Judge
erred in law in concluding that the Secretary of State had not discharged
the burden placed upon her. There is no merit to this challenge, as
acknowledged by the Secretary of State who did pursue this ground at the
hearing. The remaining paragraphs are concerned with what is said to be a
failure to have regard to Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations: para. 5. At
para. 6 it is asserted that the Judge 'merely refers in passing to Schedule
1 at [9] and [24]'. Para. 7 simply sets out Schedule 1, without more. Para.
8 details:

         '8.  It is submitted that it is quite clear that paragraphs 2, 3
             and 4 of Schedule 1 are in varying degrees applicable in the
             instant case and have not been considered at all by the judge.
             Similarly, under the hearing 'The fundamental interests of
             society' paragraph 7 of Schedule 1, particularly sub-
             paragraphs b, c, f, g and j, have completely been left out of
             the judge's analysis. It is submitted that these omissions
             amount to a (sic) fundamental and material errors in law.'

As observed above the ground of challenge advanced at paras. 5 to 8 can
properly be considered to be a narrow one, drafted in different ways over
several paragraphs, namely that the Judge failed to have proper regard to
Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations. There is no requirement for a Judge to
expressly detail the contents of the Schedule itself, so long as it is
lawfully engaged within in the decision. I find that what are said to be
'passing' references to the Schedule at ��9 and 24 of the decision
constitute lawful engagement with the Schedule. I further find upon reading
the decision as a whole that the Judge clearly had in mind the fundamental
interests of society identified by the Schedule and so this challenge
simply amounts to a disagreement with the Judge's conclusion.

I am satisfied that the arguments skillfully advanced by Mr. Lindsay before
me cannot properly be identified as forming part of the narrow grounds of
appeal upon which permission was granted. They constitute an impermissible
challenge that is far beyond that advanced by the drafted grounds of
appeal. In reaching such conclusion I observe the confirmation by the Court
of Appeal that procedural rigour is to be applied as to the adoption of an
evolving case on appeal: R (Talpada) v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841, per Singh LJ, at [68]-[69]:

         '68. In the context of an appeal such as this it is important that
            the grounds of appeal should be clearly and succinctly set out.
            It is also important that only those grounds of appeal for which
            permission has been granted by this Court are then pursued at an
            appeal. The Courts frequently observe, as did appear to happen
            in the present case, that grounds of challenge have a habit of
            "evolving" during the course of proceedings, for example when a
            final skeleton argument comes to be drafted. This will in
            practice be many months after the formal close of pleadings and
            after evidence has been filed.

         69. These unfortunate trends must be resisted and should be
            discouraged by the courts, using whatever powers they have to
            impose procedural rigour in public law proceedings. Courts
            should be prepared to take robust decisions and not permit
            grounds to be advanced if they have not been properly pleaded or
            where permission has not been granted to raise them. Otherwise
            there is a risk that there will be unfairness, not only to the
            other party to the case, but potentially to the wider public
            interest, which is an important facet of public law litigation.'

The Tribunal is increasingly aware as to grounds of appeal filed on behalf
of the Secretary of State being discursive in nature and/or lacking
expected particularity. Several members of this Chamber have expressed
concern in recent times as to the poor drafting of grounds filed on behalf
of the Secretary of State. The rise in inadequately drafted grounds has
resulted in Presenting Officers, who are not the authors of the grounds
relied upon, requesting that particularised challenges 'be read into'
grounds of appeal in the absence of a formal request for permission to
amend grounds. I observe that no application to amend was made by the
Secretary of State in this matter. In such circumstances the Tribunal is
properly to be mindful of the guidance provided by the Court of Appeal in
Talpada.

Having found that the challenge now relied upon does not form part of the
grounds of appeal in relation to which permission to appeal was granted,
upon concluding when assessing procedural rigour that it is unfair to the
claimant that such amendment be permitted in the absence of a formal
application to amend, and upon considering there to be no arguable merit in
the grounds upon which permission was granted, this appeal must be
dismissed.

This Tribunal takes the opportunity to observe that it has not been aided
by the grant of permission by Judge Grant. Having identified in broad terms
the challenge identified by ground 2, the reasons for granting permission
to appeal was simply limited to, 'The grounds may be argued'. Such
approach, which fails to provide required reasoning, should not be adopted
in any event but is of particular concern where the grounds advanced are
poorly drafted. In this matter it is entirely unclear in the absence of
reasons as to how the grounds could be considered arguable, in
circumstances where the Secretary of State did not consider them to have
sufficient merit to rely upon them, as drafted, at an oral hearing.



Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
material error of law. The decision sent to the parties on 22 December 2020
is upheld, and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 10 August 2021




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Dean made a fee award in favour of the appellant.

No fee was paid and therefore no fee award can properly be made.

No fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 10 August 2021

