
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00569/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2019                               |On 18 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                r---d--- s---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent did not appear and was not
represented
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 we make an order prohibiting the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Respondent
(also called the Claimant) or her children. Breach of  this  order  can  be
punished as a contempt of court. We make this  order  because  we  have  to
consider the interests of children who are entitled to privacy and may well
be protected by court orders dealing with their circumstances.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the Respondent,  hereinafter  the
Claimant, against the decision of the Secretary of State to deport her. The
decision to make a  deportation  order  was  taken  on  17  September  2016
explained in a supplementary letter of 2 December 2016.  The Claimant is an
EEA national and the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
apply. It is the Secretary of State's case that although the Claimant is an
EEA national she is  not  entitled  to  more  than  the  minimum  level  of
protection and that the decision to deport her is proportionate.

3. We were surprised that the Claimant did not appear before us and was  not
represented.   She  had  instructed  experienced   solicitors   and   those
solicitors had communicated with Mr Wilding in the week before the  hearing
and referred to the hearing before us.  We adjourned for  enquiries  to  be
made and Mr Wilding was kind enough  (because  this  is  not  his  job)  to
contact the solicitors and received a communication from them  saying  that
they were in fact no longer on the record and had contacted the Tribunal to
that effect.  We have not found anything on our  file  that  confirms  that
claim but it is very clear to us both that the Claimant had  proper  notice
of today's hearing and that her representatives who have been on the record
are no longer acting for her.  We therefore  decided  to  continue  in  her
absence.

4. We have no hesitation in saying  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is quite unsatisfactory.  It is  not  clear  from  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision what  level  of  protection,  if  any,  the  judge  was
satisfied the Claimant had.  He refers in the same paragraph to "imperative
grounds" for removal and "serious grounds" for removal  without  indicating
which of the tests was relevant and that is  sufficient  to  undermine  the
decision as a whole.

5. We simply do  not  know  what  evidence  the  judge  accepted  about  the
Claimant's reasons for being in the United Kingdom or really  what  reasons
he had for allowing the appeal.  There is no proper analysis of the law and
no reasoned findings on crucial points.  This is a rather serious criticism
but it is justified  and  explains  why  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal cannot stand.

6. Having decided to set aside the decision we had  to  decide  what  to  do
next.  We considered remitting the case but  given  the  lack  of  evidence
before this Tribunal and  the  Claimant's  apparent  lack  of  interest  in
promoting her case, we saw no point in so doing.  There was evidence before
us and we have considered it.

7. It is quite plain that the Claimant has lived in the United  Kingdom  for
a long time; it seems likely that she lived there for about 28 years.  This
causes us to suspect that she may have acquired EEA  residence  rights  but
that is something she has to prove and  she  knows  she  has  to  prove  it
because this has been made clear and we find that she cannot do that.  When
the Claimant first came to the United Kingdom it seems that  she  was  with
her parents who may have been exercising treaty rights but we do  not  know
what they were doing in the United Kingdom or what,  if  any,  arrangements
had been made, for example, about healthcare.

8. We are satisfied on the evidence that for  some  of  the  time  that  the
Claimant has been in the United Kingdom she was following her education but
we do not know the circumstances and so cannot say that she was, or  should
be treated as, exercising treaty rights in that time.  There  are  "missing
links" in the evidence.  It is regrettable if  the  Claimant  has  acquired
rights that we have not  recognised  but  we  cannot  ignore  gaps  in  the
evidence.

9. We are also entirely satisfied that the Claimant  has  been  working  and
this has caused us particular concern because  people  who  are  intent  on
exercising treaty rights and obtain work very often are  indeed  exercising
treaty rights as they  set  out  to  do  and  have  acquired  rights  as  a
consequence.

10.  That  contention  that  the  Claimant  has  worked  is   supported   by
correspondence from HMRC confirming the Claimant's  work  record.  We  have
gone through that evidence with particular care and with the assistance  of
detailed submissions from Mr Wilding. Like Mr Wilding, we cannot find  five
years of continuous work.  The particular difficulty for  the  Claimant  is
that there is a gap in her employment record which suggests to us that  she
was unemployed for considerably more than the period of three months  which
is, in broad terms, an allowable time gap for the  purposes  of  exercising
treaty rights. The correspondence from HMRC certainly does not  prove  that
the Claimant was exercising  treaty  rights  for  a  continuous  five  year
period.

11. We struggled to understand the evidence because it is not explained  but
we have considered it and that is the view we take.  It is our finding that
the Claimant is a person who, notwithstanding her  long  residence  in  the
United Kingdom, has not shown that she has exercised treaty rights for  the
time need to obtain permanent residence and is therefore  not  entitled  to
more than the minimum level of protection.

12. We have also considered what her position would be if we  are  wrong  on
this and she has exercised treaty rights for a continuous  period  of  five
years. In that event she could not be removed except on "serious  grounds".
We will consider the offending shortly but it is our view  that  there  are
"serious grounds" in this case so even if we are wrong on the first finding
our conclusion would still be the same.

13. We have considered too if there are  "imperative  grounds"  but  we  are
quite satisfied that the  Claimant  is  not  entitled  to  the  "imperative
grounds" protection that is available to  a  person  who  has  accrued  ten
years' lawful residence including five years in which she has established a
permanent right of residence.  We say this because the Claimant has been to
prison.  Going to prison usually has the effect of breaking the  integrated
links and so "restarting the clock". Sometimes it does  not.   We  have  to
look for the effect of imprisonment on integrated  links.   Without  making
ourselves a hostage to fortune we are entirely comfortable  with  the  idea
that a short period of imprisonment in a long period of industrious  living
in the United Kingdom would not have that effect but that is not  what  has
happened here.  This is a case of a person who for  reasons  that  are  not
disclosed but we suspect are to do with drug abuse  has  got  into  serious
trouble on many occasions and the consequent periods  of  imprisonment  and
living irregularly and committing offences would  have  broken  any  proper
integrated links.  This is not a case where the Claimant is entitled to the
imperative grounds of protection.

14. In any case involving the removal of an  EEA  national  under  the  2006
regulation the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a  "genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the  fundamental
interests of society". This is set out in Regulation 21(5)(c).   It  is  an
important requirement  and  one  that  must  not  be  overlooked.   We  are
satisfied that that requirement is met here. A brief look at the Claimant's
criminal record makes the point.  In 2012 she was in trouble for making  an
article  for  use  in  fraud.  This  is  an  offence   which   shows   some
sophistication and planning.  Then  she  was  in  trouble  for  failing  to
surrender at the appointed time. That shows irresponsibility  or  inability
to co-operate with the authorities.  In 2013 she was fined for  shoplifting
and also for possessing a controlled drug of class A.  In May 2013  at  the
Crown Court sitting at Harrow for an offence of robbery that she denied she
was given a suspended  sentence  of  imprisonment.   Robbery  is  always  a
serious matter and is concerning because it impedes on the rights of to  go
about their lawful business without  fear.   Clearly  drugs  were  involved
because as well as a suspended sentence there was  a  twelve  months'  drug
rehabilitation order. In  November  2013,  barely  six  months  later,  the
Claimant was before the Crown Court again when she was sent to  prison  for
fifteen months. The earlier suspended term was activated.   In  2014  there
was a short period of imprisonment for burglary of  a  non-dwelling  place.
She was in trouble  again  in  April  2015  and  made  subject  to  a  drug
rehabilitation requirement and a community order.  In  April  2015  at  the
North London Magistrates' Court for theft from shops she was subject  to  a
drug rehabilitation requirement and a community order.  In September 2015 a
similar,  further,  penalty  was  imposed.  She  was   also   conditionally
discharged because she had  failed  to  attend  or  remain  for  assessment
following a drug test.  In August 2016 she was imprisoned for three  months
for theft from shops and for breaching her conditional discharge  and  then
in August 2016 for theft from shops and failing to surrender to custody she
was subject to a short period of imprisonment.

15. We have seen the judge's sentencing remarks.  Clearly, he was  concerned
about the Claimant and wanted her to do well.  He imposed a  sentence  that
he knew would allow her immediate or almost immediate release and  finished
his sentencing remarks wishing her "good luck".  We have no  difficulty  in
concluding  that  there  were  undercurrents  here  that  made  the   judge
understandably sorry for the Claimant but she has not  taken  advantage  of
the opportunities that had been extended to her.  There is  nothing  before
us to suggest that she has in fact given up the drugs  that  have  got  her
into trouble. There is nothing before us to suggest that there has been any
prolonged or serious rehabilitation. Rather  her  absence  and  failure  to
explain herself  adds  to  the  picture  of  her  irresponsibility  or  her
inability to give effect  to  good  intentions  that  no  doubt  have  been
expressed.  We have no difficulty in saying that her conduct does represent
a present threat because in the past she has behaved  in  a  way  that  has
caused distress and inconvenience and fear of crime to a number  of  people
for a variety of reasons and there is nothing before us to suggest she  has
changed.  That aspect remains real.   It  follows  therefore  that  we  are
satisfied that the personal  conduct  does  represent  a  threat  and  that
requirement of the Rules is met.

16. We are also satisfied that if she had established a right  of  permanent
residence and therefore benefitted from the  "serious  grounds"  protection
there are serious grounds in this case to remove her.  The serious  grounds
are her persistent criminal behaviour of quite a serious kind.

17. Nevertheless, we also have to ask ourselves  if  this  is  proportionate
and we do bear two things very much in mind. First is the  long  length  of
residence in the United Kingdom. It does represent  a  big  chunk  of  this
woman's life.  Second is that she is the mother of three children and  they
have to be considered. We have to do our best to make findings about  their
best interests.  The difficulty we have about that is we know very  little.
We know there are three children who are still minors. We  understand  that
one of them has remained in the care of his father and does not feature  in
the Claimant's life.  We understand that another is in the care of a  close
relative of the  Claimant.  There  arrangement  seems  to  be  approved  by
appropriate court orders or local authority involvement and another  is  in
local authority care.  This is not a case where  the  children  are  living
with the Claimant, as far as we know, or where the  Claimant's  removal  is
going to disrupt close family links as might be the case  if  the  Claimant
has frequent contact with  her  children.   Our  reading  of  the  evidence
suggests, but does not establish  clearly,  that  there  is  little  or  no
contact and that if there is any contact at all it is not a regular  event.



18. There is evidence that the child in the care of the local authority  was
being considered for adoption.  We do not know how far those plans advanced
but it certainly adds to our view that the  Claimant  is  not  in  constant
contact with the child and that the best interests  of  the  child  do  not
require the mother to remain in the United Kingdom.

19. We can only make the decision on what we have before  us  and  there  is
nothing before us to suggest that her removal would have a  big  impact  on
the children.  No doubt they would want to know about their mother  and  no
doubt if there is any sort of contact they would miss her but this is not a
case where removal would break up a nuclear  family  or  interfere  with  a
close or re-emerging parental bond. We do not know nearly enough about  the
circumstances of the children to make an informed decision  on  their  best
interests but we are confident that the occasional contact that they  might
enjoy is not a weighty element in a proportionality exercise.

20. We have considered the Claimant's length  of  residence  in  the  United
Kingdom.  The fact is she entered the United Kingdom as a child.  For quite
a lot of her stay she appears  to  have  lived  respectably  and  has  been
employed. Since about 2012 she has been involved in criminal activity of  a
kind that is serious in itself and made much more serious by its cumulative
effect.  We do not regard her long residence in the United Kingdom in these
circumstances as a weighty point in any proportionality exercise.

21. It follows that we find the evidence here points entirely  one  way  and
it is that the decision of the Secretary of State shows a  proper  analysis
of the relevant points and was proportionate and, more importantly, we take
the view that it is proportionate and that under the Rules she has no right
to remain.

22. In the circumstances  we  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and substitute a decision dismissing the Claimant's appeal against
the decision of the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We allow  the  Secretary  of  State's
appeal. We set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  we
substitute a decision dismissing the Claimant's appeal against the decision
of the Secretary of State.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 14 March 2019                  |



