
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00101/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 August 2021                             |On 07 September 2021          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Pio Maria Finazzi
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the decision issued on 1 April 2021 of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Steer which allowed the appellant's appeal against
deportation under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (the EEA
Regulations).

For the purposes of this decision I will refer to the Secretary of State
for the Home Department as the respondent and to Mr Finazzi as the
appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant was born on 7 September 1996 in Ethiopia.  He subsequently
obtained Italian nationality.  The accepted evidence is that he has been in
the United Kingdom since 2015.  It has not been found that he has been
exercising Treaty Rights for that period of time and so is not entitled to
be treated as having established permanent residence for the purposes of
the EEA Regulations.

The appellant has a criminal history.  On 26 February 2016 he was convicted
of offences against property (two offences of criminal damage which took
place on 1 January 2016) and was given a community order, �150 compensation
and an eight week curfew with electronic tagging.  He was also convicted of
offences against the person (four offences of battery which took place on
23 July 2018) and was given a community order, unpaid work and
rehabilitation activity requirements, �100 compensation, 85 victim
surcharge and �300 costs.

On 24 September 2019 the appellant was sentenced to twelve months'
imprisonment with a �149 victim surcharge for an offence committed on 26
August 2019 of possession/use of an offensive weapon in a public place.  On
the same date the community order from the sentence in 2018 was revoked and
that sentence varied to a two months' custodial sentence to run
concurrently with the twelve month sentence.

The conviction for possession of an offensive weapon and sentence of twelve
months led the respondent to commence deportation proceedings against the
appellant.  On 13 November 2019 the respondent made a decision to deport
the appellant under the EEA Regulations.  The appellant appealed that
decision to the First-tier Tribunal, resulting in the decision dated 1
April 2021 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer, allowing his appeal.

In paragraphs 3 and 4 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal set out the
respondent's case against the appellant.  This included, in paragraph 4,
details of the index offence including the sentencing remarks.

The judge proceeded to set out details of the documents that were before
her and the oral evidence in paragraphs 7 to 12.  The submissions of the
representatives were recorded in paragraphs 13 and 14.  The judge set out
the applicable law in paragraphs 16 and 17.  In paragraphs 18 to 26 she set
out her reasons for finding that the appellant did not represent a genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental
interests of society.

The grounds of appeal challenge two main aspects of the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal.  Firstly, the respondent takes issue with the
statement of the judge in paragraph 19 of the decision that:

"I do not find there to have been an escalation in offending over time
since the offence of criminal damage in 2016 was not relevant to the later
offences, and those offences were committed two and three years later,
triggered by the death of the appellant's father in 2018 and the resulting
alcohol dependency on the part of the appellant.  I do not find that the
appellant's previous convictions show that he has propensity to offend or
that he is a persistent offender."

    This part of the respondent's grounds also maintain that the judge
    sought to "minimise the seriousness of the appellant's offending".

The respondent's second ground is that the judge was in error in finding
that the appellant no longer has a problem with alcohol.  The grounds state
that "there is no evidence to support this finding beyond a bare assertion
by the appellant."

I can deal with the second ground relatively easily. The judge considered
the appellant's evidence regarding his abuse of alcohol in paragraphs 24
and 25 of the decision.  She set out in paragraph 24:

         "24.     ... The appellant gave evidence that he had suffered from
             a temporary alcohol dependency due to the death of his father
             in 2018, that he had only realised his dependency during his
             prison sentence and that he had been sober since his release
             from prison 18 months earlier. This evidence was not
             challenged by the respondent.  In view of the sentencing
             judge's remarks, as to a loss of control likely due to a drink
             or drug problem, the concurrency of the custodial sentence for
             the offences of battery, also committed after the death of the
             appellant's father, the appellant's unchallenged evidence that
             he no longer has a drink problem and his subsequent lack of
             convictions since his release from prison 18 months earlier, I
             accept that the offences of battery and possession/use of an
             offensive weapon were 'out of character' and, most certainly,
             there has been no indication of any conduct of a similar
             nature before, or, indeed, since.

25.  The appellant gave his evidence in a clear and straightforward manner
and Mr Williams found no reason to challenge the credibility of the account
given by the appellant in his oral evidence.  I, too, found him credible on
the balance of probabilities"

In light of those findings it is not arguable that the judge erred in
concluding that the appellant no longer had a problem with alcohol.  This
was the appellant's evidence before her.  It was not challenged by the
respondent.  Nothing else in the appellant's evidence suggested that he
should not be found to be a credible witness on this point.  Nothing in his
conduct suggested that he had an ongoing problem with alcohol. It was
clearly open to the judge to find that the appellant was no longer abusing
alcohol and the respondent's second ground therefore has no merit.

I also did not find that the respondent's first ground had merit.  The
grounds maintain that the judge gave inadequate reasons for concluding that
the appellant's offending had not escalated in seriousness or reached an
irrational conclusion in so finding. The judge set out carefully in
paragraphs 19 to 22 of the decision why it was her view that the
appellant's history of offending did not show the kind of escalation that
indicated he would offend again. That assessment took into account all of
the appellant's offending, the offences from 2016 being referred to
specifically in paragraphs 2, 4, 11, 13, 19, 21 and 22.  The reference to
"relevant" offences in paragraph 19 and 23 is to the offences that led the
respondent to commence deportation action and the use of the term is not
sufficient to suggest that the judge ignored the 2016 offences or
"minimised" the appellant's forensic history. The statement that the 2016
offences were not taken into account when the sentencing judge when
assessing the appropriate sentence was a matter the judge was entitled to
take into account. She was equally entitled to conclude that there was a
difference in the two periods of offending, the first being before the
death of the appellant's father and the appellant beginning to abuse
alcohol and the latter being after those events. The evidence before the
First-tier Tribunal entitled the judge to draw that distinction and to
conclude that the appellant's profile did not show a pattern of escalation
of offending that indicated there was a sufficiently serious risk of
reoffending. The judge identified factors that entitled her to conclude
that the appellant was not on a straightforward path of escalating
offending.  The decision sets out adequate reasons for that conclusion and
that conclusion is not irrational.

It was suggested before met that the appellant's evidence as recorded in
paragraph 14 of the decision was that he had made statements indicating
that he had also been abusing alcohol at the time of the offences committed
in 2016. It appeared to me, however, that the statements recorded in
paragraph 14 were referring to  the offences committed in 2018 and 2019 and
not those committed in 2016.

For all these reasons, I did not find that the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal showed a material error on a point of law.

Mr Finazzi should be under no doubt, however, that he will not be able to
rely on the decision made here by the First-tier Tribunal if he commits any
further offences whilst he is in the UK, further deportation proceedings
being very likely, if not inevitable, in that event and entirely likely
that the Tribunal would view his case very differently.

Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed   S Pitt                                  Date: 13 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

