
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00356/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 March 2019                              |On 27 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DINGEMANS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Jurgita [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Smith, Counsel, instructed by IR Immigration
Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an approved transcript of an extempore decision and reasons given
on 19 March 2019.  This is a hearing of an appeal by the Secretary of State
for the Home Department against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Parkes, whom I will refer to as the judge, in a decision promulgated on 20
November 2018.  The decision followed the hearing of an appeal heard on 5
November 2018 and the appeal was by the appellant, Jurgita [M], against the
decision of the Secretary of State dated 15 May 2018 to make a deportation
order against Ms [M].  The judge allowed Ms [M]'s appeal against the
deportation order on the basis that the Secretary of State had not made out
the grounds necessary to deport an EU national living in the United
Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal are that the judge erred in law in finding that Ms
[M] did not demonstrate a sufficient threat so that her deportation could
be justified under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
2016, which I will refer to as the 2016 Regulations, and that deportation
was not a proportionate response and that the judge failed to have regard
to the considerations set out in Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations.
Permission to appeal was granted on 13 December 2018.

    The relevant factual Background

Ms [M] is a Lithuanian national and claims to have entered the United
Kingdom in 2009 with her two children.  It is apparent that she was joining
her mother, who had been present from about 2003, and her brother, who had
been present from about 2007.  Ms [M] does not have a permanent right of
residence because she has had an intermittent work record.

On 15 November 2015 Ms [M] was living with her then partner, [AS], at a
property and they were at that stage supplying a class B drug, MCAT, to a
person called [LT].  He visited the property, it seems at Mr [S]'s request,
on 15 November and then he was falsely imprisoned by Mr [S] with Ms [M] in
support.  Mr [T] was a drug addict and he had lived in Gainsborough and he
had an established supplier but he had been obtaining drugs for about the
two weeks before 15 November from the property shared by Mr [S] and Ms [M].
 Mr [S] and Ms [M] were convicted of supplying MCAT at the trial.  There
were dealer lists, plastic bags, ï¿½1,000 in cash, all indicating ongoing
drug supply.

Mr [T] attended the property but for reasons not disclosed by the evidence
but which the trial judge was sure related to the drugs Mr [T] was
assaulted, kicked and punched by Mr [S], who was also threatened with a gun
and hit with an extendable baton.  Mr [S] and Ms [M] then called the other
three defendants at the trial to the property so that they could continue
the assault on Mr [T].  Mr [T] was waterboarded and hit.  The whole
incident lasted for at least two hours.  The judge was unable on the
evidence to give any further determination as to time.  Ms [M] took
photographs which the judge was sure could be used to threaten other
persons who might cross Mr [S] in the future.

Mr [T] was released, it seems because of the intervention of one of the
other defendants, and reported matters to the police.  On arrest, Ms [M]
made a number of admissions in interview to the police about phoning the
others and living at the property at which the drugs were supplied and the
judge described that as a partially candid account, which was obviously
partly to her credit, but thereafter Ms [M] pleaded not guilty and lost any
credit which she would have obtained and was remanded in custody.  She was
then diagnosed with a very serious illness which required treatment and she
was released on bail.

Ms [M] did not plead guilty at trial and was convicted after a trial of
false imprisonment of Mr [T] and the supply of the MCAT but acquitted of
assaulting Mr [T].  In the sentencing remarks the judge explained the
convictions and acquittals on the basis that Ms [M] had taken no part in
any of the assaults but had called the others, knowing full well that Mr
[T] was going to be detained.  On 3 November 2017 Ms [M] was sentenced at
the Crown Court at Lincoln.  She was noted by the judge to be 35 years old,
of good character, with two children then aged 16 and 11, living with her
mother.  The judge had read references and said: "It is clear to me that
what you did was totally out of character.  You were in the wrong place at
the wrong time with the wrong people."  Those are important comments to
consider when we address the Secretary of State's appeal.

Ms [M] was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for the false
imprisonment, which was concurrent to a six month sentence for supplying
MCAT.  Although there is a letter from the Secretary of State which
suggests that that sentence for supply was varied to be a confiscation
order it seems likely that the six month sentence remained concurrent and a
separate confiscation order was made.  The judge found Ms [M] was present
from start to finish, summoned reinforcement in the full knowledge of what
was to happen and took photographs of Mr [T] during the assault but was
acting under pressure from Mr [S].  Mr [S] was found to be dangerous,
namely that there was a significant risk to the public of serious harm
occasioned by the commission of further offences and given an extended
sentence.  I have already identified what was the sentence for Ms [M].

After her incarceration pursuant to the sentence imposed by the judge, an
OASys Report was produced.  The best evidence we have, page 2 of 20 of the
report, is that it was signed on 22 November, after sentence, and
countersigned on 7 December 2017.  There was a date at the top of 19 March
2018 but that appears, doing the best we can, to be the date it was
printed.  So far as is material, at page 6 of 20, the general risk of
offending within one year of community sentence was identified using the
tools available to be 6% and the general risk of offending within two years
was identified at 11%.  So far as is material, at page 16 of 20, the risks
in the community were identified as low for children, low for public,
medium for a known adult, which must be Mr [T], and low for staff.  The
risks in custody were all low.

It is also right to note the following matters: that after imprisonment Ms
[M] has now separated from Mr [S]; in prison she has won awards for
painting and sculpture and obtained a level 1 award in food safety
awareness, catering, personal and professional development; she has been
reported to be a model student and a role model for other learners; and she
scored the highest level of achievement of any ESOL student present or
historically in Her Majesty's Prison Peterborough.  Her then tutor Dr
Woodbridge noted that it was rare for him to support a learner but believed
she was earnest in her wish to undertake a lawful and constructive life in
the future.  By that stage, Ms [M] had trusted status and she has continued
in detention since then and subsequently been released, as apparent from
her presence today, and her children remained in the care of their
grandmother under a special guardianship order.

    The Proceedings before the Judge

The judge set out the relevant framework and summarised the respective
positions.  The judge held that it was common ground that the Ms [M] did
not have permanent residence and so could be deported if she represented a
present and sufficiently serious threat to either public policy or
security.  The judge concluded that the Secretary of State's
characterisation of the Ms [M]'s offending bore little relationship to the
judge's findings about what had happened, by which he meant the sentencing
judge's findings, and noted that the information from prison, the OASys
Report and the previous good character showed that the Ms [M] could not be
said to represent a threat to the fundamental interests of society.  It
could not be shown, forward-looking, that Ms [M] represented a sufficiently
serious threat that her deportation could be justified.

    No material error of law

The Secretary of State in written submissions and in the admirable and
succinct submissions put forward by Mr Jarvis today, submitted that the
judge had sought to minimise the appellant's role in the criminal matter
and gone behind some of the sentencing remarks. It was said that the Judge
had failed to have proper regard to the provisions of the 2016 Regulations
by failing to go through the Schedule 1 considerations, which the judge was
mandated to do by reason of Regulation 27(8) of the Regulations.  It was
submitted that the judge had come to the conclusion which was wrong in
relation to the presentation of a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
threat.

So far as the judge's assessment of the sentencing remarks, in our
judgment, the Judge did not make any error in setting out the material
parts of the sentencing remarks that were made by the sentencing judge.
The judge was right to identify the basis on which Ms [M] was sentenced,
and we have set out further information in this judgment to identify that
the offending carried out by Ms [M] was serious and deserving of serious
punishment, but that there were a number of mitigating features.

So far as the most important error made by the judge is concerned, it is
necessary to set out part of the 2016 Regulations.  Regulation 27, which
was applicable at the time, (we should say that it has been amended in
immaterial respects on 24 July 2018) provided that:

"(5) The public policy and public security requirements of the United
Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by these Regulations
in order to protect the fundamental interests of society, and where a
relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy or public security
it must also be taken in accordance with the following principles -

...

(c)  The personal conduct of the person must represent a genuine, present
and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests
of society, taking into account past conduct of the person and that the
threat does not need to be imminent"

and 27(8) provides that a court or Tribunal considering whether the
requirements of this Regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to
the considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of public
policy, public security and the fundamental interests of society etc.).

Schedule 1 sets out a number of paragraphs which identify that it is for
each state to set out its own policy.  Paragraph 2 deals with integration.
Paragraph 3 identifies that the longer the sentence, and we record that Ms
[M] was given a long sentence of five years, the greater the likelihood of
threat.  Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 deal with matters on which no particular
reliance is placed but at paragraph 7 there is reference to the fundamental
interests of society, including the maintenance of public order and the
causing of harm to society and the importance of freedom to others and
protecting the public.

It is right to acknowledge that the judge made a legal error in not
referring to schedule 1 as he was required to do by regulation 27(8) of the
2016 Regulations.  However in our judgment the most important material was
the OASys Report and the reports from custody.  This has to be taken
together with what was known about Ms [M]'s role in this offending.  Having
looked at all that material carefully and having particular regard to the
sentencing judge's finding which we have emphasised before, namely that Ms
[M] had acted totally out of character, means that the judge's conclusion
that the Secretary of State could not show a genuine, present and
sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of
society is, in our judgment, right.

For all those reasons, we acknowledge that there was a legal error in
failing to refer to paragraph 1 and paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 pursuant to
Regulation 27(8) but consider it not to be material because, in our
judgment, the judge was right to find the absence of the relevant threat.
We conclude these remarks by thanking both representatives for their
assistance.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mr Justice Dingemans                    Date 22 March 2019

Mr Justice Dingemans
