
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00208/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st February 2020                |On 14th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                          MR OLALEKAN JAY ADEYOOLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  His appeal against the
    respondent's decision to make a deportation order under s5(1)
    Immigration Act 1971 was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade
    for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 22nd July 2019.


 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing of the appeal before me.
    Notice of the hearing listed before the Upper Tribunal was sent to the
    parties on 17th January 2020.  As the appellant had not arrived at
    10:00am, I put the matter to the end of the list. The matter was called
    on at 12:20pm and there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    appellant and there was no explanation for the appellant's absence.
    Having checked the Tribunal file, I am satisfied that the notice of
    hearing was properly served upon the appellant at his last known
    address. The notice of hearing was sent by first class post to the same
    address set out by the appellant in his email to the Tribunal on 17th
    July 2019.  I am satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to
    proceed to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant.


 3. The appellant had not attended the hearing of his appeal before the
    First-tier Tribunal on 15th July 2019.  Although he was represented by
    Duncan Lewis Solicitors when the appeal was lodged, and the notice of
    the hearing before the FtT was sent to the parties, Messrs Duncan Lewis
    had notified the Tribunal on 9th July 2019 that they no longer act for
    the appellant. At paragraphs [34] and [35] of the judge stated:


         "34. The appellant did not attend the hearing, though clearly aware
         of it, which I deduce from the fact that (i) he submitted a bundle
         of documents with a covering letter also dated 9th July 2019 in
         which he said that it was for the hearing on 15th July, and (ii)
         that the notice of hearing was sent to him at his home address on
         30th April 2019, and (iii) that he attended a CMR in person before
         IJ O'Keeffe on 16th May 2019, before which time the substantive
         hearing date was set. I had regard to her note of the CMR in which
         the appellant said that friends may attend the hearing, that he
         volunteers as (sic) the Citizens Advice Bureau; as to a partner he
         was not sure if she would give evidence as they do not currently
         live together though he has a relationship with a child whose
         nationality he did not know as he could not get a passport for him;
         he wanted to obtain medical evidence as a victim of torture, who
         referred him to a group and they are looking to support him.


         35.  The appeal was called on at 12:30; the usher checked the
         reception (but the appellant had not checked in), and the office
         (there was no phone message to say that he was late/ill/otherwise
         unable to attend).


 4. It appears that the appellant did in fact attend the 'Harmondsworth
    Hearing Centre', not on 15th July 2019, but the day after, on 16th July
    2019.  He has provided a note stamped by a member of staff at the
    hearing centre confirming that he attended the hearing centre on 16th
    July 2019 and was told that his appeal had been heard in his absence
    the previous day.  On 17th July 2019, the appellant sent an email that
    was addressed to 'Judge Oxlade' apologising for his absence at the
    hearing.  In that email, the appellant confirms he was informed by his
    previous representatives, by telephone, that public funding had been
    withdrawn and he should "attend court on 16th July 2019...".  He was
    provided with a bundle that he should post to the Tribunal.  The
    appellant states he attended the Tribunal on 16th July 2019, expecting
    his appeal to be heard on that day but was informed that the appeal had
    in fact been listed for hearing on 15th July 2019.


 5. The appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission to appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on 14th
    August 2019.


 6. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 4th September 2019
    that was adopted by Mrs Aboni. The respondent opposes the appeal and
    submits the appellant seeks to blame his previous representatives
    regarding the mix-up as to the date upon which his appeal was listed
    for hearing, but has provided no documentary evidence confirming that
    he had been told that his appeal was listed for hearing on 16th July
    2019.  It is said the appellant's previous representatives had made it
    clear that they no longer act for him, and there is no reason why his
    representatives would have provided him with an incorrect hearing date.


 7. In the absence of the appellant at the hearing of the appeal before me,
    without any explanation, I have a degree of sympathy with the matters
    set out in the rule 24 response.  However, in the end, in my judgment
    the question is whether the appellant was deprived of his right to a
    fair hearing before the FtT.


 8. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it is
    important to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not
    whether the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the test to be applied is
    that of fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected party's
    right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.


 9. The judge cannot in any way be criticised for proceeding to hear the
    appeal in the absence of the appellant, for the reasons identified in
    her decision.  It was plainly the proper course to adopt.  However, it
    is now apparent that the appellant did in fact attend the hearing
    centre on 16th July 2019, and he has provided evidence to support that
    claim.  He has provided a slip from Harmondsworth hearing centre stamp
    dated 16 July 2019, which confirms the appellant's appeal was heard in
    his absence on 15th of July 2019 but that he attended on 16th July
    2019. That was followed up by an email sent to the Tribunal by the
    appellant on 17th July 2019.


10. The underlying decision that gave rise to the appeal is a decision to
    deport the appellant. The appellant relies, inter alia, upon his
    relationship with a child in the UK and the length of his presence in
    the UK.  I cannot be satisfied that the judge would have reached the
    same decision if the appellant had attended the hearing. This is not an
    appeal in which the presence of the appellant at the hearing and the
    evidence he gave would have made no difference.


11. I stress there can be no criticism of the FtT judge. It is unfortunate
    that the appellant had understood that his appeal was listed for
    hearing on 16th July 2019.  Whether that was because of misinformation
    from his previous representatives or his own misunderstanding, he did
    attend the hearing centre on 16th July 2019.  The appellant explains
    that he was told that the hearing was listed on 16th July 2019 by
    telephone, and he was provided with a sealed bundle that she should
    send to the Tribunal in readiness for the hearing of his appeal. If
    that is correct, it is perhaps unsurprising that the appellant cannot
    point to any written communication from his previous representatives
    and the bundle sent to the Tribunal by the appellant referred to a
    hearing on 15th July 2019. There has plainly been some miscommunication
    or misunderstanding as to the date of the hearing on the appellant's
    part.


12. I accept that the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law
    and that the appropriate course is for the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oxlade to be set aside.  As to disposal, the appropriate
    course is for the matter to be remitted for rehearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal afresh, with no findings preserved.


Decision:


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade promulgated on 22nd July
2019 is set aside and matter is remitted for rehearing before the First-
tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.




Signed                                  Date          6th April 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

