
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/00182/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|under rule 34                        |17th June 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                             FRANCISCO CARVALHO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a Portuguese citizen who  appealed  the  respondent's
    decision dated 19 March 2019 to remove him on public policy grounds (an
    EEA deportation decision).

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 30 December 2019. She  proceeded  to  determine
    the appeal in the absence of any appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in the knowledge that he was  on  remand  and  had  not  been
    produced [28].

3.    The appellant appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  asserting
    that the decision to proceed in his absence was procedurally unfair. In
    a Note and Directions sent on 07 April 2020 the President of the  Upper
    Tribunal  indicated  that,  subject  to  any  objection,  it  was   his
    preliminary view that the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and the case  should  be  remitted
    for a fresh hearing.  In a rule 24 response dated  21  April  2020  the
    respondent agreed that the appellant did not have a fair  hearing.  The
    respondent has no objection to the appeal being remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

4.    I agree that it was procedurally unfair for the judge  to  proceed  to
    determine the appeal in the appellant's absence in the  knowledge  that
    he was in custody and that it was beyond  his  control  to  attend  the
    hearing. The First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and must be set aside. Having been denied the  opportunity
    to present his case, it is appropriate to remit the appeal for a  fresh
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed      M. Canavan Date 09 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

