
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00041/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2019                  |On 16 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Pawel [D]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Buchan, Counsel, instructed by Cloisters


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination of
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kainth promulgated on 17 July 2019 after a
hearing on 4 July 2019.  The respondent in that case, the Secretary of
State, whom we shall continue to call the respondent in the body of this
determination, was represented today by Ms Fijiwala, a Home Office
Presenting Officer, and Mr A Buchan of Counsel appears for Mr [D], whom we
shall call the appellant.

2.   The appellant is a national of Poland with a declared date of birth of
13 March 1987.  On 31 December 2018 the respondent made a decision that he
should be deported from the United Kingdom on the grounds of public
policy/public security in accordance with Regulation 23(6)(b) and
Regulation 27 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.
 The appellant lodged an appeal against that on 22 January 2019 and the
determination under attack is the result of that appeal.

3.   It appears that the appellant claims to have entered the United
Kingdom in 2006.  On 4 October 2017 before the Crown Court at Reading, he
was convicted of sexually assaulting a female by penetration.  It is noted
that it was digital rather than penile penetration.  On 3 November 2017 he
was sentenced to two years' imprisonment and became subject to the
notification provisions of the Sexual Offences Act 2003, the so-called Sex
Offenders Register.

4.   As a consequence of that, on 15 November 2017 he was served with a
Notice of Liability to Deportation.  Certain representations were submitted
and he himself made written submissions on 2 October 2018, setting out why
he should not be deported.  Further representations were received from his
wife on 15 October 2018 but a decision was made to refuse her
representations and deport him.  A deportation order was signed against him
that same day, namely 15 October 2018.  On 31 December 2018 the original
deportation decision which had been certified under Regulation 33 of the
European Regulations was reviewed and a replacement decision issued as of
31 December 2018.

5.   Before the First-tier Tribunal a number of documents were lodged,
including a copy of the appellant's immigration history, a pre-sentence
report, the sentencing remarks of the judge at Reading Crown Court, an
OASys Report, certain financial documentation and the appellant's written
representations, as well as deportation documentation.  There was also a
copy of the Reasons for Refusal Letter and other documentation.  The
appellant's bundle was received by the Tribunal Office on 27 June 2019,
consisting of some 187 pages.  The respondent considered that the
deportation was justified on grounds of public policy, as we have
indicated, because of the conviction for a serious sexual assault.

6.   The law makes it plain that any deportation must be proportionate and
in accordance with Regulation 27 but there are, as is well-known, three
levels of protection against deportation in the Regulations.  They are
basic level, a level of protection acquired where the EEA Regulations
apply, serious or middle tier protection, acquired after obtaining
permanent residence and imperative or top tier protection, acquired after
obtaining permanent residence and ten years' continuous residence.  These
factors were set out plainly in the determination of the First-tier Judge.

7.   As far as the determination itself is concerned, the judge allowed the
appeal, finding that the respondent had failed to substantiate any lawful
reason, as it is put, as to why the appellant's rights should be curtailed.
 The view was taken by the judge that the respondent's actions were not
proportionate because the respondent was unable to satisfy the criteria for
deportation. Any question of Article 8 was not considered because the
grounds upon which the respondent sought to rely upon deportation were not
satisfied, according to the judge.

8.   That decision is under challenge in a number of respects.  It is
submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that the appellant only
enjoyed the basic level of protection and the First-tier Tribunal had erred
by applying a higher threshold than applicable.  It does appear to us that
it is not entirely clear whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge applied the
imperative test or the serious grounds test but when looking at paragraph
40 it is apparent that at least the imperative grounds were considered
because what is said there is the following:

"Based on my finding above, the appellant is entitled to the higher level
of protection and accordingly it is for the respondent to show that there
are imperative grounds.  The continuous period of residence has not been
broken because in calculating the ten year period I have worked backwards
from the date of the custodial sentence having been imposed."

That custodial sentence was imposed in November 2017 and, as we have
indicated, the deportation decision was not made until December 2018.  In
fact, what should have happened, as is conceded, is that the back
calculation in respect of the ten year period should have run from the date
of the deportation decision, not the date of the imposition of the
custodial sentence.

9.   That being so, Counsel has conceded that there is an error of law and
Ms Fijiwala obviously contends that that is also the case.  We agree with
that.  It is clear, we think, from the authorities that the back
calculation has to come from the date of the deportation decision.
Therefore, the judge falls into error.

10.  That is, however, not the end of the story.  The mere fact that a
prison sentence has interrupted the period does not necessarily mean that
the ten year period has been itself interrupted.  What has to happen is
that the judge has to make an assessment of all the circumstances to see if
the appellant's integrative links with the community, such as they are have
been broken, and no such assessment was carried out in this case.  The
result of that is that we find that there is an error of law in that
respect.

11.  There are other grounds in the Secretary of State's appeal.  They
relate, amongst other things, to the merits of the appeal.  We do not wish
to say too much about that at this stage in view of the decision we have
reached but it is plain to us also that as far as the permanent residence
is concerned, although the judge has made certain findings that the
appellant acquired permanent residence, basing this on certain evidence
about his arrival in the country and certain evidence about his work, there
is a gap in the period of certification of the documentation as far as his
work is concerned.  Now, it may be that that is of no consequence if the
position is that the judge has found that he worked for five years
exercising his treaty rights before that period, namely from about May 2006
until about May 2011 or thereby, but it is not clear what the continuous
period of five years is thought to be.  So, in those circumstances, it
cannot be clear to the respondent just what it is that has been found as
far as that period is concerned.

12.  We have been asked by the Home Office Presenting Officer to remit the
case to the First-tier Tribunal, having found that there is an error of
law.  On the other hand, Mr Buchan suggests that the matter could be dealt
with in this Tribunal.  Having considered what the Home Office Presenting
Officer has had to say, we are in agreement with her position.  It seems to
us that, while certain further evidence has been submitted setting out
statements from not only the appellant and certain relatives and charity
workers (apparently he works in a charity shop), the upshot of all this
being that he has maintained community ties here, the respondent is
entitled to challenge that evidence, not merely to have it thrust upon her
and accept it at face value, so it is important, we think, that the
question of the community ties be properly explored.

13.  It is important also that the question of the permanent residence,
namely the exercise of treaty rights for a continuous period of five years,
whenever that is, should be properly explored and determined and the
question of the proper level of protection is a matter which obviously
requires to be determined properly.

14.  In these circumstances, we are in agreement that the matter should be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  We therefore set aside the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal.  None of the findings of fact will be
maintained.  The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and we
direct that any evidence which is sought to be relied upon should be
submitted no later than two weeks before any hearing and a respondent's
bundle should be submitted.  The bundle we have is almost illegible, in
fact completely illegible in many respects. It is possible if one strains
one's eyes to make out what it is all about but clear documentation
requires to be submitted to enable the First-tier Tribunal to consider the
matter properly.



DECISION

15.  The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The making of the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of
law. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section
12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice
Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge
Kainth.


pp[pic]
LORD MATTHEWS
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Date: 13 December
    2019
