
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00311/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Video Skype  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               Mr Elmantas [T]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Philps, instructed by Owens Stevens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James
promulgated on 5th February 2020 which dismissed the appellant's appeal
under the European Economic Area Regulations 2016 against a deportation
order dated 6th June 2019.

The grounds of appeal set out that the appellant is a 30 year old national
of Lithuania who lived in the UK with his partner and daughter.  It
asserted he had never been sentenced to a term of imprisonment in the UK.
The grounds are as follows.

Ground 1

The Tribunal erred in its assessment of the best interests of the
appellant's child by failing to have regard to relevant evidence.

It is submitted that the appellant was currently working and supporting his
family and played an active role in the child's upbringing but the Tribunal
failed to have regard to these factors and instead gave only cursory
remarks in relation to the issue such as "Taking into account Section 55
best interest matters, I am not persuaded the appellant's presence is a
positive impact on his son, or in the son's best interests", [60(g)].  No
explanation was provided for why the appellant's presence and his financial
support of the family were not in the child's best interests and although
the appellant had offended in the past that was not sufficient
justification for finding the child's best interests did not outweigh the
removal of the appellant.

Further, it appears the Tribunal erroneously took into account the alleged
best interests of the appellant's partner's two children who were in care
in Lithuania by stating:

"It may be in the best interests of all three children to be in the same
geographic area as their mother", paragraph 48.

As the children were not in the UK their best interests did not form part
of the assessment.  The appellant's partner's evidence was that she was
only in touch with them "a little bit".

Ground 2

The Tribunal erred in finding that the appellant's offending represented an
incremental increase in risk of harm and use of violence by failing to have
regard to relevant evidence.

During the hearing the appellant gave evidence regarding his conviction for
"assault by beating of an emergency worker".  His clear evidence was that
there was no beating and that this conviction related to spitting at a
police officer during the course of his arrest.

The Tribunal ignored this evidence and found the appellant's "use of
violence against others in his more recent UK conviction" reflected "an
incremental increase in risk of harm and use of violence" (paragraph 50).
The Tribunal goes on to say that "his alcohol addition, pro-criminal
behaviour was exacerbated by his attacking a police officer, thus
increasing the seriousness of his offending behaviour, such that he was
given a suspended prison sentence of twelve months", paragraph 56.  The
Tribunal erred in assuming that the suspended sentence related to the fact
that the appellant spat on an emergency worker rather than the fact that it
was his third conviction in the UK.

The Tribunal also erred in failing to acknowledge that the appellant's
offending throughout his life had become increasingly less serious.  No
offence he has ever committed whilst being in the UK has warranted the
imposition of a term of imprisonment.

At paragraph 56 the Tribunal stated: "I do not accept the appellant's claim
that the entry of psychoactive substances on his Lithuanian court disposal
was a mere error, not least as he has admitted during his oral evidence
taking such substances."

The appellant admitted having smoked cannabis many years ago, not as
recently as 2017.

Ground 3

The Tribunal errs in fact by finding that the appellant had said that he
and his partner had arrived together in the UK.

At paragraph 41 the Tribunal found: "The appellant claimed [his partner]
entered the UK seven years ago, which would have been 2013, but also claims
that they entered the UK together from Lithuania at the same time."  Then
at paragraph 44 the Tribunal explained as follows:

"During oral evidence the appellant claimed that he and his partner entered
the UK from Lithuania together, which due to the above adverse findings
regarding the contradictory residential period in the UK is a concern.
When this was brought to his notice, the appellant then claims that what he
had just stated was a mistake."

Counsel put forward an extract in Counsel's note which makes it clear that
when the appellant said "we arrived" he misspoke and immediately corrected
himself.

Ground 4

The Tribunal erred in finding that the appellant and his partner had not
cohabited prior to 2nd August 2019 by failing to have regard to the
consistent oral evidence given by the appellant and his partner.

The Tribunal found as follows: "I do not accept that the couple have
cohabited prior to 2nd August 2019 due to the number and type of
discrepancies in both written and oral evidence.  Thus, I find that
cohabitation is a fairly recent event."

The relevant passages from Counsel's note of the evidence appeared at the
Appendix of these grounds.  In summary the Tribunal failed to consider the
following consistent evidence provided by the two witnesses orally
regarding their cohabitation.  They started living together in 2015, at
first they stayed with friends, in 2017 they moved into their current
accommodation, but at that time it was rented by the appellant's brother
and when he moved out they took over the tenancy but it was in the
appellant's partner's name.

The Tribunal stated at paragraph 34 the following:

"The partner in her oral evidence said variously that they started
cohabiting in January, then June or July or 2015.  She then said in 2017
they left living with friends and moved into their current address,
although the Appellant said that he lived alone in his previous address
i.e. without his partner.  She then said that her partner the Appellant was
away in October 2018 so he could not sign the tenancy agreement at their
new address in 2017; which in turn was the same time the Appellant also
claims he was in Lithuania undertaking his eight month alcohol/substance
abuse programme after being convicted of an offence on 31 January 2017 i.e.
until September 2017",

The Tribunal erred, however, because (a) the appellant's partner only said
they moved in together in June or July 2015 and Counsel had no record of
her saying anything about January, (b) the appellant never said he lived
alone, (c) the appellant's partner said the appellant was at work in
October 2018 when the tenancy agreement was signed, (d) the appellant did
not claim that he undertook an eight month alcohol/substance abuse
programme in Lithuania.

These errors were material as they formed the basis of the Tribunal's
assessment of the length of time the appellant had been in the UK which is
relevant to the proportionality of removing him and depriving him of his
rights under EU law.

Ground 5

The Tribunal erred in law by ascribing the burden of proof to the
appellant.

As per Arranz (EEA Regulations - deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294 the
burden of proving that a person represents a genuine, present and
sufficiently serious threat rests with the respondent and the standard of
proof is the balance of probabilities but at paragraph 64 the Tribunal
found as follows:

"In conclusion I find on balance the Appellant has failed to counter the
objections of the Respondent set down in her refusal decision regarding her
concerns or the deportation order, and reasons for deportation, which abide
by the 2016 EEA Regulations.  The evidence before the Tribunal confirms the
Respondent's concerns and further supports the Respondent's objections and
deportation decisions.  Thus in summary the Appellant's documentation, oral
evidence of witnesses, and submission made in support of his appeal fails
to properly address the Respondent's objections and deportation order."

This was a clear reversal of the burden of proof.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
20th March 2020, stating:

"Grounds 5 and 2 appear to me to set out the strongest arguments, although
all grounds may be argued.  Arguably the judge fell into error in his
approach to the offending history which arguably showed a reduction in
seriousness, rather than the increase identified by the judge.  Moreover it
is arguable the judge reversed the burden of proof on the proportionality
test."

Submissions

Ms Philps relied on her further submissions, in particular that the judge
had not taken into account the active role of the appellant in the child's
life and had taken an erroneous approach to the best interests of the
child.  The appellant's additional income supported the partner, albeit
that she claims benefits and thus the child.  There was no proper analysis
of Section 55, which was a primary consideration, no proper analysis of
them being able to go back together or her living separately from the
appellant.  In relation to ground 2 the judge had not taken into account
that the severity of offending had decreased.  At this point Mr Clarke
interjected and pointed out that the appellant had entered a guilty plea on
7th March 2020 for battery for which he received a sixteen-week sentence of
imprisonment suspended for eighteen months.

Ms Philps nonetheless submitted that the trajectory had been downwards in
terms of the offending, which went to the test of whether the appellant
remained a present threat.

In relation to grounds 3 and 4, which were taken together, the judge had
not taken proper account of the consistent oral evidence set out in the
grounds of appeal.  At paragraph 34 she noted that there was no reference
to January in the oral evidence.  Where the judge referred to being away in
October he was actually at work.  At paragraphs 24 and 25 the evidence was
wrongly recorded.  There was a 'shockingly' inaccurate record of the
evidence at paragraphs 24 and 25.  The credibility findings made, bearing
in mind the judge had inaccurately recorded the evidence, the finding that
the witnesses were not credible was based on a misrecording of the
evidence.  For example, the appellant had stated he was in Holland in 2014,
not at a later date.  At paragraph 25 the appellant had stated that the
payslips giving the address where in fact wrong and mistaken.  At paragraph
46 the appellant had not given evidence of contact with aunts, uncles and
cousins.  The credibility findings were unsustainable.

At paragraph 64 it was clear that there was a reversal of the burden of
proof.

Mr Clarke made comprehensive submissions and referred extensively to the
evidence.  He submitted that the ground of appeal in relation to the best
interests of the child was misconceived.  Ground 2, clearly, the offending
pattern of the appellant reflected an increasingly serious pattern of
offending within the United Kingdom and Mr Clarke submitted that the
grounds failed to engage with the categoric finding that the appellant had
not engaged with factors which triggered his offending.  Mr Clarke
specifically referred to paragraphs ranging from 49 to 57 in the decision
which were not challenged.  It could not be argued that there was anything
other than an increasing level of seriousness of offending.

Grounds 3 and 4 had no merit.  The judge had clearly identified that the
appellant had corrected his evidence by asserting that it was a slip of the
tongue but it was open to her to make adverse credibility findings.  The
findings were open to the judge to make and in particular she found that
the assertion that he had remained in the United Kingdom prior to October
2018 was not supported by the documentary evidence.

In relation to ground 4 it was necessary when considering the reference to
January the judge had made to look at the actual evidence of the partner
and there was a reference to six months from the beginning of the year.

Both the oral and the written evidence was inconsistent, for example the
appellant's witness statement at page 2 was inconsistent with the 'moving
in together' date in June and July.

The dates in the evidence were all over the place and the evidence was
vague.  When questioned in relation to his address in 2015 it was entirely
vague and when further questioned the appellant said he was away when the
partner said he was at work.  There was no consistency and as such there
was no material error in the recording and assessment of the evidence.

Ground 5, it was necessary to read the decision as a whole and to consider
paragraph 61 before reading the findings at 64.  It was quite clear that
the judge understood the burden of proof and found the burden of proof had
been discharged and it was important to consider the overall context.  The
appellant had no permanent residence, remained a risk, his partner had no
reason to stay as she was dependent on him and the decision was not
disproportionate.

Analysis

Taking each ground in turn, I am not persuaded that the judge failed to
consider the best interests of the child.  At paragraph 35 the judge set
out, in accordance with the principles established ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
UKSC 4  and Azimi-Moayed (Decisions Affecting Children: Onward Appeal)
[2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) that the child is now 13 months old and quite clearly
found it was in his best interests to remain with both parents.  That,
however, was a starting point.  There was no indication that the judge has
failed to take this as a primary consideration.  It is not, however, a
paramount consideration and is not determinative.  The judge reasoned that
the parents and the child were all nationals of Lithuania and were able to
go to Lithuania together as a family unit and also noted that the child did
not attend nursery.  His youth clearly indicated adaptability.  Albeit that
the judge set out the appellant was not a positive role model for his son
in regard to his substance abuse and ongoing criminal behaviour, which was
an accurate observation, the judge also found that "the child is wholly
dependent emotionally on his primary caregiver, the mother, who is a stay
at home mother".  That was a fair observation.

In terms of financial assistance, it was also open to the judge to observe
that the bank account of the partner showed large sums recently being
transferred from the partner to the appellant, for example in November
2019.  No criticism was made as to the judge's approach to whether the
appellant or the partner claimed working tax credit or not in the light of
the finding that the appellant was given financial support by his partner.
I find there is no material error in the assessment of the financial
support given to the partner and thus to the child by the appellant.  It
would appear that it was the judge's finding that it was the partner who
was the mainstay of the financial arrangements in the family.

It is also misconceived to criticise the judge for taking into account the
two children of the partner who are currently in care in Lithuania.  As Mr
Clarke rightly pointed out, although there is no obligation to consider
Section 55 in relation to children who are not within the jurisdiction,
cases such as T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT
00483(IAC) show that it is possible and good practice for the Secretary of
State to invoke the spirit of Section 55 as to how it affects other
children even outside the jurisdiction.  Certainly, the children in
Lithuania are a relevant factor and not to be ignored.

There were unchallenged findings that the partner was not working, not
studying and that she had previously worked illegally with the consequence
that she was within the UK as a dependant on the appellant.  On those
findings, which were, as I say, unchallenged, it is not clear on what basis
she could lawfully reside in the United Kingdom.  As the judge stated, her
findings were based on the lack of evidence before her in relation to
family, friends or neighbours, local community ties and the appellant's
residence and working history.

In relation to ground 2 and the increase of serious offending, and the
claimed failure to take into account the appellant's evidence that he did
not beat the emergency worker but merely spat at him, it is not for the
judge to go behind the charge, conviction and sentence which is recorded
merely on the later evidence of the appellant.  The appellant had been
convicted of beating an emergency worker and that is evidenced by the
Police National Computer printout.

The judge helpfully set out a framework of the appellant's offending which
commenced in Lithuania in 2007.  The appellant was imprisoned for 30 days
for theft in 2007, imprisoned for one year for theft in April 2008,
imprisoned for four years for grievous bodily harm in July 2008, imprisoned
for four years and six months for possession of a firearm in October 2008,
imprisoned for five years for theft in May 2008 and in January 2017,
received a community order and obligation to undergo programmes and not to
use psychoactive drug for battery.

In 2017 the appellant came to the United Kingdom and was promptly convicted
of damage to property in September 2017 whereupon he received a caution.
In August 2018 for driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol he was fined
and disqualified, in January 2019 he was convicted of driving whilst
disqualified and failed to provide a specimen and received a community
order and inter alia an alcohol abstinence order and in May 2019 was
convicted of assault by beating an emergency worker and, inter alia,
received a suspended sentence of  imprisonment of 12 weeks.

The judge at paragraph 50 described the offending as follows:

"I therefore have no documentary evidence from the Appellant to show that
his risk has reduced since his last conviction in the UK. [my underlining]
In light of his persistent pattern of offending in the UK for identical and
similar offences, triggered by abuse of drugs (according to the
psychoactive sentence imposed in Lithuania) and abuse of alcohol (according
to the drink driving offences committed in the UK), and his use of violence
against others in his more recent UK conviction, reflecting an incremental
increase in risk of harm and use of violence.  I do not accept the
Appellant's claim that the entry of psychoactive substances on his
Lithuanian court disposal was a mere error, not least as he admitted during
his oral evidence taking such substances."

The judge was referring to the pattern of offending in the United Kingdom
and that is clearly set out at paragraph 50.  To suggest that assaulting an
emergency worker does not represent an escalation in seriousness of
offending since the appellant's arrival here cannot be sustained nor can
the suggestion that spitting at the worker was not an act of violence.  The
judge set out quite clearly the development of the appellant's offending
history.

There was no material error in the judge's approach to the offending or
evidence on psychoactive substances.

The grounds fail to engage with the categoric finding by the judge that the
appellant had not engaged with factors which triggered his offending
behaviour.  At paragraph 49 the judge noted that the appellant continued to
drink, "which remains a live risk factor leading to driving uninsured and
his violent behaviour of assaulting others".  At paragraph 50 (which I
repeat for clarity) the judge properly reasoned:

"Nor was any OASys Report or OGRS risk assessment submitted.  I therefore
have no documentary evidence from the appellant to show that his risk has
reduced since his last conviction in the UK.  In light of his persistent
pattern of offending in the UK for identical and similar offences,
triggered by abuse of drugs (according to the psychoactive sentence imposed
in Lithuania) and abuse of alcohol (according to the drink-driving offences
committed in the UK) and his use of violence against others in his more
recent UK conviction, reflecting an incremental increase in risk of harm
and use of violence."

The judge further added: "I do not accept the Appellant's claim that the
entry of psychoactive substances on his Lithuanian court disposal was a
mere error, not least as he admitted during his oral evidence taking such
substances."  There was criticism in the grounds of appeal as to the
judge's approach to the psychoactive substances, but I note that as late as
January 2019 the appellant was sentenced to an alcohol-abstinent pilot area
and a rehabilitation activity requirement.  Alcohol is a psychoactive
substance.

The judge systematically considered the evidence in relation to the
appellant undertaking any prison work, and any offending behaviour courses
to reduce or ameliorate his risk of harm to others and the risk of
reoffending either in Lithuania or in the UK.  She noted the sentences he
had received and logically found, "I have no evidence he has complied with
these court orders with community disposals" and there was no letter from
his probation officer.  At paragraph 52 the judge explored the appellant's
claims for help with his alcohol addiction but again there was no
documentary evidence or details about organisations or of any such requests
for assistance.  She recorded: "He incorrectly claimed that he thought he
had to pay to attend NGO support groups, such as AA, clearly indicating he
has failed to undertake a simple internet search to find out about such
support."  Further, she noted that he expected the court to contact him.

At paragraph 52 she noted that the appellant claimed that he cohabited with
his partner in the UK which would mean he did not complete the
rehabilitation sentence from Lithuania in 2017 and further, at paragraph 54
the judge found: "There is no evidence before me to show the appellant has
attended such a programme or complied with this requirement" [a
rehabilitation order].  The evidence of rehabilitation was simply absent.

At subparagraph 55 the judge found the appellant had continued to misuse
alcohol, the appellant had had a sentence for driving offences on 29th
January 2019 but just three months later he was again driving whilst
disqualified and refused to provide a specimen of breath for analysis.

The judge's findings culminated in stating that:

 "It is clear that the appellant has failed to address his alcohol abuse
which triggers his offending and risk-taking behaviour including driving
whilst under the influence of alcohol and whilst uninsured such that
vehicular and pedestrian road users are put at ongoing risk.  In addition
the appellant becomes violent whilst in drink and he has assaulted a police
officer when the officer was on duty and dealing with the criminal
behaviour of the appellant."

As set out, those findings were not challenged.  The appellant was recorded
as drink-driving in August 2018, failing to provide a specimen for analysis
and driving whilst disqualified in January 2019 and failing to provide a
specimen for analysis in May 2019.  As the judge found, the appellant had
the lowest level of protection under the EEA Regulations and it was open to
the judge particularly on the findings made that he continued to constitute
a risk and danger to the community.

In relation to grounds 3 and 4, which were taken together, I compared the
Record of Proceedings closely with the Record of Proceedings produced by
the Counsel attending the First-tier Tribunal but am not persuaded that
there was a 'shockingly' poor mischaracterisation of the evidence, if any,
and none which is material.  It is clear from the note provided by Ms
Philps that the appellant corrected his slip of the tongue when stating
that both he and his partner came to the UK in 2015 but that was recorded
by the judge at paragraph 44 when he stated that his partner and he entered
the UK from Lithuania together but that was a mistake.  That said, he was
unable to recall the address he stayed at or when he and his partner were
sofa-surfing and when he moved into his current address, not even the year.

It was open to the judge at paragraph 25 to find that she did not accept
that the appellant had cohabited with his partner since May 2015 as
claimed.  Not only was the appellant clearly on a community order for eight
months from January 2017 in Lithuania but as the judge stated, the
appellant could easily have obtained a council tax bill or letter from the
landlord to confirm where he resided but failed to do so despite being
legally represented.  Further, the appellant submitted payslips from
October 2018 to April 2019 which referred to the appellant residing in an
address which was not his partner's (paragraph 25).  It was open to the
judge to find that this undermined the claim of cohabitancy as well as
residency from May 2015 onwards.  The judge found that the cohabitation was
fairly recent and from 2nd August 2019.  That finding at paragraph 26 was
open to her on the evidence, albeit that there may be some minor slips in
the record of evidence, but I find that nothing outlined was material.

As the judge stated at paragraph 27, there was no documentary evidence
before her prior to October 2018 and that the payslips were from 5th
October 2018 onwards.  The judge also noted at paragraph 27 that there were
no payslips between 15th March 2019 and 12th April 2019 and the payslip for
12th April 2019 confirmed that he was not working the week before that day.
 There was 'then a gap until 2nd August 2019 which includes September and
October 2019'.  It was open to the judge to reject, on this evidence, the
assertion that the appellant was in the UK during this period, even taking
into account the permitted period under EEA Regulations for job-seeking or
gaps in employment or self-employment or study.

None of this above evidence was challenged and in sum, at paragraph 28 the
judge found the appellant "has not adduced evidence that he has exercised
any of his treaty rights prior to 5th October 2018".

The assertion that the judge misconstrued or misunderstood the oral
evidence from the appellant, or his partner is not made out and material
against the judge's findings in relation to the documentary evidence.
Further, it is clear that the judge found, for a variety of cogent reasons,
neither the appellant nor his partner credible witnesses because there were
inconsistencies and vagueness in the oral evidence and between the oral
evidence and the witness statement of the appellant.

The judge's Record of Proceedings does distinctly identify the mention of
January but against my findings above in relation to the documentary
evidence, that is not material.  As Mr Clarke identified, page 2 of the
appellant's witness statement was inconsistent with the assertion that he
had moved in with his partner in June or July 2015.  Indeed, at paragraph 3
of his witness statement signed in January 2020 he states that he came to
the United Kingdom in May 2015, met his partner in a club in Manchester,
started a relationship six months later, which would suggest October or
November 2015, in his oral evidence when asked where he lived in 2015 he
said, "I don't remember the road" and when asked what date did he move into
the current address, again he said, "I don't remember".  As the judge found
at paragraph 34, even when it came to signing the tenancy agreement the
appellant said he was away in October 2018 so he could not sign the tenancy
agreement to their new address (albeit they have lived there from 2017)
while the appellant's partner stated he was at work.  There was no
consistency.  The judge's assessment of the evidence was sustainable.

I am not persuaded that, reading the decision as a whole, which is
unusually detailed, that there is any material error of law in relation to
the recording and assessment of the evidence overall.

What was being decided here was whether the appellant was a genuine and
present risk to the community, and on the evidence, which was not
challenged, it was wholly open to the judge to find that he was such a risk
to the community.

Turning to the final ground 5, I find this has no purchase whatsoever.  At
paragraph 8 at the outset of the decision the judge clearly states that:
"The onus is on the respondent to justify the interference of the
appellant's treaty rights".  At paragraph 60 the judge set out the
respondent's reasoning for issuing the deportation order and listed factors
from (a) to (m).

In conclusion, at paragraph 61, the judge stated:

"I am satisfied that the respondent has shown by way of the criminal record
and ongoing criminal conduct of the appellant that he is at high and
present risk of future offending and causing serious harm and threat to the
interests of society, that the respondent has justified the removal
decision, and it is proportionate and justified in all the circumstances,
including taking into account the appellant's relationship with his partner
and son and his work record, such that the removal of the EEA national
although prima facie would interfere with his right to exercise treaty
rights in the UK, the respondent has justified her action."

    Nothing stated at paragraph 64 in the conclusion by writing that the
    appellant had failed to counter the objections of the respondent
    undermines the fact that the judge applied the correct approach to the
    burden of proof.  The judge is merely setting out that the appellant
    has justified the decision.

Notice of Decision

I find no material error of law and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
will stand.


Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 16th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

