
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00752/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 1 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KRYSTYN [C]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rizvi, legal representative from Salam & Co
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of State  to  deport  him.
In outline summary, and by way of introduction,  it  is  the  Secretary  of
State's  case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision   was   reasoned
inadequately.  Having heard the submissions we agreed with the Secretary of
State. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  we  heard
evidence at the hearing so that we could remake the decision.  Although  we
have allowed the Secretary of State's appeal when we remade the decision we
have allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
State.

2. We begin by considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

3. This notes, correctly, that the Secretary of State decided to deport  the
claimant on 14 November 2018 following his being sent to prison for a total
of 33 months on 4 December 2017  for  offences  concerning  the  misuse  of
drugs. However the First-tier Tribunal's summary of  the  offences  is  not
consistent with the Trial Record Sheet provided to us. This shows that  the
claimant was convicted of possessing a controlled drug of class A (cocaine)
with intent to supply, of possessing a controlled drug of class  A  (MDMA),
of possessing a controlled drug of class B  (amphetamine)  with  intent  to
supply and possessing a controlled drug of class B  (cannabis  or  cannabis
resin). We  doubt  if  anything  turns  on  this  error.  The  sentence  of
imprisonment for possessing class A drugs with intent to supply attracted a
sentence of 33 months imprisonment. The  other  sentences  were  concurrent
with that. However some of the other  convictions  recorded  on  the  Trial
Record Sheet are less serious than the First-tier Tribunal stated  as  they
are offences of possession without the aggravating  feature  of  intent  to
supply and we have corrected the error.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge began the material part of her decision  by
asking herself if the claimant could only be removed on imperative  grounds
of public security.  At paragraph 3 she said:

  "The [claimant's] position was that he had  acquired  ten  years'  lawful
  residence from 2006 when he entered the UK, but the date  runs  backwards
  from the date of decision and therefore the period from 2006 cannot  help
  the [claimant].  He does not succeed as although I accept he was  working
  from 14 November 2008, as he has produced  evidence  of  employment  from
  that time, lawful residence had ceased at least by 1 December  2017  when
  he was sentenced."

5. Whilst the judge's use of the phrase "lawful residence"  is  questionable
we understand the point that she was making.  Prison, she found,  disrupted
the integrative links with society.

6. The judge then reminded herself of the terms of Regulation 21(5)  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 and then outlined the
claimant's domestic circumstances.  The judge said at paragraph 6 that  the
claimant:

  "Lives with his wife and three children, A, who was  born  in  Poland  on
  [January] 2002 and who is now 17, G, born on [August] 2009 in the UK  who
  is 9 and N, born in the UK on 1 January 2016, who is 3."

7. The judge then noted an OASys assessment dated 20 September  2018.   This
showed that the claimant's home was visited by police after his arrest  and
a large quantity of drugs and drug paraphernalia with a value of ï¿½850  were
found at the home and the claimant tested positive for the use  of  cocaine
and cannabis.

8. The claimant and his partner use different surnames  and  refer  to  each
other as partners. We doubt that they are married or hold themselves out as
married but there is no doubt that they have been living in a  relationship
akin to marriage for many years.

9. There was concern about the children living  in  the  house  where  drugs
were stored for the purposes of dealing but a social work assessment  found
no evidence to suggest the children were aware of the drugs or affected  by
their presence.  The children were looked after  properly  by  safe  adults
including their mother and there was no concern for their well-being.

10. The claimant has been in trouble on an earlier occasion.   He  had  been
convicted of driving with excess alcohol in 2008 and also for three  counts
of driving when a specified controlled drug  in  his  body  was  above  the
specified limit in November 2016. However the claimant explained to us that
that conviction arose out of the same incident that led  to  his  going  to
prison.  Certainly papers before us show that the offences in the motor car
and the possession offences were committed on  18  June  2016.   The  Crown
Court would not normally have power to deal with motoring offences  and  it
is a well understood  feature  of  the  criminal  justice  system  that  on
occasions one  episode  of  criminality  has  to  be  dealt  with  both  in
Magistrates' Court and in the Crown Court probably on different  occasions.
We do not think it  has  made  any  difference  in  this  case  but  it  is
regrettable that the Secretary of State's explanation for the  decision  to
make a deportation order did not recognise that the incidents  outlined  at
paragraphs 7 and 8 of that letter under the heading "criminal history" were
essentially relating to the same occasion.

11. We set out below paragraphs 15 to  17  of  the  judge's  decision.   She
said:

  "15.   There was no evidence before me to show the  likely  risk  of  the
  [claimant]  reoffending.   It  has  to  be  shown  that  the   [claimant]
  represents a threat to one of the fundamental interests  of  society,  in
  this case the prevention of disorder and crime  arising  from  those  who
  would use the drugs supplied by the [claimant] and of the supply itself.

  16.    The [claimant] was convicted of four  counts  of  possession  with
  intent to supply.  There is no evidence to show  how  long  he  had  been
  dealing for or the extent of his dealings  save  with  reference  to  the
  drugs in his possession.  Crucially there is nothing to suggest  that  he
  intends to continue his behaviour.  I attach little weight to  the  OASys
  Report as it provides no information about the risk of reoffending.   The
  mere possession of drugs on one occasion and the quantities found is  not
  of itself evidence that the [claimant]  is  likely  to  supply  drugs  in
  future.  Arresting a known  dealer  with  numerous  previous  convictions
  would not be sufficient as the Regulations are designed  to  cover  those
  who wish to continue their activities; that is with a view to  prevention
  not merely to punish a supplier.

  17.    In this appeal I could find nothing to suggest that the [claimant]
  is likely to reoffend.  There is nothing to show that he  is  part  of  a
  gang who might encourage him to continue or threaten him if he does  not.
  There is nothing to show he is desperate in need (sic) of the proceeds of
  dealing as it appears his family have supported themselves in the UK  for
  a number of years.  Whilst I accept the [claimant's] actions are  greatly
  to be deprecated I was not satisfied that there has been shown  to  be  a
  risk of further drug supply in the future."

12. The Secretary  of  State's  grounds  are  a  mixture  of  pertinent  and
erroneous points.

13. They point out that there was an OASys Report  of  sorts  and  that  the
general risk of reoffending within a year was 14% and within two years  was
25%.  The Secretary of State contended that this was too great a risk to be
dealt with in the way it was dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

14. The grounds then criticise the First-tier Tribunal Judge for not  having
proper regard to the previous convictions including the 2016 convictions in
the Magistrates' Courts which we are satisfied were all part of the conduct
complained of. Rather than identifying an error by the judge this criticism
reveals a potentially serious error made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
understanding the criminality involved. However, as is explained above,  it
is the sentence of 33  months  imprisonment  for  possessing  cocaine  with
intent to supply that is important in this appeal.

15. The grounds then  criticised  the  judge  for  not  explaining  why  the
claimant was not going to commit  further  offences.   It  had  never  been
anybody's case that he was part of a gang but he still committed offences.

16. There was then the contention that the drug paraphernalia found  in  the
claimant's property suggested dealing rather than a one-off event  and  the
evidence that this has been put behind him was insufficient to support  the
conclusion that the protestations of reform were sincere or well founded.

17. The judge is also criticised for not making  a  proportionality  finding
although that is only relevant if the judge was wrong in concluding as  she
did that the claimant was not a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
threat.

18. It is regrettable that the Secretary of State's  grounds  refer  to  the
claimant having spent his formative years in  Latvia  and  there  being  no
reasons why he could not  re-establish  himself  there.   This  must  be  a
mistake.  The claimant is a national of Poland.

19. At the start of the hearing we asked the parties to address  us  on  the
relevance of the conviction for the offence of driving a motor vehicle with
excess alcohol.  The conviction was on 26 June 2008 and the sentence was  a
fine and disqualification from driving.  The  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders
Act 1974 provides that an offence punished by  a  fine  is  spent  after  a
period of five years and so that conviction is spent in June 2013.  We  did
not understand why it was considered at all by the Secretary  of  State  or
indeed the First-tier Tribunal.  In AA (spent convictions) Pakistan  [2008]
UKAIT 00027 the Tribunal (Mr C M G Ockleton, Deputy  President  and  Senior
Immigration Judge  Freeman)  determined  that  convictions  spent  for  the
purposes of the Rehabilitation Offenders Act 1974 should  not  normally  be
mentioned in appeals before the Tribunal.  Section 7(3) of the Act provides
for such convictions to be considered if the interest of  justice  requires
it but that is something for the respondent  to  prove  and  that  was  not
addressed in this case.  Clearly  driving  a  motor  vehicle  after  having
consumed an excess of a lawfully available drug might be  relevant  when  a
person is later convicted of a similar offence involving a prohibited  drug
but there is a significant gap between the two episodes  of  offending  and
the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act is intended to  permit  people  to  put
behind them some of their criminal acts.

20. Far from criticising the First-tier Tribunal Judge for not  having  more
regard for  the  previous  convictions,  which  is  something  the  grounds
suggest, we find that the Secretary of State had  neglected  to  prove  the
relevance of the 2008 conviction and we are satisfied (although it was  not
apparent until the hearing before us) that the 2016 conviction was all part
of the same offending that led to the claimant's imprisonment.

21. Mr  Mills  did  not  concede  that  the  appeal  could  not  succeed  on
"imperative grounds" but he emphasised that it was the Secretary of State's
case that it was the 2017 convictions that mattered.

22. Mr Mills produced a copy of MA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  163
where the Court of Appeal refused permission to appeal a  decision  of  the
Upper Tribunal dismissing an appeal  against  deportation.   Mr  Mills  was
particularly interested in the observations of Elias  LJ  at  paragraph  19
where he considered evidence from an OASys Report and said that a

  "risk of 17% reoffending over a two year period is not, in  my  judgment,
  in the context of a deportation case a matter which  can  be  treated  as
  insignificant."

23. That case was not an EEA appeal and so the observations are  of  limited
relevance here but we agree with Mr  Mills  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
appeared to be asking itself if there was a  probability  of  re-conviction
which had to be proved.  The disregarding of the risk of  reoffending  adds
some weight to  this.   We  were  also  impressed  by  Mr  Mills'  succinct
submission that "it cannot be the law that deportation is impossible  after
only one offence".

24. It is not the law.  As indicated there was evidence in the  form  of  an
OASys assessment (E6 in the bundle) that there was a 14%  risk  of  general
offending within the community within one year of the sentence and a 25% of
general offending within two years.   This  is  a  prediction  that  it  is
improbable that the claimant will  reoffend  but  although  improbable  the
chance of reoffending is quite high and some explanation should  have  been
offered  as  part  of  the  overall  evaluative  exercise  to  justify  the
conclusion that there would be no further offending.

25. Of  particular  interest  to  the  Tribunal  is  the  evidence  of  drug
paraphernalia being kept in  the  house.  This  is  clearly  indicative  of
habitual dealing and it seems to be the claimant's confession, based on the
OASys assessment at page E7, that he dealt to fund his own drug use.

26. However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  impressed  with  the  social
work assessment which pointed to happy  children  and  supportive  parents.
The social worker's conclusion that  there  were  "no  concerns  identified
throughout the assessment in respect of the care afforded to  the  children
or the children's daily lived experiences" is not  illuminating  about  the
future behaviour of the claimant but it does indicate an ability to confine
his illegal activities in a way that indicates that he was in  control  and
therefore gives hope for the possibility of his giving them up completely.

27. We have considered the skeleton argument and oral  submissions.   We  do
not agree that this is a case where the imperative grounds  are  made  out.
We have reminded ourselves of the decision of the Court of Justice  of  the
European Union in Franko Vomero (C-424/16) reported on 17 April 2018 and in
SSHD v MG C-400/12 and the decision  of  this  Tribunal  in  MG  (prison  -
Article 28(3)(a) of Citizens Directive (Portugal) [2014]  UKUT  392  (IAC).
There is no simple answer but we work with the proposition that a period of
imprisonment will generally interrupt integrative links but the shorter the
period of imprisonment the more likely it is  that  the  integrative  links
will not have been broken.  Nevertheless, it is clearly the position that a
prison sentence will usually break integrative links and  we  are  entirely
satisfied that that is what has happened here.  We recognise, as is plainly
the case, that the claimant is settled in the United Kingdom and his family
is settled in the United Kingdom but a prison sentence by its  very  nature
disrupts that settlement and its disruptive effect will rarely  be  capable
of being set aside and it is not capable here.  For  the  duration  of  the
sentence the claimant was without the rhythms of ordinary society. That  is
nature of imprisonment. He lost his job. He was able to preserve his family
life but that is not sufficient for him to  say  that  he  remained  within
ordinary society in the United Kingdom.

28. The First-tier Tribunal was right to find that this is a case where  the
claimant has established permanent residence and so can only be removed  on
"serious grounds" but this is not an "imperative grounds" case.

29. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
law.  The concluding paragraphs are sound substantially as far as  they  go
but they do not deal properly with the reasons leading to the  conclusions.
It is clear the judge took a favourable view of the claimant  but  we  find
that the judge has put too heavy a burden on the Secretary  of  State.   He
does not have to prove that the offender will reoffend  in  order  to  show
that the "personal conduct of the person must represent a genuine,  present
and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
of society".  That has to be established by overall evaluative exercise  in
which the propensity to reoffend is an important but not decisive  element.
Further the reasons for the judge's conclusion that the claimant  will  not
reoffend are inadequate and wrong where they suggest that the OASys  report
provided no information about the risk of reoffending.

30. We announced there was an error of law at the hearing and  we  indicated
we would hear further evidence and submissions with a view  to  determining
the appeal.

31. There was further evidence produced before us  mainly  in  the  form  of
payslips and a reference relating to the claimant's present employment.

32. The claimant gave evidence before  us  and  confirmed  that  he  was  an
employee of a firm of fertiliser and animal feed suppliers. He  had  worked
there  since  January  2019.   The  reference  is  in  appreciative   terms
describing the claimant as a "tremendous asset" to the company and comments
on his willingness to get new skills and his making a sufficient impression
for the company to invest money  in  his  development  by  way  of  further
training.

33. The letter's evidential value is diminished slightly from  appearing  to
be a copy rather than a  document  on  official  paper  but  the  style  is
persuasive and the copies of the payslips are very persuasive.

34. The claimant was cross-examined by Mr Mills.

35. He accepted, as is plainly the  case,  that  he  is  still  on  licence.
Clearly this is likely to encourage good behaviour.

36. He explained that he had not got any directly supporting  evidence  from
his Probation Officer because he did not need to see his Probation  Officer
very often because he had obtained work immediately on leaving prison.   He
had only been out of prison for six months or thereabouts.

37. He said that his older  son  from  another  relationship  visits  Poland
every year.  That is required in  the  terms  of  the  family  arrangements
following his divorce.  The children from the present relationship are in a
different position.  The oldest has visited Poland.  The youngest has never
visited Poland.  Nevertheless, he accepted that he had family in Poland who
would help him re-establish himself if he had to  return  there.   He  said
that the children speak Polish at home although the older child also speaks
English fluently because of his contacts at school.  He speculated that  it
would be hard to get a job in Poland but he did not suggest that  he  could
not get work.

38. I asked the claimant if he  was  going  to  reoffend.   Unremarkably  he
replied in the negative.  I asked him how we  could  believe  that  and  he
replied:

  "I have broken my habit, I have not been back, not going to do it again."

39.  He  then  elaborated  his  answer  to  say  he  had  been  addicted  to
amphetamine and cannabis.  He could not obtain the drugs in prison nor  did
he wish to.  He had used prison as an opportunity to break the habit and he
did not wish to resume it.  He said he had  drugs  tests  as  part  of  his
probation and he had passed them satisfactorily.

40. His  partner  gave  evidence.   She  confirmed  that  the  claimant  had
obtained work shortly after release from prison and he  had  obtained  that
work himself.

41. She said that he was supporting his family and she knew she  could  rely
on him now.  She knew that he had smoked cannabis  but  she  did  not  know
about the amphetamine and cocaine use.  She clearly did not  approve.   She
was cross-examined and confirmed that she had family in Poland.   She  said
the older child was studying to be a welding fabricator and he  had  got  a
part-time job for pocket money.

42. We found the claimant and his partner to be very  persuasive  witnesses.
We found it particularly impressive that they were  each  willing  to  make
concessions where a less truthful person could have exaggerated  the  case.
For example, there was no suggestion from the claimant that his oldest  son
could not live without him in the United Kingdom.  He  is  a  young  person
close to adulthood and we were told that arrangements had been made for him
to stay with a relative if they had to leave.  The young man's home  is  in
the United Kingdom and  he  is  learning  a  trade  there.   There  was  no
suggestion that he could not manage without his father and step-mother.

43. With similar candour it was accepted that the  youngest  children  would
remove with their mother and father.  That was  not  what  they  hoped  for
their children but the children knew Polish and they would settle in Poland
if that is what they had to do.

44. It was somewhat refreshing to be addressed by people  in  a  deportation
appeal who had seriously faced up to the possibility of being  removed  and
had considered their options.   It  is  this  sort  of  responsibility  and
disinclination to exaggerate points that could easily have been exaggerated
without overt untruthfulness that makes us more  inclined  to  believe  the
claimant when he says that he has given up the drug use that got  him  into
trouble.

45. We also find the social work report about conditions in the home  before
the prison sentence to be revealing.  It is significant that  the  children
were not directly affected by the drugs.   The  drug  use  was  controlled.
This is not to imply that illicit drug use is  somehow  acceptable  but  it
does make it is easier to believe that the claimant is  a  person  who  has
stopped taking unlawful drugs. He was  not  so  involved  that  drug  abuse
controlled his life.

46. Comment has been made about there not being a full OASys assessment  but
there is a letter from the Probation Service  dated  3  October  2018  that
explains that.  It says:

  "You have been identified as an individual who does not  require  a  full
  OASYS assessment due to the nature of your offending.  This  is  positive
  news and this letter is confirmation  that  you  have  been  assessed  as
  posing a low risk of harm to all sectors of the community."

47. There is also a letter from the  offender  supervisor  to  the  claimant
dated 12 September  2018  congratulating  him  for  completing  the  ""stop
supplying" in cell worksheet" and notes that the claimant had outlined what
he needed to do to reduce offending in the future.  There is a  certificate
confirming that.

48. Although we hope we have explained our conclusions  in  more  detail  we
agree with the First-tier Tribunal Judge that the Secretary  of  State  has
not shown that there is the required risk in this case.

49. The claimant presented to us as a man who had used  drugs  for  his  own
purposes and dealt to support his habit as he explained.  He presented as a
man who was not broken by drug addiction but who was able  to  control  his
addiction and then give up using drugs. He  had  a  sense  of  pride  about
maintaining his  family  and  being  in  work.   Prison  was  a  chastening
experience and we believe him when he said that he has put that part of his
life behind him.  If he has then his personal conduct does not represent  a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious risk.  We cannot not know  if  we
are right.  Time will tell.  We can only say that the  evidence  before  us
points clearly to the conclusion  that  this  man  had  a  significant  but
controlled drug habit that led him into serious trouble with  the  law  and
the consequence of that caused him to abandon his drug use.

50. For the sake of completeness, we make it plain that we would have  found
the decision to deport proportionate in this case.  The claimant's  partner
could decide if she remained in the United Kingdom  with  the  children  or
returned to Poland. Either route would be unwelcome but criminal  behaviour
disrupts family  life.  We  find  that  such  disruption  would  have  been
proportionate if we had not  concluded  for  the  reasons  given  that  the
claimant does not present a risk.

51. Having set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  having
heard further evidence and  submissions  we  are  satisfied  that  the  one
important thing that has to be proved in this case has not been  proved  to
our satisfaction.

Notice of Decision

52. The Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision is allowed.

53. Nevertheless, we substitute a decision allowing on EEA law  grounds  the
claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 July 2019                   |



