
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00335/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 22nd January 2019                          |On 5th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FARBEY DBE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AMA
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Mr D Chirico of Counsel, instructed by
Bindmans LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo, born
on 24th January 1984.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom in 1989 or 1990, when he was
approximately 5 to 6 years of age.

3.   The claimant has nineteen convictions arising out of 49 offences,
first entering the criminal justice system in 1988, when he was convicted
of indecent assault at the age of 14.  In 2000 he was convicted of domestic
burglary and driving matters and in 2001 for further offences of burglary.
He was convicted of actual bodily harm and sexual assault, resulting in a
five year term of imprisonment in a youth detention centre.  In 2007, after
leaving prison, he was convicted on three occasions for threatening
behaviour, driving matters and attempted burglary.  More offences followed
in 2008, including the possession of crack cocaine. He offended again in
2009 and in 2010 was convicted of fraud and handling stolen goods and
driving matters.

4.   The claimant was diagnosed with schizophrenia in 2009, for which he is
still receiving treatment.

5.   After the claimant was released from custody in 2013 there was a
deterioration in his health and he was placed in medium support
accommodation and under the care of a consultant psychiatrist.

6.   In 2004 the Secretary of State revoked the grant of indefinite leave
to remain and sought to make a deportation order against the claimant.
That was the subject of an appeal, which came before an Immigration
Adjudicator in November 2004.  Following the lengthy process of that
appeal, that appeal finally came before Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson
and Senior Immigration Judge Perkins for hearing on 12th December 2008 and
15th May 2009.  In a very detailed and well-considered determination the
appeal was allowed on the basis of human rights. Judges considered that,
although the appeal was finally balanced, it was not proportionate to
remove the claimant from the jurisdiction.

7.   The Tribunal in coming to that conclusion clearly had in mind the
potential risk which the claimant continued to pose to society and the risk
of re-offending. The pattern of re-offending continued.

8.   The Secretary of State once again sought to implement the deportation
of the claimant in the light of his further serious offences, outlining the
reasons for doing so in a decision of 13th August 2012.  Eventually the
appeal against that decision came before the First-tier Tribunal on 31st
May 2013, before First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane and Miss S E Singer.  The
Tribunal also allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8, finding that
the deportation of the claimant to the DRC was not necessary or
proportionate.

9.   The current appeal arises from a decision to deport made on 14th June
2017, triggered by the claimant's conviction on 15th June 2015 for
conspiracy to burgle with an intent to steal, for which he was sentenced to
five years' imprisonment.  In the sentencing remarks, the Judge stated that
the claimant with five others targeted schools in a systematically
organised way to steal computers.  Some of the burglaries were violent,
destructive and determined in which there were smashed doors and gates and
in one school 50 classrooms were destroyed.  Apart from the financial loss
caused by the loss of computers and the damage, the work of the
schoolchildren stored on the computers was lost, including work for GCSEs.
The Judge indicated that there was a rolling conspiracy between a team of
people who trusted each other and who were central to it.  The final
valuation of property stolen was in the region of �300,000 and the cost of
repairing damage in the region of �100,000.  It was the finding that the
claimant was central to this conspiracy, when at large, although he had
been in custody for the second half of the conspiracy.

10.  The basis of the challenge to that decision that it was in breach of
the claimant's rights under the EEA Regulations and that of his family
under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.  The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 21st November 2017.  The
Judge found there to be compelling circumstances making the claimant's
deportation disproportionate even when balanced against the very strong
public interests in deportation.

12.  The Secretary of State sought to appeal against that decision.  Leave
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 7th February 2018.  Thus,
the matter comes before us to determine the issues as between the parties.

13.  Mr Chirico seeks to raise, as a preliminary issue the timeliness of
the appeal lodged by the Secretary of State.  The First-tier Tribunal
decision of Judge Robertson was promulgated on 13th December 2017.  When
taking into account the Christmas period the deadline to lodge an appeal
fell on 3rd January 2018.  The Secretary of State acknowledged that the
application was made eight days out of time and said that this had arisen
due to an administrative error.   It was the initial understanding that the
determination had dismissed the appeal and the case was filed as dismissed.
It was not at that time noted that the appeal had been allowed in respect
of Article 8 ECHR.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge, in granting permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal on 7th February 2008, found there to be special
circumstances and accordingly extended time and admitted the application.

15.  Mr Chirico invites our attention to the GCID case record sheets for
the relevant period and submits that a study of them gives rise to a
significantly different interpretation from the one as presented to the
First-tier Tribunal Judge. The notes indicate that the dismissed
determination was received on 13th December 2017.  The appeal screen
updated showed appeal dismissed.  However, when the determination was
received it showed appeal dismissed under Article 3 but allowed under
Article 8.  There was an entry in the record "ask decision maker if he has
heard anything further regarding how to proceed and refer to SCW/SATT for
advice".  Seemingly, that advice was not forthcoming and it was only the
receipt of a letter from the solicitors on 4th January 2018 which prompted
further communication, resulting in an indication from SAT that the appeal
had not been fully dismissed, "must look into whether late application for
PTA should be made". This was made on 11th January 2018.  Thus, he submits
that the misunderstanding as to what was or what was not dismissed was
apparent on 14th December 2017 and that considerable time had therefore
elapsed before any action was taken to submit the appeal.  He invites us to
find that a First-tier Tribunal Judge, having such notes, might have come
to a different conclusion as to timeliness.

16.  It is clear from the minute case notes that there had been initial
confusion which was in the process of being sorted out internally before
the decision to appeal was made.  Although the circumstances are more fully
set out, we do not find the circumstances to be such to call in question
the propriety and fairness of the Judge having extended time.  We do not
interfere with that decision and make it clear that were we invited to
reconstitute ourselves as Judges of the First-tier Tribunal and remake the
decision on timeliness, we would exercise the discretion in favour of the
Secretary of State.  We find there to be no undue delay.

17.  In essence, the challenge mounted by the Secretary of State to the
determination was that the Judge has failed to conduct the proportionality
exercise correctly under the EEA Regulations, in particular had given
little consideration to the public policy in that proportionality
assessment. Further, it is submitted that the Judge has misapplied Section
117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in that he did not
consider whether the claimant was socially or culturally integrated into UK
society.  The factors identified as giving rise to "very compelling
circumstances" in fact go no where near founding such circumstances.   We
are grateful to the parties for their detailed representations,
particularly to Mr Chirico for his helpful skeleton argument.

18.  In terms of the appeal in respect of the EEA Regulations, the Judge
dealt with that matter in paragraph 78 of the determination in these terms:

"78. Both the panel and the Tribunal in 2013 were under no illusions
regarding the seriousness of the appellant's offending and the likelihood
that he would continue to re-offend (see paras 39(b) above and the findings
of the panel at paragraphs 3 - 4, 48 and 153, as set out above and
paragraph 41 (setting out paragraph 156 of the decision of the panel).  I
make my findings in line with those findings.  However, given that the
appellant has been in the UK for most of his life, and he effectively has
no ties to the DRC, and all his ties are in the UK, I find that it would be
disproportionate under the EEA Regulations to remove him.  This has been a
finely balanced decision, and I have not taken the decision lightly.  I
would therefore allow his appeal under the EEA Regulations."

19.  It is not apparent to us that the Judge gave any independent
consideration of the issues, in the light of the recent conviction.

20.  Challenge has been made that the Judge has given only distinct
consideration to the earlier offences and outcome, rather than to the
decision to deport, which is the subject of the appeal.  There is no
assessment, for example, as to the nature of the risk which is posed by the
appellant in the current situation and no assessment of the public interest
in his removal by reason of that risk.  We say that because it is to be
noted in paragraph 48 of the determination that reference is made to the
OASys Report, which was written on 29th November 2017, and which deals with
the probability of violent re-offending.  The probability of the appellant
re-offending is described as "high" and the probability of non-violent
offending is described as medium.  This was stated to be greatest when the
appellant was low on finances, open to negative peer influences or had
relapsed into alcohol and illicit drug abuse., particularly if he was non-
compliant with his medication.  The author of the report noted the lack of
full acknowledgement of the appellant as to his actions in the conspiracy."
Until the thinking process and behaviour of the appellant's repeat re-
offending is addressed he will continue to pose a risk of serious harm to
the public."  It is also noted that he was diagnosed with antisocial
personality disorder.  Thus, the fact that the previous Tribunals had
allowed his appeal, aware that he may well commit further offences, is not
an answer as to whether the proportionality assessment has now changed in
the light of the particular nature of the claimant's present offending.  It
seems to us not only relevant to consider the seriousness of the offence
generally, as reflected in sentence, but more particularly the nature and
content of the claimant's behaviour.

21.  In terms of the assessment of the claimant's rights under Article 8,
such are briefly stated in paragraph 79 of the determination, finding that
the claimant has a strong relationship with family members who were
dependent on him in the past and on whom he depends now and even, whilst he
is in prison, there is a strong element of family or private life.

22.  Even in that analysis there is little explicit recognition of any
countervailing matter. This is particularly so as it was recorded by the
Judge in paragraph 49(c) of the determination, that when the index offence
was committed he was living in a hostel and associating with negative
influences and that he was not available for employment due to his mental
health.  Prior to custody, his brother managed his finances due to his drug
and alcohol abuse and his offences were carried out to feed his drug and
alcohol habit.  He had many positive periods but also many negative ones.
Given the nature and extent of his re-offending, there were concerns
expressed in the OASys report that the appellant needed continual
monitoring, for example in his drug and alcohol habits.  The claimant
remains in custody.  He sees family members on visits.  It is difficult in
those circumstances to understand how it can be said that the family
comprises a strong element in his private life.  Indeed, it is difficult,
without further clarification, to understand how it can be reasonably said
that family and private life created for him or will create the stability
which he needed.

23.  The Judge in considering Section 117C(1) and (4) found that the
claimant can benefit as to Exception 1 in terms of whether the claimant was
socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.  The Judge said
as follows:

"However, I have nothing before me to go behind the findings of the
Tribunal in 2009 and the Tribunal in 2013.  I bear in mind that these
findings were made in the full knowledge of the appellant's past offending
and the assessment of future risk.  I find that the appellant is culturally
and socially integrated into life in the United Kingdom."

24.  We repeat our concern, as expressed before, that there is of a lack of
an independent consideration of the more current offending, and of its
relevance to cultural and social integration. Subsequent to the hearing
submissions were made by those acting for the appellant linked to the
opinion in Saber and Boughassai v Spain (apps 76550/123 and 45938/14). The
opinion itself was in French with an English summary. It is said that the
said decision supports the proposition that the offence could not by itself
demonstrate the lack of social or family ties of that person with the host
country. However, the opinion also indicates that the nature and
seriousness of the offence must be placed in balance with other criteria.
Such seems to us to include the lifestyle of the appellant leading up to
the offence and his response to community and family support and to the
nature of his conduct giving rise to the offending.

25.  Our attention in that regard was drawn to the CJEU's recent judgment
in B v Land Baden-Wuerttemberg and SSHD v Franco Vomero (C-316/16 and C-
424/16 17th April 2018), in particular paragraph 74 thereof, which provides
as follows:

"While the nature of the offence and the circumstances in which it was
committed shed light on the extent to which the person concerned has, as
the case may be, become disconnected from the society of the host member
state, the attitude of the person concerned during his detention may, in
turn, reinforce that disconnection or, conversely, help to maintain or
restore links previously forged with the host member state with a view to
his future social re-integration in that state."

No such assessment, we find, has been made. That it should have been made
is, we find, of particular importance, given the very antisocial nature and
violent and destructive course of conduct with which the claimant was
concerned. It is necessary not only to look at the nature of the offence
but also to the personality and conduct of the claimant, which are relevant
considerations in the assessment of proportionality.  We find such an
assessment entirely lacking in this matter.

26.  In terms of whether there would be very significant obstacles to the
claimant's integration to life in the DRC, we note the findings made by the
Judge, particularly paragraphs 59 to 63 of the determination.  Such seems
to suggest that the appellant would suffer a rapid, serious and
irreversible decline in his mental health if removed to the DRC.  It
suggests that the appellant could not receive remittances or be in contact
with his family by telephone.

27.  This is not a situation where the Judge has found, on the basis of
Article 3, that the claimant could not safely be removed to the DRC or that
the authorities would be adversely interested in him, but rather that he
would face difficulties in re-integration.

28.  In those circumstances it is even more important to balance the public
interest in his removal with his difficulties if removed, in coming to a
balanced and proper proportionality assessment.

29.  As the Judge has indicated in paragraph 84 of the determination, there
was no evidence that the effect of removal of the appellant upon his wife
would be unduly harsh.  They have only been in a relationship for a short
period of time and have never lived together.  Similarly, in terms of R,
she lives with her primary carer.  There was no independent evidence that
the likely effect on her of the claimant's removal would be unduly harsh.

30.  In paragraph 86 of the determination, the Judge cites a number of
factors as being compelling circumstances.  In particular it is said that
the compelling factor was his family, to provide stability. Such a finding
pays little regard to the reality that at the time of the offence the
claimant was living in a hostel and had, apart from support of his brother,
very little support or stability.  In any event his need for stability must
be weighed against the public interest in his removal.

31.  Overall, we do not find, despite what is otherwise a detailed and
careful determination, that the Judge has really grappled with the risk to
the public posed by the further significant and serious offending, and
whether such, together with all related factors, renders his removal now
proportionate, despite the difficulties which he might face in the DRC. The
Assessments made by experienced Tribunals in 2008 and 2013 are clearly
relevant matters as a starting point but do not engage with the fundamental
question whether the appellant now poses such a significant threat to
public order and safety that he should be removed.

32.  Having found that that assessment has not been fully conducted, we set
aside this decision to be remade.

33.  We are conscious that there may be need for significant additional
evidence from witnesses or from the medical authorities which requires
effectual findings made upon it.  In those circumstances, we consider,
accordance with the Senior President's Practice Direction, that this is a
matter that should be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal Of the Secretary of State is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
First tier Tribunal decision is set aside to be remade  by  the  First  tier
Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                               Date 4 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
