


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: DA/01172/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2nd July 2019                    |On: 9th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     CTW
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Karnik, Counsel instructed by Howells
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sierra Leone born in 1993. He appeals on
    human rights grounds against the Respondent's decision  to  deport  him
    from the United Kingdom.










 2. The chronology of events leading to this appeal is as follows:

    23.7.09            The Appellant enters the UK aged 15.


                  Appellant granted Indefinite Leave to Enter as  the  child
      of a
                  person present and settled in the UK (his mother)

       1.11.12           The  Appellant  convicted  at  Bury  and   Rochdale
Juvenile Court of
                       possession of  a  Class  C  drug,  using  threatening
behaviour.
                       Received a community order

      2.11.12          The Appellant convicted at Manchester Crown Court  of
robbery.
                       Received a sentence of 2 years' imprisonment

      2.1.13           The Appellant served with a liability to  deportation
notice

      25.9.13          The Appellant served with a Deportation Order

      8.1.13           The Respondent withdrew the Deportation Order

      10.6.14          The Respondent signs second Deportation Order

      5.9.14           First-tier Tribunal Judge de Haney allows appeal

      28.10.14   Upper Tribunal Judge Coker sets the decision  of  Judge  de
Haney
                       aside on the grounds that he erred in law in  failing
to adequately
                       weigh the public  interest  into  his  assessment  of
whether it would
                 be 'unduly harsh' for the Appellant's son if he were to be


                 deported. The matter is remitted for re-hearing.

      21.8.15          The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  McClure)  dismisses
appeal

       16.6.16           Upper  Tribunal  (Judge  Clive  Lane)  upholds  the
decision of
                       First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure and  dismisses  the
Appellant's
                       onward appeal

      2.12.17          Upper Tribunal refuses permission to appeal

      24.10.18         Supreme Court hand down judgment in KO  (Nigeria)(FC)
v
                       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
UKSC 53
                        holding  that  upon  proper  construction  the  test
"unduly harsh"
                       should be evaluated without reference to  the  public
interest

      8.11.18           Court  of  Appeal  grant  permission  (Lord  Justice
Holroyde)

       8.1.19            Consent  Order  sealed  in  the  Court  of  Appeal.
Statement of
                       Reasons explains that  the  Respondent  accepts  that
following the
                       decision in KO (Nigeria) the decision would  need  to
be remade,
                       and that  remittal  to  the  UT  would  therefore  be
appropriate.

 3. At a hearing before me on the 24th May 2019 the parties agreed that the
    effect of the consent order is that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside for error of law, namely the  incorrect  approach
    to the  question  of  whether  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    Appellant's young son to remain in the United Kingdom without him. They
    invited me to remake the decision de novo, addressing  that  issue  and
    further considering whether there were "very compelling  circumstances"
    such that deportation action should no longer be pursued.  Since it has
    now been approaching four years since Judge McClure made  his  findings
    of fact about the Appellant's circumstances, this would need to be with
    regard  to  updated  evidence.   This  is  particularly  so  since  the
    intervening years have seen the Appellant  fall  victim  to  a  serious
    assault which has left  him  with  a  number  of  physical  and  mental
    difficulties which may arguably impact upon his ability to re-establish
    himself in Sierra Leone.  I therefore adjourned the initial hearing  in
    order that such further evidence could be prepared and presented.


 4. When the hearing reconvened on the 2nd July 2019 I heard live  evidence
    from the Appellant, and from his mother, Mrs H.   I was  provided  with
    up  to  date  medical  evidence  and  witness  statements  from   other
    witnesses, including the mother of the Appellant's child, whom I  shall
    refer to as OO.



    The Evidence

 5. I preface this summary of the evidence by recording that I  found  both
    the Appellant and Mrs H to be wholly credible witnesses. Their evidence
    was  detailed  and  consistent,  and  at  times  obviously   heartfelt,
    particularly when they were discussing the position of the  Appellant's
    son, S.   In his submissions Mr McVeety acknowledged that no issue  was
    taken with any of it, and that it was a matter for me whether  I  found
    it to disclose circumstances that would engage one of the exceptions at
    section 33 of the Borders Act 2007.


 6. The family history is as follows.

 7. Mrs H came to study in the United Kingdom in 2002.  She  had  left  the
    Appellant, then aged almost 8, with the only relative that she  had  in
    Sierra Leone at the time. This was a lady whom he referred  to  as  his
    grandma but was, more accurately, his great-aunt. He called  this  lady
    Mrs Alladin and she looked after him until he came here.  The Appellant
    explained in his oral evidence that whilst under Mrs Alladin's care  he
    had led a very sheltered life. She was afraid to let him out and  as  a
    result he did not have friends as such. He was not used to going  about
    his own business. I  interpolate  that  this  evidence  appears  to  be
    consistent with the country background evidence which shows that Sierra
    Leone suffered a brutal and protracted civil war between 1991 and  2002
    characterised by the forced recruitment of vulnerable children into the
    various militias. It is further consistent with the evidence  given  to
    the Judge who dealt with the  Appellant's  entry  clearance  appeal  in
    March 2009. Immigration Judge Crawford recorded  Mrs  H's  evidence  at
    that time to be that Mrs Alladin was stressed when the  Appellant  left
    the house, and that the Appellant was in turn complaining to his mother
    that she was restricting him.


 8. So it was that when the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  the
    summer of 2009 he was  a  fifteen  year  old  with  very  limited  life
    experience; such experience that he did have did not equip him well for
    his new life  in  Manchester.  The  Appellant  explained  in  his  oral
    evidence that he started attending school as soon  as  he  arrived  but
    there was no way that he was going to be able  to  catch  up  with  his
    peers. He had gone from grade 8 in Sierra Leone to joining a class  who
    were about to take their GCSEs. He therefore  found  school  difficult.
    It is appropriate to note at this point that the Appellant speaks  with
    a quite a severe stutter. He states  that  he  was  bullied  at  school
    because of this speech  impediment  and  this  further  obstructed  his
    settling in.  He was moreover not used to the freedom. He  told  me  in
    live evidence that he "couldn't really cope". When he did make friends,
    he chose badly.  He started hanging around with the wrong people.

 9. Mrs H found this behaviour very difficult to cope with.  She  had  held
    high hopes for her son and was obviously distraught  that  he  was  not
    making the most of the opportunity he had been given when  he  came  to
    the United Kingdom. They fought; he fought with her then  husband,  his
    stepfather. Mrs H had not seen him at all between the  years  2002  and
    2009 and found  it  hard  to  discipline  him.   There  was  frequently
    conflict between them. In March 2012 his mother gave birth  prematurely
    (to  the  Appellant's  second  brother  'B2').   The   Appellant   felt
    responsible for this because of all of the fighting and so  he  decided
    that he should leave the family home and live on his  own.  He  was  at
    that stage 18 years old.

10. On the day that the Appellant left his mother's home  he  went  with  a
    'friend'  into  Manchester  city  centre.   What  transpired  there  is
    described in grim detail in the sentencing remarks of HHJ Wigglesworth,
    who in November 2012 sent the Appellant  to  prison  for  robbery.  The
    Appellant and this associate were  in  a  bookmaker's  near  Piccadilly
    Gardens when they observed an elderly customer  collecting  substantial
    winnings. The pair of them left the shop and followed this gentleman to
    where he was boarding his bus. They got on the bus and sat on that  bus
    for approximately 40 minutes, all the while planning to rob  him.  When
    the man disembarked in Walkden he proceeded to a taxi  rank  where  the
    two young men set about him, knocking him to the  ground  and  punching
    him as he lay on the floor. Judge  Wigglesworth  rightly  comments  "it
    must have been for him, a terrifying experience".  He  noted  that  the
    aggravating features of the offence were a) the age of the victim -  he
    was 77, b) the fact that the two acted in concert, c) that it  occurred
    in the hours of darkness and d) that they planned the attack.  I  would
    add in respect of the latter feature of the case that a 40  minute  bus
    ride is a long time to think about what you are about to do and  change
    your mind. That the Appellant did not speaks to his state  of  mind  at
    the  time  and  the  very  serious  nature  of  this  offence.    Judge
    Wigglesworth sent the Appellant to a Young  Offenders  Institution  for
    two years.


11. He was released  in  October  2013  and  immediately  returned  to  his
    mother's home.  Prior to his sentencing he had been  staying  with  his
    girlfriend, OO, but the contemporaneous notes from social services  and
    the probation service record that it was the Appellant's decision to go
    back to living  with  his  mother  and  stepfather  in  an  attempt  to
    stabilise his life, and to  support  them  in  looking  after  his  two
    younger brothers.  He has lived there ever since.   The  Appellant  now
    enjoys a close relationship with his mother, who has been  particularly
    reliant on him since her marriage broke  down  in  2016.     Mrs  H  is
    employed full time by Manchester City Council where she has worked,  in
    various capacities, since 2005.  She told me that over  the  years  the
    Appellant has been of  enormous  help  to  her  in  looking  after  his
    brothers/collecting them from school etc. This has enabled her to carry
    on working to support the family. The younger boys have not seen  their
    father for approximately three years. Mrs H was able  to  secure  'CSA'
    payments from him through the intervention of that agency, but  he  has
    declined to have any contact with his sons. Mrs H told me  that  social
    services  have  contacted  him  with  a  view  to   facilitating   some
    reconciliation but he "is not interested". It is in that  context  that
    Mrs H feels it is particularly important for her younger sons to have a
    meaningful relationship with their elder brother.


12. Because of these  domestic  arrangements  there  was  a  good  deal  of
    evidence about the Appellant's two younger half-brothers.

13. B1 was born in 2006 and it became apparent when he was at a  young  age
    that he had very  significant  behavioural  and  learning  issues.  Mrs
    Hibbert told me that B1 was excluded or suspended every  year  that  he
    was in primary school, and I can see from the various letters from  his
    then school in the Respondent's bundle that this is  indeed  the  case.
    The child was repeatedly excluded  or  punished  for  assaulting  other
    children or members of staff,  on  at  least  one  occasion  causing  a
    teacher to have to attend hospital; on another he was  witnessed  by  a
    Child Psychologist to be throwing chairs at other children, one of whom
    was cut in the face.   He has subsequently been diagnosed  with  autism
    and is now, at the age of 12, attending specialist boarding school four
    nights a week.

14. I have read all of the documents before me relating to B1. Three  clear
    points emerge. First, that B1 has quite extreme  learning  disabilities
    and behavioural difficulties. He was under the care of Manchester CAMHS
    from the age of five until very recently. He remains  under  assessment
    but at present the diagnosis is autism. Second, that these disabilities
    have presented the family as a whole with a  long  term  and  stressful
    challenges.  Managing the care  of  B1  has  not,  for  instance,  been
    limited to having someone available to pick him up from school  at  the
    normal time. His violent outbursts have meant that his  family  members
    have been called to collect him at various points of the day  and  that
    planning is very difficult. Those logistical issues however  pale  into
    insignificance next to the emotional strain that his needs have  placed
    the family under.   Third, that it has been the consistent view of  his
    mother and independent  observers  that  B1  has  an  extremely  strong
    attachment to the Appellant. In January 2014 Independent Social  Worker
    Mr Charles Musendo was told by B1's then school that B1's behaviour had
    significantly improved after the Appellant was released from prison and
    returned  to  the  family  home.  He  had,  whilst  the  Appellant  was
    imprisoned, only managed one day in school at a time before being  sent
    home; the 'team' working with B1 reported to Mr Musendo that after  the
    Appellant was released B1 immediately managed a five day straight  run.
    Mrs H told me that the two remain very close and that B1 looks  forward
    to coming home at weekends where he is able  to  spend  time  with  the
    Appellant.  He was only a toddler when the Appellant arrived and he has
    always been part of his life.


15. B2 was born in March 2012 and is almost exactly the  same  age  as  the
    Appellant's own son, S, who was born  in  January  of  the  same  year.
    Although it does not appear that the Appellant and S's mother OO stayed
    together for very long after S was born, it is the consistent  evidence
    of the witnesses that she has maintained a close and warm  relationship
    with the family as a whole. Mrs H told me that when the  Appellant  was
    in hospital in Liverpool and she was stuck for childcare it was OO  who
    came and babysat, allowing her to make the long round  trip  on  public
    transport.   She stayed in contact with the family when  the  Appellant
    was in prison and ever since. As a consequence, S and B2 are more  like
    brothers than nephew and uncle.   They are  extremely  close  and  ever
    since they were young children if the  Appellant  was  doing  something
    with S - cinema, football, MacDonalds - he would take B2 along as well.
    As a result B2 has also developed a strong bond with the  Appellant,  a
    bond that has inevitably strengthened as his relationship with his  own
    father has come to an end.

16. The only other member of the family living in  Manchester  is  Mrs  H's
    foster mother, whom the Appellant treats and refers to as  his  'Nana'.
    The consistent evidence of both witnesses is that this lady is now very
    elderly and requires the support of her family. Before  his  'accident'
    the Appellant would go to her flat twice a week to give it a clean, get
    her shopping and run errands for her. Now obviously he is unable to  do
    this but he continues to see her on a weekly basis. Mrs  H  visits  her
    mother three times a week and when she does she leaves  her  sons  with
    the Appellant.

17. That is the evidence relating to the Appellant's family  background.  I
    now turn to address the evidence relating to personally to him.

18. The Appellant started a relationship with Nigerian national OO sometime
    in 2011. They were both then 17.  Their son S was born in Manchester in
    January 2012. The Appellant did spend some time  living  with  his  new
    family prior to his imprisonment in November  of  that  year,  but  the
    relationship with OO did not survive his conviction.  OO was unable  to
    attend the hearing before me as one of her other children  was  unwell,
    but I note that she has  come  to  court  on  two  previous  occasions,
    appearing before Judge de Haney and Judge McClure. As far as Mr McVeety
    was aware no issue has ever been taken with any of  her  evidence.  Her
    witness statement dated 10th June 2019 was admitted into the evidence.

19. OO states that the Appellant has "always been there" for S, and that he
    has always made it clear to her how important it is to him that  S  has
    what he did not, a father.  Prior to the Appellant being  assaulted  in
    Liverpool (that is to say between his release from custody  in  October
    2013 and the 17th March 2018) S saw his father three times a week, with
    overnight  stays.  The  Appellant  was  working  at  The  Alchemist  in
    Manchester at that time  and  he  would  give  her  �100  per  week  in
    maintenance money. Since he was injured the Appellant has had  to  give
    up work but still gives her �150 per month; he  also  takes  S  clothes
    shopping and buys him things he needs. The Appellant now regularly sees
    S every two weeks for a full weekend, plus holidays.   OO  states  that
    she is also close to Mrs H and that their support has been a  big  help
    to her and S.

20. OO states that the assault on the Appellant was an incredibly stressful
    time for S. Mrs H told her not to take S to  the  hospital  because  it
    would be too distressing for him to see his father  like  that,  but  S
    continued to regularly visit  his  father's  house,  staying  with  his
    grandmother and uncles.  After  the  Appellant  was  transferred  to  a
    hospital  in  Trafford  S  was  able  to  start  seeing  him  again.  S
    understands that his father's injuries  have  been  life-changing,  and
    that he is not able to do the things that he  used  to  do,  like  play
    football all the time. S is however seeing his dad every two  weeks  at
    the moment, with the hope that this will increase  as  the  Appellant's
    condition improves.   OO describes the relationship between S  and  his
    father as "very intense".

21. One aspect of the Appellant's relationship with S  that  OO  wishes  to
    stress is the efforts he has gone to in helping his son understand  and
    connect to his Sierra Leonean heritage. As a dual-heritage child living
    in the United Kingdom OO believes that it is very important for S to be
    familiar with, and have respect for, his background. He can  understand
    Krio, and has been taught about his family history by his father -  the
    Appellant describes going online with S  to  find  articles  about  his
    great-grandfather CA Kamara-Taylor, who was a politician in  the  1970s
    and 80s. OO closes her statement by offering her  assessment  that  the
    Appellant's deportation would have a "devastating" impact on her son.

22. In March 2018 the Appellant was subject to an assault whilst on a night
    out in Liverpool. The trial of his alleged assailant is not until later
    this year but in broad terms he was knocked to the ground  and  kicked,
    including in his head.  There was snow on the ground and the  Appellant
    lay in it unconscious for several hours before he  was  discovered.  He
    therefore had hypothermia when he was admitted  to  the  critical  care
    unit at Aintree University  Hospital,  where  he  required  intubation,
    ventilation and dialysis.  He remained in a coma for several days.  Mrs
    H told me that the Appellant was in hospital until August.

23. The medical evidence before me indicates that there continue to be  two
    consequences of that event. First, that  the  Appellant  has  sustained
    significant neurological damage in that he suffers daily from pains  in
    his  legs  and  feet,  and  occasionally  hands,  which  are   entirely
    attributable to nerve damage. He is unable to control or flex his toes,
    particularly on  his  left  foot,  so  that  walking  any  distance  is
    difficult and creates other problems such as damage to his feet, cramps
    and lower back pain.  He told me that his knees are often very  painful
    such that he finds it difficult to move.  He is unable  to  bend  over,
    for instance to tie his shoelaces. I  was  able  to  observe  that  his
    movements are obviously impaired. He was receiving  three  sessions  of
    physiotherapy per week but that has now  reduced,  with  the  Appellant
    undertaking independent exercise  to  promote  his  rehabilitation.  He
    continues to see the physio once per fortnight, sees a speech therapist
    and attends a group physio session once per week. The  Appellant  takes
    several painkillers: iboprufen,  codeine,  gabapentin  and  duloxetine,
    which  are  specifically  prescribed  to  deal  with  neuropathic  pain
    symptoms.  A recent assessment by  the  clinical  lead  physiotherapist
    with the Manchester Local Care Association (MLCO), Ms  Joanne  Ritchie,
    revealed that the Appellant was  able  to  walk  for  350  metres  with
    crutches before he needed to stop and rest.


24. The second sequala of the event is  the  impact  upon  the  Appellant's
    mental health.  He  has  reported  suffering  from  increased  anxiety,
    flashbacks and nightmares (although I note that Mrs H has also observed
    that these sometimes relate to wartime Sierra Leone). He is  unable  to
    sleep and has been diagnosed with depression. A  letter  dated  May  of
    this  year  from  MLCO  confirms  that  the  Appellant  is   seeing   a
    psychologist and has been referred for CBT; a letter dated  30th  April
    2019 from Laura Plant of Greater Manchester  Mental  Health  foundation
    trust states that the appellant  continues  to  receive  treatment  for
    symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder.   He  is  prescribed  30mg
    propranolol per day to help deal with these symptoms.

25. The totality of these medical issues  has  resulted  in  the  Appellant
    being deemed eligible for Personal Independence Payments  of  over  �75
    per week.

26. Given the passage of time, and the fact that the Appellant has not been
    in any trouble since his  2012  conviction,  it  was  no  part  of  the
    Respondent's case that he continues to present a risk of  harm  in  the
    form of continuing criminality. It is  however  worth  noting  that  he
    completed all the requirements of the probation service both before and
    after release; he was a model prisoner and professionals who interacted
    with him inside reported to his probation officer that he took part  in
    programmes offered to him with "a high degree of application".

27. The last section of evidence that I must address is  that  relating  to
    Sierra Leone.  Again, none of this was challenged and the Secretary  of
    State produced no evidence of his own. In broad summary:

              i) 75% of Sierra Leoneans live below  the  poverty  line,  and
                 this "economic desperation has fuelled increases in  crime"
                 [US Overseas Security Advisory Council, 10.4.19];


             ii) Given the high rate of unemployment work opportunities  for
                 persons with disabilities were  limited,  and  begging  was
                 commonplace [US State Department report 2019]

            iii) Unemployment rates are 70%. Life expectancy for men  is  39
                 years [The Borgen Project, 15.7.18]

             iv) There is a severe shortage  of  mental  health  clinicians,
                 with only two practising psychiatrists,  two  psychologists
                 and 19 mental health nurses in a country of over 7  million
                 people.  Individuals  with  mental  health  disorders   are
                 commonly chained [WHO 29.3.18]

              v) Most of the drugs supplied from the central  medical  store
                 to sub-medical stores across the country are either expired
                 or close to expiry [Sierra Leone Telegraph 11.9.16].





    Legal Framework

28. The legal framework is uncontroversial.

29. The Appellant is, by reason  of  his  criminal  conviction,  liable  to
    automatic deportation: s32(5) UK Border Act 2007.  He  can  succeed  in
    resisting deportation if he can show that  any  of  the  exceptions  in
    section 33 of the UK Border Act 2007 apply.   That section  contains  6
    exceptions, only one of which is potentially engaged on the facts:  s33
    (2)(a), that his deportation would breach his Convention  rights,  that
    is to say his rights under the European Convention on Human Rights.

30. The Appellant relies on Article  8,  submitting  that  his  deportation
    would be a disproportionate interference  with  both  his  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom. Because he seeks to rely on  Article
    8 I must have regard  to  the  provisions  in  respect  of  the  public
    interest set out in s117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002:

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

              (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
              most of C's life,

              (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
           Kingdom, and

              (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
              integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
              deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.



31. It is not contended that the Appellant can meet 'exception 1'  set  out
    at s117C(4). Although he has lived in the  United  Kingdom  with  leave
    since 2012 he spent the preceding 15 years living in Sierra Leone.   He
    has not therefore been lawfully resident here for most of his life.  He
    does however contend that he can meet 'exception 2', which  relates  to
    family  members,  since  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  S.   The  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  this
    relationship exists, but not that any interference  with  it  would  be
    'unduly harsh'.


32. The courts have consistently held  that  to  be  a  high  test.  In  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53
    the Supreme Court said this:


         "the word 'unduly' implies an element  of  comparison.  It  assumes
         that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is a  level  which
         may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context.  'Unduly'
         implies something going beyond that level. The relevant context  is
         that set by section 117C(1), that is the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking for  a  degree  of
         harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any
         child faced with the deportation of a  parent.  What  it  does  not
         require in my view (and subject to the discussion of the  cases  in
         the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity  of
         the parent's offence, other than is  inherent  in  the  distinction
         drawn by the section itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor
         (contrary to the view of the Court of  Appeal  in  IT  (Jamaica)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  932,
         [2017] 1  WLR  240,  paras  55,  64)  can  it  be  equated  with  a
         requirement to show "very compelling reasons".  That  would  be  in
         effect to replicate the additional test applied by section  117C(6)
         with respect to sentences of four years or more.


    [at 23](emphasis added).

33. The parties were in agreement that should the Appellant  be  unable  to
    demonstrate that test to be met, he could nevertheless  succeed  if  he
    can show that there are in his  case  'very  compelling  circumstances'
    over and above that, or an equivalent degree of harm: NA  (Pakistan)  &
    Another v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    662.   It is therefore the case that the Appellant would need  here  to
    show that there were some circumstances demonstrably worse  than  undue
    suffering for his son; a higher threshold  yet.   In  NA  Lord  Justice
    Jackson put it like this:


         "Although there is no 'exceptionality' requirement,  it  inexorably
         follows  from  the  statutory  scheme  that  the  cases  in   which
         circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
         public interest  in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The  commonplace
         incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in poor health  or
         the  natural  love  between  parents  and  children,  will  not  be
         sufficient".

  34. A Presidential panel of this Tribunal (Lane J, Upper Tribunal  Judges
      Coker and Gill) has recently offered further guidance on how the test
      should be applied. In MS (s.117C(6): "very compelling circumstances")
      Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC) the Tribunal held that unlike the
      test of 'undue harshness' which has - eventually - been settled to be
      determined with reference to only to  the  child,  this  freestanding
      test is not effected by the ratio in KO:


      1) In determining pursuant to  section  117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether there are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         in subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest
         in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal  must
         take into account, together with any other relevant public interest
         considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence of  which
         the foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether the  foreign
         criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of  more  than  4
         years. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion.






    Discussion and Findings

35. The difficulty with applying the 'undue harshness' test in practice  is
    that most children who face losing a parent to deportation are going to
    suffer adverse consequences; they will be upset; they  will  miss  that
    parent; they may grow up in a one-parent family;  they  will  miss  the
    opportunities afforded to them by interaction with the deportee.  These
    affects are real and can be devastating  for  the  children  concerned.
    That this is so is undoubtedly harsh, but the courts have held that  it
    was not parliament's intention that such factors would make it 'unduly'
    so.  As Lord Justice Carnwath put it in KO:   "One  is  looking  for  a
    degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for
    any child faced with the deportation of a parent".


36. I accept OO's evidence that her son would be "devastated" by losing his
    father. I accept that the Appellant has been, and continues  to  be,  a
    devoted and enthusiastic parent, and that he is keenly aware of what it
    is for a little boy to grow up without his dad.   I accept  -  although
    there is no independent evidence to this effect - that S is  likely  to
    have been extremely anxious about his father after the assault  and  in
    particular during those weeks when it was not clear what the extent  of
    his injuries might be. I accept that it is overwhelmingly  likely  that
    the removal of the Appellant to Sierra Leone will mean that S will  not
    see him again in the foreseeable future, if  at  all.  This  is  not  a
    family with a lot of money. OO has two other children to care  for  now
    and it seems fanciful to imagine that she would have the means or  will
    to be able to take S to a country to which she has never been  and  has
    no connection.   I note that this appeared to  have  been  accepted  by
    Lord Justice Holdroyde when he granted  permission:  he  thought  Judge
    McClure had "failed to grasp the  nettle  of  permanent  separation  of
    father and son".  I am unable to find,  in  any  of  that,  any  matter
    capable of elevating this case above that of the average child  in  the
    position of S.   The consequences for S are harsh - very  harsh  -  but
    applying the dicta of the Court of Appeal they are not unduly so.


37.  I do nevertheless accept without hesitation that it  would  be  wholly
    contrary to S's best interests if the Appellant were  to  be  deported,
    and that he would likely suffer considerably if his father were  to  be
    removed. This is a matter that Mr McVeety  accepted  I  would  have  to
    weigh in the balance when considering whether the higher test of  'very
    compelling circumstances' was met.

38. Turning to that test  I  remind  myself  that  in  this  stage  of  the
    deliberations I am bound to weigh against the Appellant the  nature  of
    his offence, and the length of his sentence. The Appellant got 2  years
    in prison for the premeditated robbery of a 77 year-old  man.  That  he
    was sent to prison for as long  as  he  was,  on  what  was  his  first
    appearance before the  Crown  Court,  marks  the  seriousness  of  this
    attack. I also note that the sentencing judge imposed  that  length  of
    sentence only after having had regard to the mitigation pleaded on  the
    Appellant's behalf, principally the fact that he  had  become  homeless
    and was going through a  difficult  time  with  his  family.  Had  that
    mitigation not been accepted, and credit not given for his guilty plea,
    the sentence would have been markedly longer.   The  offence,  and  the
    nature of it, weigh heavily against the Appellant. The presumption lies
    in favour of deporting him. It matters little that it was six years ago
    and that  he  has  not  committed  a  crime  since.  As  the  President
    underlined in MS (Philippines),  deterrence remains a strong factor  in
    the imposition of deportation  orders.  My  acceptance  that  he  poses
    virtually no risk of reoffending must be set in that context.


39. Against that I weigh the findings I  have  already  reached  about  the
    serious impact upon S, and the following matters.

40. It would be strongly contrary  to  the  best  interest  of  B1  if  the
    Appellant were to be deported. B1 was only a toddler when the Appellant
    appeared in his  life  and  I  accept  that  the  two  of  them  became
    immediately close. Unlike Mrs H the Appellant was a young man with  the
    energy required to take a boisterous little boy to the park  every  day
    and I accept Mrs H's evidence that this was a welcome -  and  no  doubt
    necessary - respite for her in dealing  with  B1s  increasing  demands.
    The independent evidence about B1s very significant needs is  striking.
    It paints a picture of a child who was at times impossible  to  control
    and comfort. The stress of this must have been very hard for Mrs  H  to
    bear, and I entirely accept her evidence that the  Appellant  played  a
    large part in ensuring that they could 'get through' this challenge  as
    a family.  Her evidence - and indeed the evidence of  B1s  teachers  to
    the social worker - is that the Appellant is able to connect  with  B1,
    and that his behaviour improves  when  the  Appellant  is  around  him.
    Unlike S, B1 will have little or no  means  of  understanding  why  the
    Appellant has disappeared from his life. It  is  likely  to  be  deeply
    upsetting for him.


41. I find that it would also be contrary to B2's  best  interests  if  the
    Appellant were to be deported.  Although B2 is not the Appellant's son,
    it is clear from the evidence that he has a very strong bond  with  his
    uncle and that during his life it has been the  norm  rather  than  the
    exception for him to go along with his 'nephew' S and the Appellant  on
    their trips out, or just hanging round the house. Because of his  close
    proximity in age to S the two of them are more like brothers and so  it
    is easy to see how B2 also regards the Appellant as a parental  figure.
     I accept Mrs H's evidence that this bond has been further strengthened
    by the departure of her ex-husband, the biological father of B1 and B2.

42. Whilst I am mindful  of  what  is  said  in  NA  (Pakistan),  that  the
    "commonplace" demands of domestic life will not in itself be sufficient
    to tip the balance I do attach some  weight  to  the  strength  of  the
    relationship that Mrs H has with her son.  Even  after  sustaining  his
    injuries Mrs H relies upon him as she tries to  maintain  a  full  time
    job, be  a  single  mother  (three  nights  a  week  to  a  child  with
    significant special needs) and look after her  own  ailing  mother  who
    lives on the  other  side  of  Manchester.  I  have  no  difficulty  in
    accepting Mrs H's evidence that having the Appellant under her roof has
    been a great comfort and support to her as she tries to juggle  all  of
    these competing demands.

43. As to the Appellant's prospective circumstances in Sierra  Leone  I  am
    quite satisfied that these would be grim.  He is not going to starve  -
    I have no doubt that Mrs H would not let that happen -  but  I  do  not
    believe that he will be able to carve out for himself  a  life  of  any
    degree of normality there. First, he has very little  understanding  of
    how life works in that country. Although he speaks Krio and was 15 when
    he left I accept that he had led a relatively sheltered  life.  He  has
    never had a job there. He knows no-one in that country,  'Nana'  having
    died some years ago.  The  Appellant  has  a  visible  disability.  His
    movements are restricted, with  his  gait  obviously  affected  by  the
    neurological damage sustained in the attack.  I  am  unsure  about  the
    extent to which the Appellant's stammer was worsened by the  stress  of
    appearing in court but in his oral evidence he was  unable  to  give  a
    single answer without it affecting his  speech.     In  a  strange  and
    challenging environment it would certainly draw attention to  him,  and
    gives the strong impression that he  is  vulnerable.   Given  that  the
    unemployment rate is at 70% it seems unlikely that a young man with  no
    connections would be able to find work;  the  chances  for  a  disabled
    young man with a speech impediment would be even worse.  I am concerned
    that the Appellant's visible disabilities would render him particularly
    vulnerable to crime and exploitation.


44. Mr Karnik  submitted  that  the  Appellant  would  be  likely  to  face
    considerable difficulties in obtaining the treatment that he  needs  in
    Sierra Leone. At present that consists of various therapies and a  drug
    regime. Nothing in the evidence before me indicated  that  any  of  the
    interventions that the Appellant currently  enjoys  -  speech  therapy,
    psychotherapy, CBT and physiotherapy - would be  available  to  him  in
    Sierra  Leone.  Although  there  was  no  specific  evidence   on   the
    availability of the various medications that he is prescribed, I accept
    Mr Karnik's submission that the real issue would be whether  the  drugs
    he manages to obtain are efficacious - if they are expired or fake this
    would place the Appellant at risk of significant increases in pain  and
    the attendant lack of mobility.

45. As to the issue of the Appellant's anxiety  and  depression  I  do  not
    think I need medical opinion to conclude  that  such  conditions  would
    likely be exacerbated if he were to be removed to Sierra Leone far away
    from his son, brothers, mother and grandmother.  Having had  regard  to
    the country background evidence I have real concerns that his supply of
    medication could be interrupted  and  that  this  too  would  make  his
    conditions significantly worse.  The evidence on  provision  of  mental
    health care in Sierra Leone is stark, and distressing.  In the  absence
    of actual treatment the prevailing solution is 'chaining'  whereby  the
    individual concerned is chained  in  the  home,  a  church  or  even  a
    hospital. Whilst the evidence in this case falls far short of the  high
    threshold necessary to make out a case under Article 3, I  nevertheless
    attach some weight to  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  very,  very
    unlikely to get an appointment with a psychologist, and there is a real
    risk that  his  supply  of  medication  will  be  interrupted.   He  is
    therefore likely, at the very least, to suffer psychological  distress,
    which will further  diminish  his  ability  to  integrate  into  Sierra
    Leonean society.


46. Drawing all of this together the case I  have  before  me  is  this.  A
    troubled young man with valid leave  to  remain  committed  a  horrible
    crime. He was sent to prison for 2 years. Since that time we have  been
    seemingly incapable of deporting him.  It took the Respondent 19 months
    to serve a valid deportation order, and in the  five  years  that  have
    followed his case has boomeranged around the appeal system  whilst  the
    debate about the legal effect of s117C raged on.   Thus whilst  not  on
    all fours with the delay in EB (Kosovo) [2018]  UKHL  41  -  which  was
    entirely attributable to the  dysfunction  at  the  Home  Office  -  it
    remains the case there has been a substantial delay in giving effect to
    a decision deemed necessary in the public interest.

47. The usual EB Kosovo effect can be seen here. It is certainly  the  case
    that the relationships upon which the Appellant relied  in  2012  -  in
    particular  those  with  his  son  and  little  brothers  -  have  been
    immeasurably strengthened in the intervening years. Those boys  are  no
    longer the toddlers that they were -  in  the  case  of  B2  and  S  in
    particular they are on the cusp of their teenage years when  disruption
    and family breakdown can  be  particularly  harrowing.    His  mother's
    marriage has ended and she too looks to him with  increasing  need  for
    emotional - if no longer so much practical - support.

48. It is however  the  Appellant's  individual  circumstances  which  have
    changed the most. In 2012 he had only been in this country for 3 years.
    His carer in Sierra Leone was still alive. His son  and  brothers  were
    infants, when dislocation is sad, but in time can  be  forgotten.    He
    was a fit and well young man. Today he has been in the  United  Kingdom
    for 10 years. He is, on the evidence  before  me,  entirely  integrated
    into British society. He is no longer fit and well. The  incident  that
    took place in Liverpool in March  2018  has  left  the  Appellant  with
    significant neurological damage, such that  he  is  unable  to  walk  a
    moderate distance, bend down  and  grasp  things.  This  has  played  a
    significant part in my deliberations because I am  satisfied  not  just
    that he is disabled by that attack, but because he appears  so  to  the
    outside observer.   His vulnerability to crime and/or destitution  upon
    return to Sierra Leone is markedly increased.  Even if Mrs H  was  able
    to send him some financial  support  his  situation  in  society  would
    undoubtedly be precarious.

49. It is no part of my decision making process to  mark  my  own  personal
    revulsion at the Appellant's criminal offence. As Lord Wilson noted  in
    Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 it  is  perhaps  too  emotive  a  concept  to
    properly figure in this analysis, where the public interest speaks  for
    itself. It is however worth underlining that I do consider it to  be  a
    disgusting and reprehensible attack, and that in reaching  my  decision
    the victim and  his  family  were  consistently  in  my  mind.  I  have
    nevertheless reached the conclusion that on  the  particular  facts  of
    this case, and having weighed all  of  the  relevant  features  of  the
    evidence, I conclude that the very high threshold imposed  by  s117C(6)
    has been surmounted: there are very compelling circumstances such  that
    the Appellant should not be deported  because  to  do  so  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his private and family life in  this
    country.



    Anonymity


50. The Appellant is a  criminal  and  his  identity  would  not  therefore
    ordinarily attract protection. His case involves however  the  presence
    in the United Kingdom of three British children.


51. I am concerned that identification  of  the  Appellant  could  lead  to
    identification of those children.

52. As such I am satisfied, having  had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders,  that  it
    would be appropriate to make an order in accordance with Rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions


53. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and it is set aside.


54. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


55. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                  4th July 2019








