
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
DA/01129/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|And via Skype                              |On 21st December 2020                  |
|On 1st December 2020                       |                                       |
|                                                  |                                |


                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THORNTON
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    'MS'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  her  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellant:              Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:             Ms G Loughran, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were given
orally at the end of the hearing on 1st December 2020.




Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and the Tribunal panel
attended the hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object
to attending via Skype and we were satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Welsh (the 'Judge'), who, following a hearing at Taylor House on 24th
February 2020, allowed the appeal of the respondent, a Jamaican national,
(hereafter, 'Claimant') against the Secretary of State's refusal on 10th
June 2014 of her human rights claim. That refusal was in the context of the
Secretary of State having made a deportation order in respect of the
Claimant on 4th June 2009, and Secretary of State previously refusing the
Claimant's application to revoke that deportation order.

The deportation order was made under the automatic deportation provisions
of Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Claimant's most recent
offending had resulted in a sentence of 24 months' imprisonment, for
conspiracy to steal (shoplifting).  Her conviction for the index offence
was on 16th February 2009, with 13 previous convictions for 19 offences.
Following her release from prison for the index offence, the Claimant
continued to offend and by the date of the Secretary of State's decision in
2014, had 24 convictions from 32 offences, and her offending had begun
almost immediately after she entered the UK in 2001, aged 26.

In the context of the Claimant's human rights application, the Secretary of
State accepted that the Claimant had a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with her daughters, both British citizens, 'KS', born in May
2003, and 'ZS', born in February 2007.  Both children were in the care of
Waltham Forest Children's Services pursuant to a Family Court order.
Whilst the Secretary of State accepted that it would not be reasonable to
expect either child to leave the UK and return with the Claimant to
Jamaica, the Secretary of State did not regard the effect of the Claimant's
deportation, while her daughters remained in the UK, as being unduly harsh.
 In refusing the Claimant's application, the Secretary of State noted that
the Claimant did not have a partner; and she also rejected the Claimant's
appeal on the basis of right to respect for her private life in the UK.

The Judge's decision

The focus of the case before the Judge was whether the Claimant met the
criteria of 'Exception 2' of Section 117C(5) of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, namely whether the effect of the
Claimant's deportation would be unduly harsh, in the context her family
life with her two British national daughters.

The Judge provided detailed reasons for concluding that the Claimant did
meet the criteria of Exception 2, at paragraphs [21] to [48] of her
decision. The Judge summarised the reasons why the Claimant met the
criteria, at paragraph [21], by reference to the Claimant's children:

"(1) they are children in care, with a past history of neglect and as such
are very vulnerable;

(2)  the only parent with whom they have ever had any contact is the
[Claimant];

(3)  though she was the cause of the neglect, there has been a noticeable
change in the attitude of the [Claimant] over the course of the past 4 to 5
years.  She is now a crucial source of support for the children, without
which the emotional effect on them will be of such significance that it
would have a devastating and permanent effect on [the] [sic] lives."

The Judge based her analysis, in part, on the reports of two independent
social workers, whose expertise she accepted, based on their
qualifications; their experience; the thoroughness of their reports; and
the critical approach of the authors to the evidence before them (paragraph
[22]). The Judge allowed the Claimant's appeal against the refusal of her
human rights claim.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The Secretary of State raised the following grounds in her appeal:

      1. The Judge had failed to consider that the deterioration in the
         behaviour of the eldest child, KS, had been caused by previous
         unauthorised telephone contact by the Claimant with KS, rather than
         the absence of contact with the Claimant.

      2. The Judge had erred in her reliance on the expert report of one of
         the independent social workers, Mr Horrocks. His conclusions were
         based on no more than generalisations and speculations.  The
         Claimant was not, in any way, a positive role model for her
         daughters.

      3. At paragraph [48], the Judge had offered no further reasons for her
         finding about the effects of deportation being unduly harsh, other
         than the weak evidence of Mr Horrocks. The Claimant's children
         could continue to live in the supportive environment provided by
         their foster carers, with assistance of Childrens' Services, as
         they had done for a number of years.

      4. The Judge had failed to have regard to the high threshold for what
         was "unduly harsh" and in particular, had failed to consider that
         children would naturally be distressed by a removal of a parent.

      5. The Judge had failed to consider that the Claimant could maintain
         contact with her daughters by modern means of communication,
         following her deportation.

First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro granted permission to appeal. She
regarded the Judge's reasons for concluding that the effect of deportation
would be unduly harsh as arguably wrong in law, as the case of Imran
(section 117C (5); children, unduly harsh) [2020] UKUT 83 (IAC) suggested
that the level of emotional harm might need to rise to the level of causing
diagnosable psychiatric injury to a child in order to meet the high
"unduly" harsh threshold.  She granted the Claimant permission to appeal on
all grounds.

The hearing before us

The Secretary of State's submissions

First, Ms Cunha asserted that the Judge had failed to provide adequate
reasons for why she concluded that the effects of the Claimant's
deportation would be unduly harsh. She reiterated the Judge's failure to
consider that the secret telephone contact by the Claimant some years
earlier, as recorded at paragraph [31], had had an adverse impact on 'KS',
which had resulted in problems in KS's education. This on the face of it
appeared inconsistent with the importance that Mr Horrocks had placed on
the security and stability of the childrens' arrangements (paragraph [38]).
 When we asked Ms Cunha for her submissions on paragraph [43] of the
Judge's decision, and in particular, the Judge's findings, based on the
report of another expert, Dr Boucher, of a significant improvement in the
Claimant's attitude and relationship with her daughters, Ms Cunha disputed
that there had been such a significant change.

Ms Cunha further asserted that the Judge had failed to explain the
mitigating factors, in the event of the Claimant's deportation, based on
support from Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services, or "CAMHS", for
the Claimant's daughters. The Judge's reference at paragraph [30(2)] to the
"devastating and serious effect" of a lack of engagement by KS with CAMHS,
if the Claimant were removed, reflected the negative effect of the Claimant
on her daughters. Ms Cunha asserted that Mr Horrocks had not referred to,
or considered, the full history of the Claimant's interactions with her
daughters, so that the conclusions in his report were flawed, although when
we explored with Ms Cunha whether the claimed gaps in Mr Horrocks' analysis
had been raised with the Judge, Ms Cunha accepted that the issue had not
been raised.

The Claimant's submissions

In the skeleton argument on behalf of the Claimant, Ms Loughran asserted
that the Judge had clearly summarised her reasons for finding that the
effect of the separation of the Claimant from her daughters would be unduly
harsh (paragraph [21]).  Whilst the Judge granting permission, Judge
O'Garro had cited Imran, this was clearly distinguishable from the
Claimant's case, as the guidance in Imran related to the unduly harsh
effects of deportation where there was a parental relationship with two
parents.

The Secretary of State's criticism of Mr Horrocks report did not identify
why his report was said to be generalised or speculative.  At paragraph
[44], the Judge had referred to Mr Horrocks' analysis, which reflected
concerns raised by the childrens' foster carer about the effect of the
Claimant's removal.  Mr Horrocks had previously been involved in a
parenting assessment, in the context of previous Family Court care
proceedings, and so had a good knowledge of the family. His qualifications
and expertise had been unchallenged.  Judge Welsh had clearly explained at
paragraph [22] that she had regarded Mr Horrocks' expertise as proven, as
well as placing weight on the detail in his report.  The challenge that the
Judge had failed to provide any reasons for her conclusion, other than the
report of Mr Horrocks, was not accurate, as recorded by the Judge at
paragraph [48] of her decision.

The gist of Ms Loughran's oral submissions was that the Secretary of
State's challenge was effectively a disagreement with the Judge's findings.
  The Judge's consideration of evidence was not limited to reports of the
independent social workers, Ms Pearce and Mr Horrocks, but also included
the report of the Clinical Psychologist, Dr Boucher.  The Judge had
explained and explored the evidence in detail from paragraphs [39] and
[43]. The Judge had been entitled to find that the Claimant's attitude and
relationship with her daughters had significantly improved. In a balanced
decision, the Judge had also considered that the Claimant appeared not to
accept the effects of her 2015 offending, but nevertheless concluded that
there was a genuineness and constancy of her change in behaviour (paragraph
[42]).  The Judge had also gone on to consider the 'Nexus report' offences
(for which there were no convictions but belief in the Claimant's
involvement) and was entitled to conclude that this did not affect the
quality of the Claimant's relationship with her daughters.

In essence, the Judge had considered all of the relevant evidence.  The
criticism of Mr Horrocks, and in particular the suggestion that he had
omitted consideration of gaps in the Claimant's history had never been put
in the original grounds and was effectively a new ground of appeal.  Even
if that new ground were entertained by this Tribunal, it was without merit.
 There was no misdirection in law and the Judge had clearly referred
herself correctly to the law at paragraphs [14] to [20], including
specifically that the effect of deportation needed to be more than "severe"
or "bleak", (paragraph [19] and the reference to KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]
UKSC 53).

Discussion and conclusions

We concluded, without hesitation, that the Judge did not err in law in
reaching her decision. This was a case where, in an extensive and detailed
decision, the Judge clearly explained at paragraph [21] why the effect of
deportation would be unduly harsh (which we do not repeat); and she further
explained at paragraph [22], why she relied upon the two independent social
workers' reports, and at later on at [37], the report of a Clinical
Psychologist.

The suggestion that there was an inconsistency in the analysis, because of
the earlier adverse effects of the Claimant's behaviour, in contrast to the
importance that Mr Horrocks had placed on the security and stability of
arrangements for the Claimant's children, was answered by the Judge's
consideration of the improvement in the Claimant's attitude and
relationship with her daughters, including the Judge's findings about the
"marked change" in the Claimant's behaviour since 2015 (paragraph [39]).
The Judge was unarguably entitled to make such findings, based on the
expert medical evidence and her analysis of the Claimant's offending
history (paragraphs [39] to [45]).  Therefore any asserted inconsistency
said to be because of earlier difficulties or inappropriate contact between
the Claimant and her children is explained by the chronology and by the
passage of time in the relationship as it improved and developed. This
ground has no merit.

In relation to the challenges to the Judge's reliance on the report of Mr
Horrocks, first, we accept Ms Loughran's submission that any challenge to a
gap in Mr Horrocks analysis is not included in the grounds of this appeal,
for which permission was granted.  We reflected on the authority of Latayan
v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 191 and the importance of focussing on grounds in
respect of which permission was granted. The assertion that Mr Horrocks had
not considered the full history of (the Claimant's children (specifically
the period of the Claimant' unauthorised contact with her daughters) was
not a ground in the application for permission, and we do not grant
permission now.  Second, and for completeness, we considered the ground and
concluded that it does not have any arguable merit.  As was clear to the
Judge, Mr Horrocks' knowledge of the Claimant's children extended from
2013, when he carried out the parenting assessment which had resulted in
the children being place in long-term care (paragraph [29]), to 2019, when
he produced his report dated 7th October 2019 (paragraph [22]).  The Judge
noted that Mr Horrocks had "long-term involvement with this family" and had
an "in-depth knowledge of their circumstances."   There was, as Ms Cunha
candidly accepted, no challenge by the Secretary of State before the Judge,
criticising Mr Horrocks' report, in terms of its contents, to which we were
directed; nor any challenge to Mr Horrocks's expertise.  In these
circumstances, such a criticism of Mr Horrocks' report now, even if it were
justified (which we do not accept that it was) cannot amount to an arguable
error of law by the Judge. The Judge had also plainly considered the
involvement of Waltham Forest Childrens' Services and their foster carers
when evaluating the effects of deportation on the Claimant's children, in
particular in the context of the Claimant's increasing involvement in her
daughters' lives, with tangible benefits (paragraphs [45] to [46]). The
Judge set out at paragraph [47] the conclusion of Mr Horrocks, which
referred to the loss of the Claimant for her daughters as having:

     "lifelong consequences in terms of their emotional wellbeing/health,
    their educational and professional development and their overall
    quality-of-life and functioning in society"

In the circumstances, we concluded that the challenge that the Judge had
failed to consider the positive impact of Childrens Services and foster
parents was without merit. We also conclude that it was not necessary for
the Judge to refer specifically to modern means of communication (e.g.
phone or video communications) as a mitigating factor against the effects
of separation, when the Judge had considered expressly the importance and
positive benefits of the Claimant's increasing involvement (including face-
to-face) with her daughters.

We considered lastly the challenge that the Judge had misdirecting herself
on what was meant by "unduly harsh".  We are reminded by the recent
authority of HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, that what is "unduly
harsh" must be considered in the context of the strong public interest in
the deportation of foreign criminals and the underlying question is whether
the harshness which the deportation will cause for the children is of a
sufficiently elevated degree to outweigh that public interest.  That public
interest was clearly in the Judge's mind, as she considered not only the
Claimant's previous convictions, at paragraph [2], but also her likely
involvement in further offending (paragraphs [33] to [35]). The Judge
reminded herself correctly of the authority of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]
UKSC 53, as well as the public interest in deportation (paragraph [18]).
The Judge's conclusions about the unduly harsh effect of deportation, at
paragraph [48], must be fairly read in the context of her earlier
references.

The Judge had concluded that the effect of deportation would be unduly
harsh, because, to repeat, at paragraph [22], she had found that:

    "the emotional effect on them will be of such significance that it
    would have a devastating and permanent effect on [the] [sic] lives."

The Judge was unarguably entitled to conclude that the Claimant's
circumstances fell within "Exception 2" of Section 117C of the 2002 Act, in
a decision that was clear and detailed in its reasons. The Secretary of
State's challenge discloses no error of law and in the circumstances, her
appeal fails and is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  14th December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



