
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/02367/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Centre City Tower,        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On : 16 September 2015               |On : 23 September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HALL


                                   Between

                                     AK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of the Palestinian Authority, born  on  1  March
1994. Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing his appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
to deport him from the United Kingdom, it was found,  at  an  error  of  law
hearing on 20 July 2015, that the Tribunal had made errors  of  law  in  its
decision. Directions were made for the decision be set aside and re-made  by
the Upper Tribunal with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant claims to have left the Gaza Strip with his uncle when he  was
eight years of age and to have travelled to and stayed in Syria for  a  year
and a half before continuing to Libya where he remained  until  the  age  of
eleven. He claims to have then travelled to Turkey, staying  there  for  two
years, then to Italy where he stayed for a year, followed  by  France  where
he stayed for two years and finally Belgium where he stayed for  two  years.
He travelled by air from Belgium to  the  United  Kingdom,  arriving  on  24
August 2012, using a false French passport. He  was  arrested  when  seeking
entry and claimed asylum.

On 15  November  2012  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  possess/  control
identity documents with intent and was sentenced to 12 months  detention  at
a young offender institution. On 7 December 2012 a notice  of  liability  to
deportation was faxed to him and re-served on 14 May 2013. He responded  the
same day. On 20 June 2013 his asylum claim was refused. On 22  July  2013  a
deportation order was signed and on 28 July 2013 a decision  was  made  that
section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied. He appealed  against  that
decision.

   4. On 26 June 2014 the appellant's appeal was  heard  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal before  a  panel  consisting  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hollingworth and Mr G H Getlevog. The appeal proceeded in the  absence
      of the appellant who  had  not  appeared  and  had  not  provided  any
      explanation for his absence. It  was  noted  that  a  previous  appeal
      hearing had been adjourned owing to his absence but on  that  occasion
      he had been represented and there was a question  as  to  whether  his
      failure to attend was due to the respondent  failing  to  provide  him
      with a travel ticket. The panel  considered  that  the  appellant  had
      failed to demonstrate that he would be at risk on return to Palestine,
      either on the basis of the general security situation or on the  basis
      of his claimed sexuality, a matter raised subsequent to the refusal of
      his claim. Having considered a  medical  report  from  Dr  Mahomed,  a
      Consultant Psychiatrist, they concluded that  his  removal  would  not
      breach Article 3 of the ECHR, but that there  would  be  a  breach  of
      Article 8 in respect to his physical and moral integrity. They allowed
      his appeal on that basis.

   5. Permission was granted to the respondent to appeal  that  decision  to
      the Upper Tribunal. At an error of law hearing on  20  July  2015  the
      First-tier Tribunal's determination was found to be materially  flawed
      with respect to its decision on Article 8, for the following reasons:

"[8] I agreed with Mr Smart that the decision had to  be  set  aside.  There
    was a complete absence  of  any  consideration  by  the  panel  of  the
    immigration rules, which recent jurisprudence had confirmed amounted to
    a complete code with respect to a consideration of Article  8.   Whilst
    the panel plainly put considerable weight upon the  psychiatric  report
    of Dr Mahomed, there was no analysis of the report or any reasons given
    why the conclusions therein amounted to very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those falling within paragraph 399 and 399A. Other  than
    by way of reference to the conclusions of the psychiatric  report,  the
    panel failed to undertake any consideration of the appellant's  private
    life in the United Kingdom, which was  particularly  significant  given
    that he had spent most of his time in the United Kingdom in  detention,
    and thus no reasons were given as to why Article 8  was  even  engaged.
    Neither was there any proper or detailed  consideration  given  to  the
    public  interest  or  any  explanation  provided  as  to  the   factors
    considered to outweigh the public interest.

[9]  In the circumstances the panel's decision in relation to Article  8  is
    materially flawed and the findings and conclusions unsustainable.   The
    decision is set aside in that respect.

[10] I gave consideration as to why the decision could  not  simply  be  re-
    made on the evidence before me and whether or not  it  was  appropriate
    for the appeal to be adjourned to a resumed  hearing,  given  that  the
    appellant had not attended and given Mr Smart's indication that he  had
    failed to report and that consideration was being given to  the  taking
    of absconder action. However, Mr Smart was concerned that  he  did  not
    have sufficient information before him  to  enable  him  to  make  full
    submissions on the current availability of medical  treatment  in  Gaza
    and  that  the  medical  evidence  was  not  recent.  Whilst   it   was
    questionable whether the appellant would respond to any directions made
    and  whether  any  further  information  or  evidence  would  be   made
    available, I was nevertheless concerned, given the basis upon which the
    appeal was previously allowed, that the interests of  justice  required
    the appellant to  be  given  a  further  opportunity  to  provide  such
    evidence.

[11] Accordingly the appeal will be listed for a  resumed  hearing  for  the
    decision on Article 8 to be re-made. The First-tier Tribunal's decision
    on the asylum and Article 3 grounds has  not  been  challenged  and  is
    therefore preserved."

   6. The following directions were made for the resumed hearing:

"Directions

(a)   The  appellant  is  directed  to  produce  recent   medical   evidence
    addressing his current medical and psychological health.

(b)  No later than 14  days  before  the  date  of  the  next  hearing,  any
    additional documentary evidence relied upon by either party,  including
    medical reports and evidence about  the  availability  of  medical  and
    psychiatric treatment in Palestine, is to be filed with  this  Tribunal
    and served on the opposing party.

(c)  The appellant is put on notice that should he fail to comply  with  the
    directions and fail, without any satisfactory  explanation,  to  attend
    the hearing, his appeal will be  considered  on  the  evidence  already
    before the Tribunal and may well, in the absence of  further  evidence,
    fall to be dismissed."

Appeal hearing and submissions

   7. The appeal then came before us for a resumed hearing on  16  September
      2015, to re-make the decision in regard to  Article  8,  applying  the
      relevant statutory provisions and immigration rules. There was, again,
      no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant. Mrs Petterson  advised
      us that the appellant had now been registered as an absconder. In  the
      circumstances, we proceeded to hear submissions from Mrs Petterson  in
      his absence.

   8. Mrs Petterson produced a supplementary refusal letter  dated  18  June
      2014, which addressed  the  appellant's  late  claim  as  regards  his
      sexuality as well as the psychiatric report from  Dr  Shauki  Mahomed,
      and which she told us should have been before the First-tier  Tribunal
      when the appeal was heard but was not referred to in its decision. She
      referred us to the decision in Chege  (section  117D  -  Article  8  -
      approach) [2015] UKUT 00165 which set  out  the  current  position  in
      relation to Article 8 and deportation and which we were  now  required
      to follow. In regard to the appellant's mental health, as detailed  in
      the medical report from Dr Mahomed, she submitted that  there  was  no
      reason why he could not  access  medical  treatment  in  the  Occupied
      Territories, where he would be returning. She  relied  upon  the  UKBA
      Operational Guidance Note for  the  Occupied  Palestinian  Territories
      dated 19 March 2013 in that regard. Mrs Petterson submitted  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements in paragraphs 399 and 399A  of
      the  immigration  rules  and  accordingly  had  to  demonstrate   very
      compelling circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs
      399 and 399A, which he could not  do.  With  regard  to  the  risk  of
      suicide, she referred to J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  629  and  submitted
      that the appellant's circumstances did not meet the test in that  case
      as he would receive any necessary treatment prior to and upon  removal
      and would be escorted during his journey to Gaza. He would have access
      to treatment in Gaza, as set out in the supplementary  refusal  letter
      of 18 June 2014. Accordingly the appellant's removal to Gaza would not
      breach Article 8 and the appeal should be dismissed.

Legislative framework

   9. Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as
      inserted by s19 of the Immigration Act 2014, states as follows:

         117A Application of this Part


             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
                  to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
                  Acts-


                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                      family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                      Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
                  tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                      117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations  listed  in  section
                      117C.

             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
                  the question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
                  right to respect for private and family life is  justified
                  under Article 8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                  the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the  United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent,  because  such
                  persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)      Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                      is established by a person at a time when the  person
                      is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
                  established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

             (6)      In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                  deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require  the
                  person's removal where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

             (1)  In this Part-"Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European
                  Convention on Human Rights;


                  "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of
                  18 and who-

                      (a)  is a British citizen, or

                      (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                           period  of  seven  years  or  more;   "qualifying
                           partner" means a partner who-

                           (a)  is a British citizen, or

                           (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within
                               the meaning of the Immigration  Act  1971  -
                               see section 33(2A) of that Act).

             (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


                  (a)  who is not a British citizen,

                  (b)  who has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                      offence, and

                  (c)  who-

                      (i)  has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment
                           of at least 12 months,

                      (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                           serious harm, or

                      (iii)    is a persistent offender.

             (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a  person  subject
                  to an order under-


                  (a)  section 5 of the Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act
                      1964 (insanity etc),

                  (b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure  (Scotland)  Act
                      1995 (insanity etc), or

                  (c)  Article 50A of the Mental Health  (Northern  Ireland)
                      Order 1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted  of
                      an offence.

             (4)  In this  Part,  references  to  a  person  who  has  been
                  sentenced to a  period  of  imprisonment  of  a    certain
                  length of time-


                  (a)  do not include a person who has received a  suspended
                      sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the
                      sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to
                      take effect);

                  (b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced  to  a
                      period of imprisonment of that length of time only by
                      virtue of being sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences
                      amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

                  (c)  include a person who is sentenced  to  detention,  or
                      ordered or directed to be detained, in an institution
                      other than a  prison  (including,  in  particular,  a
                      hospital or an institution for young  offenders)  for
                      that length of time; and (d) include a person who  is
                      sentenced to imprisonment or detention, or ordered or
                      directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
                      provided that it may last for at least that length of
                      time.

             (5)      If any question arises for the purposes of this  Part
                  as to whether a person is a British citizen, it is for the
                  person asserting that fact to prove it."


  10. The relevant immigration rules are set out as follows:

         "A362.Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

         ...

         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption  shall
         be that the public interest requires  deportation.  It  is  in  the
         public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make  a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007.

         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary  to  the  UK's  obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention.  Where
         deportation would not be contrary to  these  obligations,  it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation is outweighed.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months;

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported;
                      and

                      (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain
                      in the UK without the person who is to  be  deported;
                      or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported."

Consideration and findings

  11. We follow the approach in Chege and note firstly that the appellant is
      a foreign criminal as defined in s117D(2)(c)(i). He does  not  have  a
      parental relationship with a child and is not in a relationship with a
      qualifying partner and so does not  meet  the  criteria  in  paragraph
      399(a) or (b). Neither does he meet the  criteria  in  paragraph  399A
      since he has  not  been  lawfully  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Exceptions 1 and 2 in paragraph 117C therefore do not apply to him.

  12. Accordingly, pursuant to  paragraph  398  of  the  rules,  the  public
      interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
      there are very compelling circumstances over and above those described
      in paragraphs 399 and 399A (and Exceptions 1 and 2).

  13. As far as the factors in s117B  are  concerned,  and  on  the  limited
      evidence available, the appellant's  deportation  is  plainly  in  the
      public interest. There is no evidence before us of an ability to speak
      English.  Neither  is  there  any  evidence   to   suggest   financial
      independence.  On  the  contrary,  the  evidence  suggests  that   the
      appellant has had considerable access to the NHS in  relation  to  his
      physical and mental health problems. The appellant's private life  has
      been established at a time when he has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully.  Indeed  there  is  little  evidence   of   private   life
      established in this  country  and  that  is  limited  to  his  medical
      treatment.  As  regards  the  appellant's  criminality,  the   offence
      committed was serious in so far as it undermined immigration  control,
      but was not in the same category of seriousness as crimes of  violence
      and drugs.

  14. The main factor, however, in the appellant's case, in considering  the
      public interest in deportation, is his vulnerability and mental health
      and indeed it is on that basis that the First-tier Tribunal  initially
      allowed the appeal. We turn, therefore, to  a  consideration  of  that
      matter.

  15. In their skeleton argument produced for the hearing before the  First-
      tier Tribunal, the appellant's former representatives  relied  on  the
      case of J in submitting that the appellant's return to Palestine would
      impel him to commit  suicide.  Reference  is  made  to  the  appellant
      cutting himself with a razor and stopping eating, with  the  intention
      of starving to death, when served with deportation papers  in  May  13
      and again in November 2013.

  16. The medical evidence relied upon by the  representatives  consists  of
      the following: a psychiatric report from  Dr  Mahomed  dated  8  April
      2014; medical notes from HMP Glen Parva dated from August  2012  until
      January 2014 (pages 107 to  182  of  the  main  appeal  bundle  -  the
      relevant  extracts  are  quoted   in   the   appellant's   solicitors'
      representations of 1 February 2014 at page 93 of the bundle); a mental
      health in-reach team referral  form  from  HMP  Glen  Parva  dated  15
      November 2013 concluding that the appellant was at risk of suicide and
      that there was a risk to his physical and mental  health  (page  159);
      and an email dated 23 January 2014 from  the  offender  supervisor  at
      HMP/YOI Glen Parva referring to concerns as to the appellant's ability
      to cope and his emotional well-being in the  face  of  the  threat  of
      deportation (page 63). We also note the photographs of the appellant's
      scars from cutting, at pages 6 to 11 of the  supplementary  bundle  of
      documents under cover of the solicitors' letter of 8  April  2014.  We
      note the reference in the medical notes to the appellant  refusing  to
      take anti-depressant  medication  as  he  feared  it  would  make  him
      "crazy".

  17. Turning to Dr Mahomed's psychiatric report, prepared after  a  meeting
      with the appellant some two months after his release on bail, we  note
      that his diagnosis, at  paragraph  12,  was  that  the  appellant  was
      suffering  from  adjustment  disorder  and  associated   anxiety   and
      depression and that he  still  harboured  thoughts  of  self-harm  and
      suicide. He recommended that the appellant receive immediate  care  of
      specialist psychiatric services through his  Community  Mental  Health
      Team by a referral from his GP and that he should  continue  with  his
      present antidepressants and, if necessary, other medications to  treat
      his psychological symptoms. He also recommended that the appellant  be
      assessed for a long term course of appropriate psychotherapy  and/  or
      counselling  to  manage  his  symptoms  (paragraph  14).  Dr   Mahomed
      concluded at paragraph 15(III) that "in all probabilities, [he]  would
      consider taking his life when he realises that he cannot be allowed to
      stay in this country and is being sent to Palestine" and at  paragraph
      15(V) that he "remained at risk of suicide".

  18. The problem with which the appellant is faced in this appeal  is  that
      the evidence produced on his behalf in regard to  his  health  is  now
      over a year old, the most recent being the psychiatric report from  Dr
      Mahomed.  There  is  no  evidence  to  show   whether   Dr   Mahomed's
      recommendations were followed and whether the appellant  continued  to
      access his prescribed  medication.  It  is  clear  from  Dr  Mahomed's
      comments that the appellant's anxieties and depression related to  his
      desire not to be returned to Palestine and that he had no  history  of
      mental illness or depression. From the medical  notes  from  HMP  Glen
      Parva it appears that his actions in cutting himself and refusing food
      were related in the main to his frustration at being  detained  rather
      than the threat of deportation itself. That is expressed in particular
      in the notes of 16 May 2013 and again on  8  November  2013  when  the
      appellant refused to eat for a period of time, but on  both  occasions
      he subsequently started eating and stated that he did not want to die.
      We have no evidence before us to  show  that  the  appellant's  mental
      health remains the same or has deteriorated, particularly in light  of
      the period of time he has now  been  out  of  detention.  We  have  no
      evidence or information about his  activities,  his  whereabouts,  his
      access to medical treatment, if any, or his health  condition.  We  do
      not even know if he remains in the United Kingdom.

  19. Taking  into  consideration  all  of  the  medical  evidence  and  the
      representations made on his behalf by his former solicitors, we do not
      consider that  the  appellant's  circumstances  go  anywhere  near  to
      meeting the test in J. For the same reasons as given  in  J,  we  find
      that even if the appellant's mental health remains as it  was  over  a
      year ago, there is no reason why measures would not be put in place by
      the United Kingdom authorities to  protect  him  from  self-harm  upon
      receipt of the removal  directions  and  up  until  his  removal.  Mrs
      Petterson  submitted  that,  as  a  vulnerable  person,  he  would  be
      accompanied by escorts upon removal and therefore, again, there is  no
      reason to believe that suitable measures would  not  be  in  place  to
      protect him against self-harm during that  process.  We  rely  on  the
      comments made in J, at [61] and [62] in that regard.

  20. We turn to the risk to the appellant of self-harm on arrival in  Gaza.
      We note that it does not appear to be disputed that he left Gaza as  a
      young child and that his close family members were killed in the  war.
      The existence of extended family members  remaining  in  Gaza  can  be
      nothing more than speculation and we therefore accept that it may well
      be the case that he has no remaining family support there. However the
      appellant is an adult who, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
      has managed to live independently in  a  new  country  without  family
      support and without  medical  support  for  some  time.  There  is  no
      evidence of his current mental health and no evidence to suggest  that
      he is currently a  risk  of  suicide,  particularly  as  the  previous
      incidents of self-harm and refusal of food were, for the most part,  a
      response to his frustration at  being  detained.  The  respondent  has
      provided, in the initial refusal letter and the supplementary  letter,
      evidence of facilities and support in Gaza, albeit limited, which  the
      appellant could access for medical treatment should he require it.  We
      refer in particular to the supplementary letter at paragraph  22  with
      respect to the provision  of  mental  health  care  by  M�decins  Sans
      Fronti�res. We note that the appellant's claim to be at risk  of  harm
      from others in Gaza has not been found to be objectively  well-founded
      and neither has he established a claim based on his sexuality.

  21. Accordingly we do not consider that the appellant's deportation  would
      put him at risk of suicide or serious self-harm for  the  purposes  of
      either Article 3 or Article 8 of the ECHR. Whilst the appellant's case
      differs from the usual health cases, in that his health concerns  were
      related not to any history of medical problems but to his  immigration
      status, we take account of the observations of the Court of Appeal  in
      GS (India), & Ors v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2015] EWCA Civ 40 in regard to Article 8 health cases:

      1. "If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm. That approach  was,
         as it seems to me, applied by Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ  and
         the Master of the Rolls agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
         279 at paragraph 23:

             "The only cases I can foresee where the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8,  is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose, in this
             case, the appellant had established firm family ties  in  this
             country, then the availability of continuing medical treatment
             here, coupled with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
             support, together establish 'private life'  under  Article  8.
             That conclusion would not involve a comparison between medical
             facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such  a  finding  would
             not offend the  principle  expressed  above  that  the  United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to  provide  medical
             treatment here when it is not  available  in  the  country  to
             which the appellant is to be deported."

      1. With great respect this seems to me to be entirely right. It  means
         that a specific case has to be made under Article 8."

  22. The appellant has failed to show any other elements bringing his  case
      within Article 8. We find that  he  has  failed  to  demonstrate  very
      compelling circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs
      399 and 399A, for the purposes of paragraph  398  of  the  immigration
      rules. Accordingly, and given the preserved findings of the First-tier
      Tribunal that his  removal  would  not  breach  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under the Refugee Convention and would not be in breach of
      Article 3 of the ECHR, his circumstances do not  outweigh  the  public
      interest in his deportation.

  23. We find, accordingly, that the appellant has failed to establish  that
      he falls within the exceptions set out at section 33 of the UK Borders
      Act 2007 and his appeal must be dismissed under the immigration  rules
      and on human rights grounds.

DECISION

  24. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  an
      error on a point of law and the  decision  has  accordingly  been  set
      aside. We re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and

    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. We  continue  that  order,
    pursuant to pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.




                               Signed   Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
