
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DC/00032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Oral Decision given immediately following     |On 9 April 2019              |
|hearing                                       |                             |
|On 26 March 2019                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE JEFFORD
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Elton Zace
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr D Clarke
                                 Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Zace):   Mr R Wilcox
                                 Counsel, instructed by Connaughts


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal promulgated on 7 December 2018, in which Mr Elton Zace was
the appellant, or claimant, and the Secretary of State was the respondent.
 For ease of reference, I shall in the course of this judgment refer to
them respectively as "the claimant" and "the Secretary of State" rather
than as they appear today.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal arose out of the decision of the
Secretary of State to deprive Mr Zace, the claimant, of his British
citizenship on the grounds that it had been obtained by false
representation so that the Secretary of State was empowered to deprive him
of his citizenship pursuant to section 40(3)(b) of the British Nationality
Act 1981.


The background facts are set out in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.  They were that in August of 1999 the claimant first arrived in
the United Kingdom.  He made an asylum claim in which he gave (i) his
nationality as Kosovan, when he was in fact Albanian, and (ii) a date of
birth of 8 March 1984, which made him appear to be four and a half years
younger than he actually was.  His asylum claim was refused but he obtained
exceptional leave to remain for a period of four years because of his
apparent age, that is, under the age of 16.

He then applied for indefinite leave to remain, which was granted on 24
April 2005, and received his certificate of naturalisation on 24 June 2006.
 On each of those occasions he repeated or perpetuated the lie that he was
Kosovan, not Albanian, and that he was significantly younger than he in
fact was.  The true facts emerged in 2007 or 2008 when he sought clearance
for his wife, also Albanian, to enter the United Kingdom.  He then provided
his birth certificate, which showed his true date of birth, being 8
September 1978, and that he was Albanian and not Kosovan as he had claimed.

There was then a relatively lengthy period over which various steps were
taken. Initially on 28 July 2008, the Nationality Directorate wrote to the
claimant, advising that the Secretary of State had reason to believe he had
obtained his status as a British citizen by fraud and that consideration
was being given to depriving him of his citizenship.

However, no further action was taken.  One of the reasons for that appears
to have been a series of appeals that had been lodged in October 2009 and
related to the issue of whether British citizenship that had been given in
such circumstances was a nullity or whether it was rather a question of
deprivation of citizenship.  That matter was not resolved until the Supreme
Court's judgment in Hysaj v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2017] UKSC 82.  In the meantime, so far as the claimant is concerned, he
was told, but not until 19 August 2013, that his citizenship was null and
void.  He was still given indefinite leave to remain.

For the purposes of this decision, it is not necessary for us to canvas
further the issues which have been considered in argument on this appeal as
to the precise effect of what happened in terms of indefinite leave to
remain and citizenship but the end result was that the claimant remained in
this country pursuant to that indefinite leave to remain and that it was
not until February 2018 that he was advised that the decision to nullify
his citizenship had been withdrawn as a consequence of the decision in
Hysaj. He was sent a new letter on 30 March 2018 advising that deprivation
of his citizenship was being considered and a further decision letter,
dated 25 June 2018, in which the Secretary of State made his decision to
deprive the claimant of his citizenship.  That was the subject matter of
the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, which decided that, whilst section
40(3)(b) of the British Nationality Act, was engaged the deprivation of the
claimant's citizenship would violate his human rights and in particular his
Article 8 rights.

What is submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State on this appeal is
that that decision was wrong in principle and in law, primarily relying on
the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the case of BA [2018] UKUT 00085.  In
that case, the court said this:

"42. In the case of Section 40(2), the matter on which the respondent must
be satisfied - involving 'the public good' - is one in respect of which the
respondent's conclusion will almost inevitably be determinative.  In other
words, it is very hard to see how, on a particular set of facts, the
Tribunal could find that deprivation would not be conducive to the public
good if, on those facts, the Secretary of State has decided that it would.

43.  Nevertheless, as with criminal deportation, a finding that something
may be in the public interest or conducive to the public good will not be
necessarily dispositive of the overall appeal.  The Tribunal will be
required to allow the appeal, notwithstanding such a finding, if to do
otherwise would violate the United Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR.
The Tribunal would also have to exercise its discretion differently from
that of the respondent, if some particular (we would venture to say,
exceptional) feature of the case necessitated it.

44.  In the case of Section 40(3) [which is the Section, I observe, that we
are concerned with on this occasion] the matter of which the Secretary of
State must be satisfied is much more hard-edged.  The fact that the
subSection speaks of the Secretary of State being 'satisfied' that fraud
etc. was employed does not mean the question for the Tribunal is merely
whether the Secretary of State was rationally entitled to conclude as she
did."

The Upper Tribunal then referred to the Supreme Court's decision in The
Secretary of State for the Home Department v Al-Jedda [2013] UKSC 62 and
continued:

"The Supreme Court was not disposed to say more than that the use of the
word 'satisfied' in section 40(2) and (3) 'may afford some slight
significance', although the court found it difficult to articulate what
that significance might be.  We consider the Tribunal is in a position to
take its own view of whether the requirements of sub-section (3) are
satisfied.  If they are, then the points made in paragraph 43 above will
apply in this class of case also.  The Tribunal will be required to place
significant weight on the fact that the Secretary of State has decided, in
the public interest, that a person who has employed deception to obtain
British citizenship should be deprived of that status.  Where statelessness
is not in issue, it is likely to be only in a rare case that the ECHR or
some very compelling feature will require the Tribunal to allow the
appeal."

The Tribunal then summarised the position at paragraph 45 as follows:

"(1) The Tribunal must first establish whether the relevant condition
precedent exists for the exercise of the Secretary of State's discretion to
deprive a person (P) of British citizenship.

(2)  In a section 40(2) case, the fact that the Secretary of State is
satisfied that deprivation is conducive to the public good is to be given
very significant weight and will almost inevitably be determinative of that
issue.

(3)  In a section 40(3) case, the Tribunal must establish whether one or
more of the means described in sub-section (3)(a), (b) and (c) were used by
P in order to obtain British citizenship.

(4)  In both section 40(2) and (3) cases, the fact that the Secretary of
State has decided in the exercise of her discretion to deprive P of British
citizenship will in practice mean the Tribunal can allow P's appeal only if
satisfied that the reasonably foreseeable consequence of deprivation would
violate the obligations of the United Kingdom government under the Human
Rights Act 1998 and/or that there is some exceptional feature of the case
which means the discretion in the subsection concerned should be exercised
differently.

(5)  As can be seen from AB, the stronger P's case appears to the Tribunal
to be for resisting any future (post-deprivation) removal on ECHR grounds,
the less likely it will be that P's removal from the United Kingdom will be
one of the foreseeable consequences of deprivation.

 (6) The appeal is to be determined by reference to the evidence adduced to
the Tribunal, whether or not the same evidence was before the Secretary of
State when she made her decision to deprive."

It is not in issue here that section 40(3)(b) is engaged and that the
claimant did obtain his British citizenship by making a false
representation as to his original nationality.  Therefore, the Secretary of
State plainly had a discretion to exercise under Section 40(3) and the
principles summarised in the BA case are applicable.

What is submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State is twofold.  The
first submission is that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not give
significant weight to the decision of the Secretary of State.  It is for
that reason that we have set out the entirety of paragraphs 42 to 44 of the
decision in BA because they make it plain that the significant weight to be
given to the Secretary of State's decision is to be given both in the case
of a section 40(2) deprivation and in the case of a section 40(3)
deprivation.

We agree with that submission.  It is difficult, if not impossible, to see
from the First-tier decision how any weight was given to the decision of
the Secretary of State.

The second point made by the Secretary of State is that the First-tier
Judge did not deal appropriately with the Article 8 claim which the
claimant may have.  During his time in the United Kingdom, the claimant has
had two children, both of whom are British citizens and are aged, at this
time, 7 and 10; he has worked; and he has a painting and decorating
business.  The decision records that it is a successful business and that
he has been paying tax over many years.

The point made in the BA case is that the stronger the Article 8 claim may
be, the less foreseeable it is that the claimant would be removed such that
his Article 8 rights would be violated.  That does not appear to have been
the approach taken by the First-tier Judge, who found at paragraph 19 of
the decision that the appellant had a strong Article 8 claim.  He recited:

"He has lived in the UK for almost twenty years and would be able to apply
for indefinite leave to remain on private life grounds in August 2019.  The
appellant has established family life in the UK with his wife and two young
children, all of whom are British citizens.  Whilst the deprivation of his
citizenship would not necessarily lead to his removal from the UK, the
foreseeable consequences are that the appellant would have a lack of
settled status, affecting his ability to continue to work and provide for
his family.  He would also be liable to administrative removal."

What is argued on his behalf is that that is a properly reasoned approach
to the Article 8 claim because it places the emphasis, as does Mr Wilcox on
behalf of the claimant, not on the risk of removal but on the impact on
family life, in particular or solely on the ability of the claimant to
continue to work and provide for his family.  That seems to us to be the
natural consequence of any deprivation of citizenship but not a
disproportionate interference with the claimant's Article 8 rights and not
an unusual or exceptional feature.  The position appears to be that if he
is deprived of his citizenship he may still apply for indefinite leave to
remain and he would then be entitled to work.  There may well be some
period of disruption to his family life that may have a negative impact on
his family but that is all that there would be.

A comparison was drawn in the course of the argument before us of the
position if the claimant was to be prosecuted for the offence that he has,
on these facts, committed and subject to a sentence of imprisonment as a
result.  In those circumstances too, there would be an effect on his
ability to continue to work and provide for his family.

In other words, as we have said, the consequences of the deprivation of his
citizenship in terms of the effect on his family life are entirely
commonplace.  They do not, it seems to us, fall within the sort of
circumstances which the Upper Tribunal had in mind in AB and they do not
amount to sufficient reasons why the Secretary of State's decision was not
proportionate and was open to challenge.

For those reasons, we would allow the appeal of the Secretary of State.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  We remake the
decision so that the claimant is deprived of his citizenship in accordance
with the decision of the Secretary of State dated 25 June 2018 and we
dismiss the claimant's appeal against that decision.

Notice of Decision

We set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  the
decision as follows:
The claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision,  revoking
his British citizenship, is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

[pic]
pp.                  Mrs                   Justice                   Jefford
               Date: 2 April 2019
