

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/00712/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Sent to parties on:             |
|On 27 September 2017                      | On 12 October 2017              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR VICTOR OBIOMA UCHECHUKWU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Dr. Mynott (Legal Representative)


                      DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought  with  permission,  from  a  decision  of  the  First-tier Tribunal
(hereinafter "the tribunal") made after  a  hearing  of  14 December 2016,
whereupon it allowed the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
decision of 6 January 2016 refusing to  grant  him  a  residence  card  as
confirmation of his right to reside in  the  United Kingdom  as  a  non-EEA
national family member with a retained right of residence.

2.    Permission was sought and subsequently granted on the basis  that  the
tribunal had failed to consider  or  at  least  satisfactorily  resolve  the
issue as to whether or not the claimant's former wife  had  been  exercising
treaty rights for a continuous period of at least five years leading  up  to
date the couple divorced which was 30 June 2015.

3.     It   is   apparent   from   the   tribunal's   written   reasons   of
19 December 2016 (see paragraph 8) that, at the outset of the hearing, it
sought to establish with the parties, with a  proper  degree  of  precision,
what issues were and were not in dispute  before  it.   It  is  clear  that,
although there was said to be an issue as to whether the claimant's  ex-wife
was exercising treaty rights at the time of  the  divorce  (something  which
the tribunal went on to resolve in  the  claimant's  favour)  no  issue  was
raised as to the previous five year period. So, that was not an issue  which
the tribunal had to resolve.

4.    It is clear, from the rest of  the  written  reasons,  that  what  the
tribunal did do was to  go  through  the  disputed  issues  which  had  been
identified by the parties and to decide each one.  Given that  the  question
of the exercising or otherwise of treaty rights for a continuous  period  of
five years was not an issue specifically raised before it,  it  cannot  have
erred in law in not dealing with it.  Indeed, I suggested to the parties  at
the outset of the hearing, that that might be the position and  Mr Diwnycz,
for the Secretary of State, did not seek to dissuade me from that view.

5.    In the circumstances I conclude that the tribunal did not err  in  law
and, in consequence, its decision must stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made, none having been sought.

Signed:                           Date: 11 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:                           Date: 11 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
