
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/00134/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |                Decision & Reasons         |
|                                 |Promulgated                                |
|On 18 November 2019              |                On 26 November 2019        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                            FRANCES MARY BANGURA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:              Mr S Appiah, directly instructed
For the respondent:             Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The error of law decision was given orally at the end of the hearing on 18
November 2019 and these written reasons reflect the oral decision.  I
reserved my remaking decision, which is contained later in this decision
and reasons.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Munonyedi (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 25 July 2019, by which
she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of
her application for an EEA Residence Card as the extended family member of
her cousin, a French national, Saidu Jabbie, said to be exercising treaty
rights in the UK.  The respondent's decision under appeal was dated 30
September 2016, but was incorrectly recorded by the F-tT as being dated 30
October 2018, the date of a later decision.  The lateness of the
appellant's appeal was explained and an extension of time was granted by F-
tT Judge Shanahan on 30 October 2018, as a result of the litigation
confirming the right of appeal for extended family members in the case of
Khan v SHHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The appellant initially had not been
given the right of appeal.

The gist of the issues was whether the appellant was either a member of her
cousin's household or dependent on him prior to coming to the UK in August
2015; and whether she was currently financially dependent on him or a
member of his household since her arrival.

The grounds of appeal were not only that the F-tT had considered the wrong
decision; by reference to the wrong EEA regulations (2016 as opposed to
2006), but also applied the wrong case-law, applying human rights appeal
case law (Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31) rather than the well-known
authority for extended family member cases of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg
8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) and had impermissibly imported consideration of
whether the appellant was choosing to be dependent on her cousin, which was
not relevant. The FtT had erred in not considering, for the purposes of the
value of any savings the appellant might have made, the effect of hyper-
inflation in Venezuela, where she had lived immediately prior to coming to
the UK in August 2015.

The grant of permission

First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson granted permission on 10 October
2019, identifying that it appeared that the F-tT had considered the wrong
decision, by reference to the wrong regulations, using the wrong legal
test; and in failing to consider remittances over time; the true value of
the appellant's savings; and in impermissibly considering the motives for
the appellant coming to the UK.

The hearing before me

The respondent's submissions

While Mr Whitwell accepted that the F-tT had considered the wrong decision
under the wrong provisions, the basis of the refusal (a dispute as to
previous and current dependency and household membership) remained
unchanged and so in that specific context, the error was not material.
While the F-tT had unfortunately referred to matters which were not
directly relevant, such as the motive for the cousin's support for the
appellant, the finding had been clear that the claim of dependency was
fabricated; and there was never sufficient evidence before the F-tT to
demonstrate prior membership of the cousin's household when they were both
children; or, given the limited remittances, dependency.

The appellant's submissions

The appellant presented evidence that the cousin had returned to Sierra
Leone, the appellant's country of origin, to the common family home, on the
death of his mother, for family visits, when the appellant lived there
prior to 2010.  He had sent remittances over many years and the appellant's
college bursary in Venezuela covered only part of her costs.  The lack of
proper analysis of the evidence could not be considered immaterial in the
circumstances.

Discussion on error of law

I concluded that the FtT's errors of law were material in this case.  Not
only had the FtT considered the incorrect decision by reference to the EEA
Regulations 2016 rather than the EEA Regulations 2006, but of greater
importance was the fact that the FtT had considered the appeal by reference
to the authority of Kugathas, to which I have referred, rather than the
well-known authority of Dauhoo.  The reasoning clearly impacted on the
eventual decision, noting at paragraph 21 of the FtT's decision as follows:

"21. It is my finding that the appellant has not been dependent upon the
sponsor whilst living outside the UK.  Any financial help given by the
sponsor to the appellant is the sort of help family members give to one
another from time to time."

Clearly therefore, the motive of the sponsor in providing financial support
to the appellant was critical in the FtT's analysis and I do not accept
that the FtT's conclusion around fabrication of the claimed dependency was
uncontaminated by the failure to consider the structured approach in
Dauhoo, namely whether there had been prior membership of the cousin's
household and/or financial dependency; and current membership of the
cousin's household and/or financial dependency.  In these circumstances the
cousin's motives around that support or membership were not relevant; nor
was the issue of whether the appellant was dependent on her cousin as a
matter of the appellant's choice, rather than necessity.  Therefore, the
FtT's decision was not safe and cannot stand.

Decision on error of law

I therefore set aside the FtT's decision entirely.

Remaking

Given the limited factual areas of dispute I regarded it as appropriate to
remake the decision on the appellant's appeal, rather than remit remaking
to the First-tier Tribunal.

I dealt with the remaking by way of submissions only, without any live
evidence, but I considered the appellant's bundle ("AB") which had been
before the FtT. The parties' representatives were content to proceed on
that basis.

It was not disputed that the appellant was related, as claimed, to her
cousin and was therefore his extended family member. What remained in
dispute was the prior and current living arrangements and also the claimed
financial dependency.

The appellant's submissions

Mr Appiah referred to the money remittances from the appellant's cousin to
the appellant when the appellant was in her country of origin, Sierra
Leone, between 2005 and 2010; and between 2010 to 2015, when the appellant
lived in Venezuela, as illustrated in the remittances at pages [97] and
[119] AB.

Broadly speaking, the documented remittances, setting aside for one moment
the issue of undocumented remittances which were given via third parties
such as family, friends or relatives, for which there was a witness
statement at page [35] AB comprised twelve remittances whilst the appellant
was in Sierra Leone totalling �2,234 and then for the period from 2010 to
2014, twelve remittances totalling �1,305.  Whilst the appellant had
initially received a bursary for attending college whilst in Venezuela
which covered her course costs, flight and accommodation it did not cover
her food and as she had confirmed in her witness statement, she also
subsequently self-funded a second course.  I asked what income the
appellant received when she began work in August 2014 up until Venezuela in
August 2015, when she left Venezuela to enter the UK and Mr Appiah
confirmed was that she was receiving a salary of a sterling equivalent of
�2,000 a month as a professor at the university, having not previously been
employed.

Mr Appiah candidly accepted that there did not appear to be any documentary
evidence of ongoing remittances during the period that the appellant was
receiving her salary and working as a professor from 2014 to 2015,
immediately prior to entering the UK.  Nevertheless, he submitted that she
relied on prior remittances which she had saved over a period of time to
meet her basic needs; and even if, which was not admitted, she had not
received any undocumented remittances after 2014, nevertheless she had also
been a member of her cousin's household in Sierra Leone up to 2010, during
which he regularly visited her.

Mr Appiah asserted that there was also current financial dependency and
household membership, evidenced by bank statements to a shared address as
well as limited evidence of financial transfers from the cousin to the
appellant but also noting that these were likely to be more limited amounts
when the appellant was now living with her cousin in the UK.

The respondent's submissions

Mr Whitwell asked me to consider the total value of documented remittances,
�2,234 for the period 2005 to 2010; and �1,305 for the period from 2010 to
2014, comprising a total of �3,539 or over nine years an annual average of
�393.22, which was hardly a large sum.  In contrast, in the appellant's
visa application to enter the UK, question [58] at page [165] AB, she
stated that she worked as a professor and had savings, of a sterling
equivalent, of �20,000.  She had also been in receipt of a bursary in the
initial course that she had received.  There was neither financial
dependency prior to coming to the UK nor membership of the appellant's
household.  There needed to be either membership of household or financial
dependency in the period from 2014 to when the appellant entered the UK in
August 2015 and that the gap of that year meant that the appellant's claim
had to fail, even if there were prior household membership and dependency.

Discussion and conclusions

Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations states:

"A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is a
relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil partner and:

(a)  the person is residing in a country other than the UK and is dependent
on the EEA national or is a member of his household;....

 (c) the person satisfies the condition in paragraph (a), has joined the
EEA national in the UK and continues to be dependent on him or a member of
his household."

In terms of my findings, what is clear is that in the period in which the
appellant lived in Venezuela from 2010, until when she entered the UK on 22
August 2015, she was not a member of her cousin's household. He has never
lived in Venezuela nor has he maintained any household there.  Taking the
appellant's assertions at their highest, any common household membership
ended in 2010. Prior to that date, the appellant and her cousin had, when
growing up as children, shared a common home with the cousin's mother,
until the cousin left Sierra Leone to live in France in 1999. Whilst the
cousin's witness statement confirms that he sent remittances to Sierra
Leone (albeit it is unclear whether to his mother of the appellant) he does
not suggest that after his departure in 1999, and prior to his mother's
death in 2005, that his mother's home in Sierra Leone amounted to his
household the purposes of the EEA regulations. Instead, he had been a
former member of that household, leaving it as a minor, aged 15. Whilst he
refers to returning to Sierra Leone in December 2005 to get married and
returning again in October 2006, April 2007 and in 2008, the durations of
his stays are unspecified; and Mr Appiah was unable to confirm who owned or
rented his deceased mother's home in Sierra Leone, in which the appellant
continued to live.  I do not accept that the fact of the cousin's return
visits to Sierra Leone on four occasions between December 2005 and 2008
meant that the appellant became a member of his household, on the death of
his mother, where the remaining circumstances of the family home in Sierra
Leone remain unclear. I find that the appellant has never been a member of
her cousin's household prior to coming to the UK on 22 August 2015.

In relation to claimed financial dependency, the appellant is unclear in
her witness statement about what financial support her cousin provided to
her prior to going to Venezuela in October 2010, albeit the remittance
slips in the AB, which I have considered, provide some basic evidence, but
no clear pattern of how the appellant managed her finances in Sierra Leone
and who she was, in truth, dependent on.  Whilst the cousin refers to
remittances that were sent prior to the death of his mother on 9 May 2005
he does not provide any detail on the further remittances until the
appellant went to study in Venezuela. Whilst the appellant has referred to
Western Union money transfers between October 2010 and December 2014, and
asserted that her scholarship did not cover all of her costs and things
that she would need, the precise nature of those needs were unspecified and
it is possible to make a finding, with any confidence, that the remittances
were used by the appellant in terms of her basic needs.  I find that the
appellant, despite the remittances provided, was not dependent on her
cousin during the period from 2005, when her aunt died, until she obtained
a job as a professor on 5 August 2014.

Even had I found otherwise, it is even clearer that following getting a job
as a professor on 5 August 2014, for which she received a monthly salary of
sterling equivalent of �2,000, that she was not dependent on her cousin
after that date. Even taking into account the financial instability in
Venezuela, and even assuming that the appellant's substantial savings of
the sterling equivalent of �20,000 might have been accrued over a number of
years, including through remittances from her cousin (which amounted to
nowhere near �20,000), the absence of any further direct remittances,
together with the absence of any detailed evidence on how the appellant's
personal finances were affected by any wider economic instability in
Venezuela, lead me to find that the appellant was not dependent on her
cousin whilst employed during the period from August 2014 August 2015, by
virtue of her significantly well-paid job, which was explained why he
ceased sending her remittances.

In summary, I conclude that the appellant was not dependent on, or a member
of the household of, her cousin prior to entering the UK on 22 August 2015.
 Even had I concluded otherwise in relation to dependency prior to the
appellant starting her job on 5 August 2014, that would have left a gap
between August 2014 and August 2015 during which there was no dependency.
Regulation 8(2) of the EEA regulations refers to an applicant continuing to
be dependent on their sponsor prior to entering the UK, which means that
even if there had been financial dependency prior to August 2014, any
dependency would not continue by virtue of the gap in the period from 2014
2015. However, my dismissal of the appeal rests on the fact that there was
no prior financial dependency or household membership at all prior to the
appellant entering UK, and as a consequence she fails to meet the
requirements of regulation 8(2).



Decision

I remake the F-tT's decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Signed J Keith                  Date:  22 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and so there can be no fee award.

Signed J Keith                  Date:  22 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

