
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00830/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th August 2018                           |On 8th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                       Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Mr Amar Mahboob
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin (Counsel), instructed by Whitefield
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Shergill, promulgated on 30th May 2018, following a hearing at Manchester
on 17th May 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of
the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and was
granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter
comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was born on 24th
December 1977.  On 6th June 2017, the Appellant applied for permanent
residence on the basis of retained rights after the death of his wife,
[IM], who was the Sponsor, as an EEA national who had been exercising
treaty rights in the UK.  That application was refused by the Respondent on
the basis that there had been two previous determinations which had found
that the marriage between the Appellant and the Sponsor was a marriage of
convenience.  A number of other issues were also raised.

The Judge's Findings

In what was a careful and sensitively crafted decision, Judge Shergill held
that the issue of there being a marriage of convenience was simply not
borne out in the light of the evidence (see paragraph 6 of the
determination) and that this was a genuine and subsisting marriage
(paragraph 11).  However, in the consideration of the other questions, as
to whether the Sponsor was a qualified person and whether the Appellant did
reside in the UK "at least the year immediately before" the death of the
Sponsor, the judge was less persuaded.  The submission before Judge
Shergill was that the year in question could be accumulated at any point.
The judge held that this was not the natural reading of the provision in
the Regulations.  If the draftsman had so intended it to be the natural
meaning, a reference could have been made to the accumulation of a year at
any time before the death of a Sponsor.  However, the reference here in the
provision was to the "year immediately before".  The judge held that he
must apply the letter of the statutory instrument as drafted (paragraph
23).

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 20th August 2018, there was a degree of
consensus between Mr Parkin and Mr Bates, the Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.  Mr Bates submitted that there had been no Rule 24 response.
However, he would have to accept that there was a material error of law.
This is because the evidence (at pages 119 to 122 of the Appellant's
bundle) had not been considered.  This was the evidence that related to the
payslips of [IM], showing, for example, a period of 6th January 2017 where
she earned ï¿½183.24, right the way through to 20th January 2017, where she
still continued to be in employment.  Mr Bates submitted that if one takes
into account the fact that there was no contract of employment and no
assessment as to how the Sponsor had been paid, this evidence, which had
been overlooked, becomes relevant.  Mr Parkin, for his part, submitted that
there had been an absence of positive findings.  This was a case where the
Sponsor had been unable to work due to illness, and there was evidence in
relation to statutory sick pay which was simply not considered by the
judge.  No consideration was given to the exercising of treaty rights by
the Sponsor.

Given the agreement between the parties, I am satisfied that there is an
error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside
the decision.  This is because the judge did not engage with the evidence
that the Sponsor was working at least in January 2017 for a different
employer (as is plain from the documentation at pages 119 to 122, which
shows the Sponsor to be working elsewhere).  The judge neglects to mention
this evidence (at paragraph 15).  This is when the conclusion is reached by
the judge that the EEA national cannot be treated as qualified person
beyond 6th December 2016.  The judge also did not consider that the EEA
national may have continued to be a qualified person on the basis that she
was temporarily unable to work (as contended for by Mr Parkin before me),
given that she was in receipt of support allowance.  Therefore, although
the decision is on the whole carefully constructed, there are matters that
have been overlooked such that it cannot be said that the decision with
respect to Regulation 6(2)(a) of the 2016 EEA Regulations has been
correctly arrived at.  The Judge was wrong to have concluded as he did in
relation to the Sponsor.

I have therefore remade the decision on the basis of the evidence before
Judge Shergill, the findings made by him, and the consensus between both
parties appearing before me today, about the unconsidered evidence (at pp.
119-122 A/B).  This evidence showed the Sponsor to have been working for
different employer.  It also showed the sponsor subsequently being unable
to work.  Moreover, she was then in receipt also of support allowance.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order is made.

The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st October 2018



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st October 2018
