
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00482/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2019                     |On 14 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                               Mr Filipe Dias
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal
(the Judge), issued on 1 April 2019, by which the appellant's appeal
against the decision of the respondent to refuse to issue him with a
residence card under the relevant EEA Regulations was dismissed.

In granting permission to appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Hollingworth granted permission on all grounds.

By way of an undated letter received by the Tribunal on 5 August 2019
Sterling Chance Solicitors requested that the hearing proceed in the
absence of the appellant and his representatives as the appellant "is not
working at the present time and is not able to afford any representation
for the hearing and we therefore invite the Tribunal to make a decision in
light of the facts and documents that are available".



Anonymity

The Judge did not issue an anonymity order and no application for such an
order was made before me.



Background

The appellant is a national of India and is aged 45.  He applied for a
residence card as the dependent son (aged over 21) of an EEA national
exercising treaty rights in this country.  His sponsor is his mother, a
Portuguese national.  Accompanying the application was a letter from the
sponsor which detailed inter alia that the appellant arrived in the United
Kingdom on 3 April 2018 to live with his wife and three children.  However,
following marital difficulties his wife was unwilling to support his
application to remain in this country.  The sponsor confirmed that the
appellant was presently living with her and that she was paying his rent
and other expenses as he enjoys no lawful presence in this country.

The respondent refused the application by way of a decision dated 16
January 2019.  The respondent observed that the appellant had not provided
adequate evidence to show that he qualified for a right to reside as a
family member of an EEA sponsor.  It was noted that none of the documentary
evidence provided established that he was residing in the same address as
his sponsor and further that no bank statements, evidence of money
transfers or any evidence had been produced to establish that he was
reliant upon his sponsor.  The respondent further noted that the appellant
was not named in the tenancy agreement submitted with the application.

The appellant appealed the decision and a notice of appeal was received by
the First-tier Tribunal on 29 January 2019.  By way of a letter dated 22
March 2019 the appellant's solicitors, Sterling Chance, informed the First-
tier Tribunal that the hearing was to be decided on papers.





Hearing before the FtT

The appeal came before the Judge at Hatton Cross on 26 March 2019.  The
Judge observed that he had before him the respondent's bundle but that no
bundle had been filed on behalf of the appellant.  In dismissing the
appeal, the Judge observed at [7] of his decision:

"The starting point for the Tribunal's analysis is whether the appellant
has provided any evidence to discharge the above burden.  It finds he has
not done so; in fact, there is no evidence produced at all by the
appellant.  He has not provided any material whatsoever to rebut or deal
with the concerns raised in the refusal letter and therefore has singularly
failed to discharge the legal and evidential burden upon him."




Grounds of appeal

The grounds of appeal are concise and primarily place reliance upon the
original grounds of appeal accompanying the notice of appeal filed with the
First-tier Tribunal in January 2019.  I am concerned that the author of the
grounds before this Tribunal appears unaware that an appeal to this
Tribunal is to be on a point of law alone and is not simply a restatement
of the original case: Rule 33(5)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  Reliance was
further placed upon a letter from the sponsor that was before the Judge but
was not considered.

In granting permission to appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Hollingworth observed: "The appellant is entitled to presume that the
material submitted with the application will be provided to the Judge for
the purposes of the Judge considering the matter on the papers."

No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent in this matter.



Decision on Error of Law

The Judge was correct to identify that the appellant had not filed a bundle
in accordance with directions.  However, the respondent's bundle contains a
letter from the sponsor dated 1 October 2018, a birth certificate naming
the sponsor as the appellant's mother, a copy of the sponsor's Portuguese
identification card, a bank statement from the sponsor confirming receipt
of her weekly wages from her employer and the sponsor's tenancy agreement
dated 1 August 2018.  These documents were not expressly considered by the
Judge.  It is a longstanding principle that proper, adequate reasons must
be given that deal with the substantial points that have been raised in an
appeal and whilst it is unnecessary for a Tribunal to set out the evidence
and arguments before it or the facts found by it in detail, the reasons
must be proper, adequate and intelligible and enable the person affected to
know why they have been successful or unsuccessful.  The failure to
consider the documentary evidence relied upon by the appellant can only
mean that the Judge failed to engage with the appellant's case as put
forward in any significant respect.

Having identified an error of law, I am required to consider its
materiality.  Upon considering the evidence in the round I am satisfied the
appellant was not substantially prejudiced by the failure to consider the
evidence relied upon because it cannot satisfy the burden placed upon him
to establish that he is a dependent family member.

The appellant has established by way of his birth certificate that he is a
direct family member of the sponsor. I note that it is not the appellant's
position that he was dependent upon his mother when he entered the country.
 He sought entry to join his wife and children.  At an unknown date the
marriage broke down.  The Court of Appeal confirmed in Pedro v Secretary of
State for Work and Pensions [2009] EWCA Civ 1358 [2010] 2 CMLR 20 that
where dependency is necessary the family member does not need to be living
or have lived in an EEA state where the EEA national sponsor also lives or
has lived.  Their dependency on the EEA national sponsor does not need to
have existed before they came to the United Kingdom.

I am therefore required to consider the issue of dependency within this
country.  The sponsor has provided bank statements running to three pages,
covering a period from April 2018 to September 2018.  The statement
confirms weekly payments from her employer in the region of ï¿½290 net per
week.  I therefore accept that she was exercising EEA treaty rights between
April and September 2018.  The sole evidence of the appellant residing with
the sponsor, from an unknown date, is a one page letter where the sponsor
confirms "I confirm that Filipe is presently living with me and that I am
paying for his rent and all other expenses as he is not able to work as he
does not have any valid residence card at the time".  However, the only
document submitted by the appellant as to his accommodation is a letter
from JobCentre Plus dated May 2018 which details him living at an address
in Hayes.  Whilst his mother moved to her new home in Southall in August
2018, she was previously residing at a different property in Southall
whilst her son resided in Hayes. There is no corroborative documentary
evidence establishing that mother and son resided together in Southall
between August 2018 and the date of the application in October 2018.
Whilst the sponsor asserts that her son was living with her in October
2018, no detail is provided as to when he moved in with her or as to how he
supported himself prior to such time. Her evidence is very limited in
nature.  Details as to the appellant's marital breakdown are very limited
and he has filed no witness statement addressing the issues raised within
the respondent's decision letter.

In such circumstances the appellant is unable to satisfy the burden placed
upon him to establish that he needs financial support from the sponsor, his
mother, to meet his essential needs and therefore the error of law
identified above is not material as the only reasonable decision that can
be made by a judge considering this appeal on the evidence as presented is
to refuse the appeal.



Notice of decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of a material error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 6 August 2019

