
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00143/2020 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And via Skype for Business           |On 01 April 2021                     |
|On 19th March 2021                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                               MR BUJAR GASHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Bustani, Counsel, instructed by Maxwell
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which I gave
orally at the end of the hearing on 19th March 2021.

Both representatives and I attended the hearing via Skype, while the
hearing was also open to attend at Field House.  The parties did not object
to attending via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Trevaskis (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 2nd March 2020, by
which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
on 12th December 2019 to refuse to issue him a Residence Card as the EEA
family member (spouse) of an EEA (Romanian) national, Ms Herinean (the
'sponsor'), under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

In essence, the appellant's claims involved the single issue: whether, for
the purposes of regulation 2 of the 2016 Regulations, the appellant's
marriage to the sponsor was a "marriage of convenience," in the sense of
having been entered into for the purpose of using the EEA Regulations in
order to circumvent the Immigration Rules.

The respondent regarded the marriage as one of convenience based on
inconsistencies in the appellant's and sponsor's accounts during interviews
that had taken place on 4th June 2019, relating to: the sponsor's religion,
the duration of visits to Romania; the appellant having worked in the UK;
the number of asylum claims that the appellant had previously,
unsuccessfully made; and the appellant's previous EEA application, together
with a number of other inconsistencies.

The FtT's decision

The FtT noted at �5 that the burden was not on the appellant to demonstrate
that his marriage was not one of convenience and that the burden instead
lay on the respondent.  At �13, the FtT noted the appellant's poor
immigration history and made detailed findings at ��18 to 22, referring to
inconsistencies which he did not regard as having been adequately addressed
by the appellant or his witnesses.  There were significant areas where the
FtT would have expected greater consistency, including in relation to
wedding arrangements.  Having referred to the evidence, at ��24 to 25, the
FtT stated:

"24. The respondent must show reasonable grounds for suspecting that the
marriage was one of convenience, before the appellant is required to show
that on the balance of probabilities it is not a marriage of convenience.
I am not satisfied that the reasons given by the respondent for suspicion
as to the nature of the marriage were sufficient to shift the evidential
burden to the appellant.

25.  Whether or not I am wrong about that I am not satisfied to the
required standard that the appellant had shown that his relationship with
the sponsor is not a marriage of convenience."

The FtT then went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal, the gist of which is as follows:

   1. Ground (1) - the FtT had failed to explain why the respondent had
      shown reasonable grounds for her suspicion; had concluded that the
      respondent had in fact not shown such reasonable grounds, then
      appeared to contradict himself.

   2. Ground (2) - the FtT had erred in focusing on a small number of
      perceived inconsistencies during the marriage interviews but failed
      to take into account the extensive core consistency in over of 300
      questions.  The FtT had further erred in stating at �22 that the
      appellant had sought to stay in the UK on the basis of a previous
      relationship with a British citizen which he now admitted was not
      genuine.  At no stage had the appellant accepted making an
      application on the basis of a relationship that was not genuine.

   3. Ground (3) - the FtT failed to engage with the witness evidence of
      three live witnesses in addition to the appellant and sponsor.  The
      FtT had failed to engage with or analyse their evidence.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane granted permission on 11th August 2020.
His grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

The appellant's submissions

Ms Bustani emphasised that the refusal letter itself had not referred to
the described poor immigration history of the appellant, which had focussed
instead solely on the alleged inconsistencies in the marriage interviews.
All the appellant needed to do in this case was to provide a marriage
certificate, with the burden then on the respondent to discharge the
initial evidential burden as well as the overall legal burden.  In other
words, the context of why a marriage interview had been regarded as
necessary was not one which was at all clear.  It was almost as if the FtT
was expecting the appellant to show why his marriage was not one of
convenience, as opposed to the other way around.

The practical difficulty that the appellant had faced was that the records
of the interviews, the sole basis for refusing the applications, were only
provided by the respondent to the appellants three days before the FtT
Hearing, on 17th February 2020.  It was hardly surprising in the
circumstances that the appellant and the sponsor had done the best they
could to address the brief list of concerns about answers in interview, set
out in the refusal letter, and had not gone to provide further details.  In
context, the interview records themselves in fact ran over to 300 questions
and it was clear from �20 of the FtT's decision that he had done little
more than to adopt the summary of inconsistencies described by the
respondent at the end of each of the interview records and in the refusal
letter.  Having focussed on those, (which he may well have been entitled to
do), what the FtT did not do was to consider whether the remainder of the
core account nevertheless was of sufficient weight that the inconsistencies
could be regarded as peripheral.

The second point, taking aside the issue of the apparent misapplication of
the law and impermissible focus on the list of inconsistencies in the
refusal letter, was that in addition to the appellant and the sponsor,
three witnesses had provided statements and attended the FtT hearing, to
attest to their belief in the genuineness of the relationship and none of
them had their evidence challenged in any way.  The FtT had simply failed
to engage in that evidence or the wider evidence of cohabitation, including
that set out at �7 of the skeleton argument, including but not limited to,
the tenancy agreement showing a common address at pages 178 and 186 of the
appellant's FtT bundle as well as a list of other documentation.

In relation to a final ground, the FtT had referred to an application based
on a previous relationship with a British citizen, where in fact there was,
to Ms Bustani's knowledge, no such application and indeed it had not been
raised in the refusal letter.

The respondent's submissions

In response, Mr Melvin reiterated the terms of the Rule 24 response.
Crucially, the FtT had reminded himself correctly of the burden of proof
and had then had set out his concerns quite clearly as to why the
inconsistencies were of concern and the fact that the witnesses had not
addressed those concerns.  In those circumstances, the subsequent reference
at �25 had to be read in context and could only be realistically read as a
typographical error rather than any misapplication of the law.

In relation to the second ground, the marriage interviews had taken place
after an initial refusal of the appellant's application for a Residence
Card as an extended family member, prior to his marriage to the sponsor,
and before the second application following their wedding.  Mr Melvin was
not in a position to confirm precisely when the interview notes were
provided but it was clear that they were taken into account nevertheless by
the FtT.  Mr Melvin accepted that the appellant's immigration history had
not been expressly referred to in the refusal letter but had been clearly
set out in the bundle before the FtT and it was a matter that the FtT was
entitled to consider.

In relation to the challenge that the FtT had impermissibly focussed solely
on areas of inconsistency identified by the respondent in her refusal
letter, the FtT's reasons were, Mr Melvin urged me to consider, sufficient
enough and it was not necessarily for the FtT to have listed or written a
detailed analysis of all the questions.  It was sufficient that where such
concerns were identified that the FtT set these out and then ask himself
the question, which he did, as to whether the subsequent witness evidence
addressed these concerns.

In relation to the third area of concern around an arguably erroneous
statement as to reliance upon a previous relationship with a British
citizen, which it said was not correct, Mr Melvin suggested that it was
only safe to assume that this related to the previous asylum claim where
the appellant had claimed to have been in a relationship with a man and the
protection claim had been rejected and not appealed.  In circumstances
where the protection claim, based on the fact of that relationship was not
appealed, that was strongly indicative of the relationship referred to by
the FtT.



The appellant's response

Finally, in response, Ms Bustani stated that the earlier EEA application
was simply explained by the fact that the couple were unmarried and had not
been living together for two years and therefore by virtue of that would
have failed under the durability provisions of the EEA Regulations.
Instead they had got married and then applied on a different basis.  In
relation to receipt of the interview records she made clear the basis of
her instructions as to when the interview records had been received and it
had not been included in the respondent's bundle.  The point was that there
was that there was no analysis of the whole of the interview records and
simply a focus unduly on the brief list of inconsistencies.  It was
similarly unfair in that context to focus on the list, and dismiss or fail
to analyse the evidence, unchallenged, of the witnesses who had attended
the FtT's hearing to attest as to the genuineness of the couple's
relationship.

Discussion and conclusions

First, in relation to ground (1), I accept Mr Melvin's submission that
although it is regrettable, that a typographical error must have occurred
and I am satisfied that ��24 and 25 must be read in the context of the FtT
previously and correctly referring himself to the burden of proof being
upon the respondent to prove that the marriage is one of convenience.  That
was in the context not only of the early reminder by the FtT of the test at
�5; but also the inconsistencies identified at �20; the discussion of those
inconsistencies by reference to the sponsor and witnesses at �21 and also
what the FtT regarded as the adverse history of the appellant at �22.  Put
in very simple terms, throughout the analysis, the substance of which is at
��19 to 22, it is all critical of the appellant and in those circumstances
it is clear that the criticism was in the context of the burden of proof
being on the respondent, and not the other way around.

However, where I do regard the FtT as erring is in relation to grounds (2)
and (3).  In concluding that there were material errors of law, I should
emphasise that assessments of credibility are nuanced and fact-specific
assessments and I am acutely conscious that it is not appropriate for me to
substitute my view as to what I have decided and equally, I do not have the
benefit of hearing all of the live evidence that the FtT had before him.

Nevertheless, I do regard there as being three crucial errors.  The first,
as Ms Bustani compellingly submitted, was the FtT's focus in �20 on
inconsistencies clearly recorded by the FtT as:

         "relied upon by the respondent [and] summarised at the end of the
         interview record."

The decision then listed 11 bullet-points of concerns, consistent with the
summaries at the end of the interview records.  The practical difficulty is
that although the FtT referred at �18 to having considered all of the
evidence, the FtT did not analyse whether the noted inconsistencies were
ones that were in the context of core, consistent accounts in other areas,
during lengthy interviews and any inconsistencies were merely marginal or
ancillary; or instead were ones of such gravity that even if the remainder
of the account was said to be plausible, the quality of the inconsistencies
raised such serious concerns, to outweigh the remainder of lengthy,
consistent accounts.

In the absence of such an analysis, I accept the criticism that instead,
the FtT impermissibly focussed only on the inconsistencies identified,
without considering the wider context.  This was particularly material
where the appellant had not received the interview notes until three days
before the FtT hearing.  In those circumstances, it was all the more
important that the FtT considered all of the answers in the interviews, not
least because the witnesses could not have been expected to have dealt with
the full interview in their written witness statements, for example to
highlight the areas where there were substantial consistencies, for
example, in relation to cohabitation.  The impermissible focus is material
where the core issue was the appellant's and sponsor's credibility.

The FtT's second error was the lack of his analysis of the three witnesses
other than the appellant and the sponsor.  The FtT noted at �21 the
witnesses' evidence (all unchallenged and all attesting as to the
genuineness of the marriage).  The FtT even went so far as to say that

         "it is quite possible that the sponsor and the witnesses honestly
         believe that the relationship is genuine and subsisting"

Mr Melvin's response was that such a comment was consistent with a marriage
of convenience, where the intention of the parties at the time they married
was relevant, and the marriage may then have blossomed into a genuine
relationship, or one party may have come to believe that the relationship
is a genuine one.

I accept Mr Melvin's submission that the correct focus must be on the
intention of the couple at the time they married.  However, here, it is far
from clear that the witness evidence was only limited to post-marital
evidence or could, instead, also relate to the couple's relationship before
getting married.  While the written witness statements appear to be brief,
that was also in the context of late disclosure of the marriage interview
records.  Each of the witnesses had taken the trouble to attend the FtT's
hearing, adopt their statements attesting to their belief in the
genuineness of the relationship.  Their evidence was unchallenged and could
well have crossed over into the earlier stages of the relationship. In
contrast, the FtT's analysis of their evidence was limited, at �21, to the
following:

         "I have considered the evidence of the sponsor and the witnesses
         who have provided statements.  I do not consider any of the
         statements adequately addresses the detailed inconsistencies in the
         marriage interviews or substantiates the assertion that the
         relationship between the appellant and the sponsor is genuine and
         subsisting. I accept that that it is quite possible that the
         sponsor and witnesses honestly believe that the relationship is
         genuine and subsisting..."

That, in my view, was not an adequate analysis of the witnesses' evidence.
In particular, there is no analysis of how reliance is placed upon
apparently inconsistent answers given by the sponsor during her interview,
if it is accepted that she is an innocent party to the relationship. To
take one example, one of the claimed inconsistencies was a reference to the
couple giving "differing accounts of their friends and of their last time
out together." How such an inconsistency would have a bearing on the
credibility of the couple's intentions when marrying, when the sponsor's
genuine intentions are apparently accepted as possible, is not analysed or
explained (although I am conscious that the test is not whether the
marriage is genuine and subsisting).

I emphasise that not in every case would it be necessary to ask questions
of witnesses and the FtT should not fall into the trap of carrying out an
enquiry of their own, in the absence of cross-examination. Nevertheless,
the FtT should have explained why the account of the witnesses had no
substantive bearing on the specific concerns identified.

The FtT's final error was to place weight, at �22, on the appellant's
admission that he had sought leave on the basis of a relationship with a
previous British citizen which was not genuine.  I have not carried out an
examination of all of the extensive FtT bundle, but Mr Melvin was unable to
refer me to any evidence or document where there was such an admission.
Moreover, there is a clear distinction between pursuing an asylum claim
unsuccessfully, and admitting that it had been made on a false basis.
Second, I accept Ms Bustani's submission, and Mr Melvin could not point to
any claimed relationship in that context being with a British citizen.

Bearing in mind that the sole issue was the intention of the couple at the
time that the marriage was entered into, I am satisfied that the FtT's
assessment of their credibility was critical. Each of the three identified
errors alone was material, so as to make the FtT's decision unsafe, and
they compounded one another.

Decision on error of law

In my view there are material errors here and I must set the FtT's decision
aside, without preserved findings of fact.

Disposal

With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
Statement and the necessary fact-finding (involving 5 witnesses) this is
clearly a case that has to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
complete rehearing.  All aspects of the claim must be addressed and there
are no preserved findings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside, without preserved findings of fact.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted  appeal  shall  not  be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Trevaskis.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  25th March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



