
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/00788/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2019                 |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         Mr Admola Azeez Aderibigbe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R O Ojukotola, of SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is a challenge by the Appellant against First-tier Tribunal Judge
Mensah ("the judge"), promulgated on 7 June 2019, by which she dismissed
the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 31 January
2019, refusing to issue a residence card under the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016, as amended.

In an application made on 29 December 2018, the Appellant had sought a
residence card on the basis that he was a family member of an EEA national
("the Sponsor"), Ms [PW], a citizen of the Netherlands.  The family
relationship arose out of a claimed proxy marriage said to have taken place
in Nigeria on 23 June 2018, it being apparently registered on 28 June of
that year.  In refusing the application the Respondent acknowledged that
proxy marriages would be considered valid in the United Kingdom provided
that it had taken place in compliance with the relevant laws and customs of
the country in question, in this case Nigeria.

Having referred to the documentary evidence that had been provided by the
Appellant, the refusal letter goes on to state as follows:

"The Home Office has carefully reviewed all documentation you have
provided, however there is no evidence this marriage has been conducted
within the laws of Nigeria by a competent third party and as there is no
evidence that the person signing the aforementioned documents 'Billy
Sherifat Abosede' has the relevant qualifications, has the relevant
authority to validate the marriage, that marriage is legal within the local
government and also within the laws of Nigeria."



The judge's decision

For reasons of his own, the Appellant elected to have his appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal decided without an oral hearing.  Thus, the matter came
before the judge "on the papers".

The judge identified the single issue in the case before her as being
whether the Appellant could show that he had entered into a valid customary
proxy marriage with the Sponsor.  Reference is then made to the decision of
the Upper Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24
(IAC).

The judge relied on that decision in two respects.  First, on the question
of whether the laws of the Netherlands recognised proxy marriages; second,
as to whether the various requirements for proxy marriages under Nigerian
law had been complied with.  In considering the documentary evidence and
its compliance with Nigerian law, the judge noted that the marriage
certificate omitted certain relevant information, for example the parties'
marriage, their usual place of residence, nationalities, and name of the
persons who consented to the marriage. She also noted that the Appellant
had failed to provide any independence evidence and that the signatory of
the marriage certificate and a confirmatory letter dated 28 June 2018 was
in fact a registrar under the relevant law, and that there was no
explanation as to why this individual had issued a marriage certificate
and/or the confirmatory letter when evidence from the British High
Commission apparently stated the contrary (in other words, that such
confirmatory letters/certificates were not in fact issued).

At paragraph 14 of her decision the judge states:

"Given the lack of evidence under Dutch law regarding a presumption of
validity, absent clear independent evidence to show such certificates are
issued, in light of the missing information in the marriage certificate and
absent evidence regarding the authority of the person signing the documents
to act as a registrar, I find this appeal fails."



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The grounds of appeal assert that the judge was wrong to have applied
Kareem in respect of the laws of other EU member states.  This was because
the Court of Appeal in the case of Awuku [2017] EWCA Civ 178 had overturned
that aspect of the Upper Tribunal's decision in Kareem.  The grounds also
assert that the judge had failed to consider the contents of a form (Form
MCM.1) which contained the evidence missing from the marriage certificate.

Further, the grounds complain that the judge had failed to "cite the
relevant Nigeria law that imposes a legal requirement for a third
party/independent confirmation beyond the Mushin Grade 'A' Customary Court
Registrar" and had failed or misunderstood evidence from the British High
Commission.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on 17
July 2019.




Decision on error of law

at the outset of the hearing, and in light of Awuku, Mr Bramble accepted
that the judge had erred in relying on Kareem insofar as it related to the
issue of recognition of proxy marriages under the laws of the other EU
member state, in this case the Netherlands. However, it was submitted that
this error was immaterial.

Mr Ojukotola submitted that there was no requirement for the Appellant to
have provided evidence to show that the person claiming to be the registrar
was who he said he was.  He confirmed that there was no such additional
evidence from the Appellant.  He suggested, by way of analogy, that if a
marriage certificate created in the United Kingdom, duly signed by a
registrar, there would be no need to adduce evidence to prove that that
person was in fact a registrar.

When asked to clarify his position on this issue, Mr Ojukotola put his case
in the following way: "There was no requirement for a competent third party
under the law and there was no need for Mr Abosede [the signatory of the
two documents in question] to have relevant qualifications."  He confirmed
that a registrar from the Customary Court did have to sign the relevant
documents.  Finally, it was submitted that the letter from the British High
Commission dated 4 February 2013 simply did not support the conclusion
reached by the judge in respect of the issuance of certificates.

In addition to his position on Kareem, Mr Bramble acknowledged that the
British High Commission letter may have been misinterpreted by the judge.
However, the reasons for refusal letter had clearly put the issue of the
signatory's status in issue.  It had not been accepted that that individual
was in fact a registrar.  Mr Bramble noted that there had been no evidence
from the Appellant in response to this issue being raised by the Respondent
from the outset.

I conclude that there are no material errors of law in the judge's decision
such that it should be set aside under section 12(1)(a) of the Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

There is an error in respect of the Kareem issue: there was no need for the
Appellant to show that proxy marriages are recognised under Dutch law
(although they are).  This error is clearly not of itself material, given
that the judge went on to consider the issue of the marriage in the context
of Nigerian law.

It is the case that the marriage certificate was missing a good deal of
relevant information.  However, the MCM.1 form did appear to contain the
relevant information.  It is right to say that the judge did not
specifically address this item of evidence.  I would also accept that the
British High Commission letter of 4 February 2013 does not support the
conclusion that confirmatory letters/certificates are not issued by the
Nigerian authorities.

Thus far, there are shortcomings in the judge's decision.  However, an
important finding of the judge was that the Appellant had failed to show,
by way of evidence, that the signatory of the marriage certificate and the
confirmatory letter (and indeed the MCM.1 form) actually held the status of
registrar under relevant Nigerian law.  Mr Ojukotola has accepted that
these documents had to have been signed by such an individual, although his
argument was that there was no need for them to have what he described as
"relevant qualifications".

As far as I can see, there was no evidence, at least no independent
evidence, to support the contention that the "registrar" in question did
not require any qualifications or, by implication, did not have to be a
properly appointed official.  It appears to be the case that the individual
had to be what is described as the "registrar of a Customary Court or Area
Court".  The signatory of the relevant documents was said to be a "court
registrar".  Therefore, if the status of the particular signatory had not
been a live issue in the appeal, the judge may well have materially erred
in concluding as she did, and the Appellant's challenge would probably be
made out.

However, the status of Mr Abosede had clearly been put in issue by the
Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter (see above).  On any view,
that should have put the Appellant on notice as to the case that he had to
meet on appeal, given that the burden of proving that the proxy marriage
was in accordance with Nigerian law fell upon her (see Cudjoe (Proxy
marriages: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 180 (IAC)).

As mentioned earlier, the Appellant adduced no additional evidence from any
credible source to show that the signatory on the relevant documents had in
fact been a registrar of a Customary Court or Area.  In light of this, I
conclude that the judge was entitled to find as she did on this particular
issue.  It follows that as it was open to the judge to find that the
signatory was not an appropriate official, the Appellant had in turn failed
to show that the documents had been issued by a "competent authority", with
the further consequence that he had failed to show that a proxy marriage
was undertaken in accordance with relevant Nigerian laws.  On this basis,
the Appellant could not show that she was a family member of the Sponsor
and her appeal was correctly dismissed by the judge.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]         Date: 17 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
