
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/01337/2019 (V)
                                                           EA/04625/2019 (V)
                                                           EA/04627/2019 (V)
                                                           EA/04632/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 September 2020                 |On 12 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Ijeoma [N]
                              Mr Alphonsus [O]
                                Miss [O I O]
                              Miss Ifunanya [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Dhanji, Counsel instructed by Garth Coates
Solicitors

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties, and neither party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant in this appeal is the Entry Clearance Officer.  However, for
convenience, I will refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
Tribunal.

The appellants are citizens of Nigeria who applied for EEA family permits
in order to accompany [OOI] ("OOI"), a Dutch national born on 10 July 2014,
to the UK.  The first appellant is OOI's mother.  The second appellant is
the husband of the first appellant and OOI's stepfather. The third
appellant is the daughter of the first and second appellants.  The fourth
appellant is the sister of the first appellant.

On 19 February 2020 the respondent refused to grant any of the appellants
an EEA family permit.  A separate decision was made in respect of each of
the appellants.

      a) The first appellant's application was refused on the basis that:


          i) she had not provided sufficient evidence to establish that she
             was OOI's primary carer and therefore did not meet the
             requirements of Regulation 16(2)(a) of the Immigration (EEA)
             Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations"); and


         ii) she is currently residing in Nigeria and therefore did not
             meet the requirements of Regulation 16(2)(b)(ii) and (iii).


      b) The second appellant's application was refused on the basis that he
         is currently residing in Nigeria and therefore did not meet the
         requirements of Regulation 16(2)(b)(ii) and (iii).


      c) The third appellant's application was refused on the basis that her
         parents' applications had been refused.


      d) The fourth appellant's application was refused as it was not
         accepted that she is related to either OOI or his primary carer;
         and because she is currently residing in Nigeria and therefore did
         not meet the requirements of Regulation 16(2)(b)(ii) and (iii).


The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where their appeal was
heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi ("the judge").  In a
decision promulgated on 12 November 2019, the judge allowed the appeal.
The respondent is now appealing against that decision.

Legislature Framework

Regulation 11(5)(b) provides that a person must be:

         '... accompanying an EEA national to, or joining an EEA national
         in, the United Kingdom and [the person] would be entitled to reside
         in the United Kingdom under regulation 16(2) were [the person] and
         the EEA national both in the United Kingdom.'


Regulation 12(2) of the 2016 Regulations provides:

         '(2)     An entry clearance officer must issue an EEA family permit
         to a person who applies and provides evidence demonstrating that,
         at the time at which the person first intends to use the EEA family
         permit, the person-


             (a)  would be entitled to be admitted to the United Kingdom
             because that person would meet the criteria in regulation
             11(5); and


             (b)  will [  ] be accompanying to, or joining in, the United
             Kingdom any person from whom the right to be admitted to the
             United Kingdom under the criteria in regulation 11(5) is
             derived.'


    0. Regulation 16 of the 2016 Regulations provides, in relevant part:

         '(1) A person has a derivative right to reside during any period in
         which the person-


             (a)  is not an exempt person; and


             (b)  satisfies each of the criteria in one or more of
             paragraphs (2) to (6).


         (2)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a)  the person is the primary carer of an EEA national; and


             (b)  the EEA national-


                  (i)  is under the age of 18;


                  (ii) resides in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient
                  person; and


                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom
                  if the person left the United Kingdom for an indefinite
                  period.


         ...


         (6)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-


             (a)  the person is under the age of 18;


             (b)  the person does not have leave to enter, or remain in,
             the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act [ (but see paragraph
             (7A))]1 ;


             (c)  the person's primary carer is entitled to a derivative
             right to reside in the United Kingdom under paragraph (2), (4)
             or (5); and


             (d)  the primary carer would be prevented from residing in the
             United Kingdom if the person left the United Kingdom for an
             indefinite period.'


Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge found that the first and second appellants were joint primary
carers of OOI and therefore satisfied Regulation 16(2)(a), on the basis
that the first appellant is his biological mother and the second appellant
has been named his legal guardian in Nigeria.  Having made these finding
about OOI's primary carers, the judge concluded that the first and second
appellants met the requirements of Regulation 16(2) and therefore qualified
for family permits under Regulations 12(2) and 11(5)(b).

The judge found that the third appellant satisfied the requirements of
16(6).

The judge found that fourth appellant did not meet the requirements of
16(6) because she was over the age of 18. However, the judge raised with
the parties whether the fourth appellant met the criteria of being an
extended family member of OOI pursuant to Regulation 8(2).  The judge
concluded that she did, on the basis that she is living, and will continue
to live, in the same household as OOI.

Grounds of Appeal and Respondent's Submissions

The respondent's case is set out in the grounds of appeal, written
submissions of Mr Whitwell dated 8 July 2020, further submissions made on
21 July 2020 and in Mr Whitwell's oral argument made at the error of law
hearing.

Mr Whitwell accepted that, pursuant to Regulation 11(5)(b), the first and
second appellants would be entitled to a family permit if they satisfied
the requirements of Regulation 16(2) even though they are outside the UK.
To the extent that the respondent's refusal letters expressed a contrary
view, he accepted that they were wrong.

However, he submitted that the judge erred in the application of Regulation
16(2) in two ways. Firstly, he argued that the judge erred by not
considering whether OOI was a self-sufficient person under Regulation
16(2)(b)(ii). Secondly, he argued that the judge did not give adequate
reasons to explain why it was found that both the first and second
appellants are primary carers of OOI.

With respect to the fourth appellant, Mr Whitwell argued that the judge was
not entitled to determine the question of whether she was an extended
family member under Regulation 8(2) without the respondent first carrying
out the extensive examination required by Regulation 12(5).  Regulation
12(5) provides that where an Entry Clearance Officer receives an
application for an EEA family permit by an extended family member an
extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant must
be undertaken by the Secretary of State and if the application is refused,
the Entry Clearance Officer must give reasons justifying the refusal unless
this is contrary to the interests of national security.  Mr Whitwell argues
that no such examination has been undertaken because an application as an
extended family was not made - the issue having been raised for the first
time at the First-tier Tribunal hearing by the judge.  He also argued that
the fourth appellant is dependent on the first appellant, not OOI, and
therefore Regulation 8 is not in any event met.

Submissions of the Appellants

Mr Dhanji argued that the respondent cannot now raise the issue of self-
sufficiency, as it had not previously been identified as an issue in
dispute.  He noted that it was not raised in the Refusal Decisions, Entry
Clearance Manager Review, or in the First-tier Tribunal where (as recorded
by the judge at paragraph 5 of the decision) the Presenting Officer
explicitly stated that he was only relying on the refusal letter.  He also
drew attention to the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal
where it is stated:

"The respondent also took no issue with the first and second appellants'
ability to meet the requirements of Regulations 16(2)(b)(ii) or
16(2)(b)(iii) that the sponsor child is a self-sufficient person and that
he could not remain in the UK if the first and second appellants left for
an indefinite period."


He argued that the judge cannot have fallen into error for not addressing
an issue that was not raised.

In respect of the respondent's argument that the judge has not given
adequate reasons for finding that the first and second appellants were
joint primary carers for OOI, Mr Dhanji argued that at paragraph 9 of the
decision the judge made clear findings of fact that are supported by the
evidence: the first appellant is OOI's biological mother and the second
appellant has been granted joint legal guardianship with her.

With respect to the fourth appellant, Mr Dhanji's argued that it was open
to the judge to find that she is OOI's aunt and therefore that she is a
"relative of an EEA national" for the purposes of Regulation 8(2)(a).  He
argued that 8(2)(b) was clearly satisfied because she and OOI were living
together, as part of the same family unit, and as such were members of the
same household.

Analysis

The first and second appellants

In order to establish that the decision to refuse them a family permit
breached Regulations 11(5)(b) and 12(2), the burden was on the first and
second appellants to show, on the balance of probabilities, that the
criteria specified in Regulation 16(2) would be met if they and OOI were in
the UK. The criteria they needed to establish, therefore, were that, if
they were in the UK, they would be:

      e) OOI's primary carers (16(2)(a));


      f) OOI would be a self-sufficient person (16(2)(b)(ii)); and


      g) OOI would be unable to remain in the UK if they left the UK for an
         indefinite period (16(2)(b)(iii)).


The respondent, in the refusal decisions, only addressed the first of these
issues (whether the first and second appellants were OOI's primary carers
under 16(2)(a)). No consideration was given to the question of OOI's self-
sufficiency (16(2)(b)(ii)) or to his ability to remain in the UK without
his parents(16(2)(b)(iii)). These points were not conceded; rather, they
were not addressed at all.

An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under the 2016 Regulations is brought
on the basis that a decision breaches an appellant's rights under the EU
Treaties in respect of entry to or residence in the United Kingdom, and is
not limited to issues raised in the refusal decision. See, by analogy, RM
(Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039. Accordingly, even
though the refusal letters did not address whether OOI met the conditions
specified in 16(2)(b)(ii) and (iii), it nonetheless remained incumbent on
the appellants (the burden being on them) to establish before the First-
tier Tribunal that these criteria were satisfied.

However, if a point is not put to a judge, it will not generally be an
error of law for a judge to not consider it. See GS (India) v SSHD [2015]
EWCA Civ 40 at [89] and BM (Iran) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 491 at [17]. It is
clear from reading the decision as a whole that the Presenting Officer,
taking an approach that was consistent with the refusal letters, did not
put to the judge, and did not contend in any way, that the conditions of
Regulations 16(2)(b)(ii) and 16(2)(b)(iii) were not met. Indeed, although
the judge did not explicitly refer to a concession, at paragraph 5 of the
decision it is stated that the Presenting Officer "relied on the refusal
letter only", which indicates that the Presenting Officer accepted that
Regulations 16(2)(b)(ii) and 16(2)(b)(iii) were not at issue. The
appellants' position, as set out in their skeleton argument before the
First-tier Tribunal, was that the respondent did not take issue with
Regulations 16(2)(b)(ii) and 16(2)(b)(iii). In these circumstances, where
both parties proceeded before the First-tier Tribunal on the basis that the
issues under Regulations 16(2)(b)(ii) and 16(2)(b)(iii) were not in
dispute, and the Presenting Officer effectively conceded the point by
stating that he was only relying on the refusal letter, the judge cannot be
expected to have considered - and did not fall into error by not
considering -  Regulations 16(2)(b)(ii) and 16(2)(b)(iii). Accordingly,
although it was necessary for the first and second appellants to establish
OOI's self-sufficiency, because of the approach adopted by the respondent
before the First-tier Tribunal, failure to consider the issue was not an
error of law.

The judge gave clear reasons for finding that the first and second
appellants are joint primary carers of OOI. The reasons, which are set out
in paragraph 9 of the decision, are that the first appellant is OOI's
mother, and that the second appellant (her husband) has been appointed his
Guardian (by a Nigerian court). These are valid and sustainable reasons:
there is therefore no merit to this challenge to the decision.

For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the grounds of appeal do not
identify an error of law in respect of the decision concerning the first
and second appellants.

The third appellant

It was common ground that the third appellant's appeal fell to be decided
in line with that of the first and second appellants.

The fourth appellant

In order for the fourth appellant to be an extended family member under
Regulation 8(2) she would have to either be dependent on OOI or a member of
his household.

The judge found that Regulation 8(2) was satisfied because the fourth
appellant has been (and would continue) living as part of the same family
unit and household as OOI.

However, being part of the same family unit and household as OOI is not the
same as being a member of his household. See AA (Algeria) v The Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1741, where it was made
clear that living under the same roof as an EEA national did not equate to
being a member of that person's household.

Whilst the fourth appellant may be a member of the first or second
appellant's (or their combined) household, plainly she is not a member of
OOI's household, as OOI is a young child. The judge therefore materially
erred in law by finding that the fourth appellant is an extended family
member of OOI. As the evidence cannot, on any legitimate view, support the
conclusion that the fourth appellant is either dependent on OOI or a member
of his household, I remake the decision in respect of the fourth appellant
and dismiss her appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.



Notice of Decision

In respect of the first three appellants:

      h) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
         of an error of law.


      i) The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.


In respect of the fourth appellant:

      j) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an
         error of law.


      k) I set aside the decision and remake the decision. My remade
         decision is to dismiss the fourth appellant's appeal against the
         decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.



Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
Date:  7 October 2020

