
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01561/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2021                            |On 02 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                QERIM BOKCIU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr. P Collins, Solicitor, Zoi Bilderberg Law Practice
For the Respondent: Mr. C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Khosla ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 11 September 2019 by which the
appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing to
issue him with an EEA residence card was dismissed.

UTJ Keith granted permission to appeal on one ground alone, ground 9, by a
decision dated 14 May 2020.

The appellant continues to enjoy a right of appeal against the Secretary of
State's decision following the United Kingdom's exit from the European
Union consequent to Schedule 3, paragraph 5 of the Immigration and Social
Security Co-ordination (EU Withdrawal) Act 2020 (Consequential, Saving,
Transitional and Transitory Provisions) (EU Exit) Regulations 2020.

Remote hearing

The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at Field
House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public. The
hearing and its start time were listed in the cause list. I was addressed
by the representatives in the same way as if we were together in the
hearing room. I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open
court; that the open justice principle has been secured; that no party has
been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

Mr. Collins provided an explanation as to why the appellant was unable to
attend the hearing remotely. The appellant's wife was able to attend the
hearing remotely.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not issue an anonymity order and neither party
sought one before me.

Background

The appellant is a national of Albania. He asserts by means of his
application for an EEA residence card that he entered the United Kingdom
clandestinely in September 2014 though he previously informed the Secretary
of State that he arrived in 2012.

He was encountered on 8 February 2018 at a caf� in north London and
detained. He was subsequently served removal papers as an illegal entrant.

Two applications for an EEA residence card made on behalf of the appellant
were refused by the Secretary of State in February and March 2018 due to a
failure to provide sufficient evidence as to his relationship with his EEA
sponsor.

Two further applications were refused in June and September 2018 as the
Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant was in a durable
relationship akin to marriage with his EEA sponsor.

The appellant married his wife, a Romanian national, in London on 8
September 2018.

A further application for an EEA residence card was made on 28 November
2018. Following interviews with the appellant and his sponsor held on 26
February 2019, the Secretary of State refused the application by a decision
dated 22 March 2019. Reliance was placed upon several inconsistencies in
the answers given by the couple at interview. The Secretary of State
concluded that the marriage was one of convenience, undertaken for the sole
purpose of the appellant securing an immigration advantage.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

The hearing was held at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 23 August 2019. Both
the appellant and his wife gave evidence. An uncle of the appellant also
attended and gave evidence on his behalf.

The Judge lawfully applied the relevant burden and standard of proof. He
made several adverse credibility findings, including:

          . As to the couple's inconsistency in interview as to what they
            had done the previous day, later said to be consequent to
            confusion arising from the questions asked, the Judge concluded,
            'I find that there could be no confusion whatsoever about this.
            Clearly, the Appellant's wife was not confused. I find that the
            reason why the Appellant's answer was inconsistent with his wife
            is because one or other of them was lying. There cannot be any
            other reasonable explanation for this', at [61] of the decision.


          . The appellant had a lack of knowledge about when his wife
            started working at a caf� despite his evidence that he went
            there every other day and had been a regular there long before
            she started working: '...  his lack of knowledge about when she
            started working there, which he put down to his lack of
            curiosity, can only be explained by the fact that he knew little
            about his wife because they were not in a genuine relationship',
            at [62].


          . One or either of the couple were lying as to the appellant's
            friendship with the owner of the caf�: 'The Appellant's wife was
            unequivocal that they knew each other well and were friends
            whereas the Appellant's evidence was to the effect that they
            were mere acquaintances. Again, there was no reasonable
            explanation for this inconsistency', at [63].


          . 'I find the Appellant's explanation as to why he did not know
            the surname of his son to be bordering on the ridiculous. I do
            not find it credible that the Appellant who claims to treat the
            child like his own child, would not know his stepson's surname
            bearing in mind that he had been in the relationship with the
            child's mother from well before the child's birth, that they had
            been living together since late 2016, he had been looking after
            the child while his wife was at work, and that from January of
            this year he had been taking the child to nursery', at [64].


          . 'I find that the Appellant's answer about when he and his wife
            started dating is completely at odds with his wife's', at [65].


          . 'It simply beggars belief that the Appellant would not be at all
            curious about the whereabouts of the child's biological father
            or whether or not the child saw his father ...  Any responsible
            father would want to know if their child (or the child that they
            treated like their own child) was having contact with a known
            convict, and plainly the offences must have been serious since
            they attracted a custodial sentence', at [67].

At [68] the Judge confirmed that such findings alone were sufficient for
him to find that the appellant and his wife were lying as to their
relationship. However, he adopted a belt and braces approach and considered
further evidence presented on behalf of the appellant, giving reasons as to
why he did not find such evidence reliable.

The Judge decided at [71]:

         'I find the appellant and his wife to be wholly untruthful
            witnesses'

The Judge considered the evidence of the appellant's uncle and found, at
[72], that it did not take the appellant's case any further. He was not
considered to be an independent witness, and in any event his evidence:

         '... did not go to the significant and numerous inconsistencies
         between the Appellant's interview and his wife's interview'.

As to photographs relied upon by the appellant, the Judge observed, at [58]
and [76]:

         '58. The Appellant also relies on the documentary evidence adduced
            at his appeal including his photographs of their marriage, and
            other photographs, but it was not suggested that the documentary
            evidence goes to the inconsistencies given in the interview.'


         ...


         '76. I note that there are photographs of the Appellant with his
            wife but just as I find that they rehearsed their account, I
            find that the photographs have been staged.'

The Judge concluded, at [77]-[79]:

         '77. I accept that as an irregular migrant the Appellant may have
            had difficulty obtaining documentation showing that he and his
            wife were living at the same address. However, even if the
            Appellant was able to produce more documentation this would not,
            in my view, have overcome the inconsistencies in their
            interviews. In my view, the only explanation for those
            inconsistencies when one weighs their evidence in the round is
            that one or other of them (or indeed both) were lying.


         78. I find that the Appellant and his wife had no compunction in
            lying both to the Respondent and to this Tribunal.


         79. Given my above findings, it follows that I find that the
            Appellant's and his wife's marriage is a marriage of convenience
            as defined in the 2016 Regulation. Therefore, the Appellant does
            not meet the definition of 'family member' in Regulation 7 of
            the 2016 Regulations.'

Grounds of Appeal

The appellant filed unsigned grounds of appeal running to 14 pages. Nine
separate grounds of appeal were identified.

By means of a careful consideration of the application for permission to
appeal, UTJ Keith addressed all nine grounds and granted permission on
ground 9 alone. It is appropriate that his decision is detailed in full:

         1) The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time, the decision
            of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khosla, ('the FtT'), who, in a
            decision promulgated on 11 September 2019 ('the Decision'),
            dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse
            his application for an EEA residence card on the basis of his
            marriage to an EEA (Romanian) national, Ms Roman. The respondent
            had refused the application on the basis that the couple's
            marriage was one of convenience, and the FtT upheld this
            decision, regarding the couple's evidence as untruthful,
            including inconsistencies identified by the respondent during
            marriage interviews.


         2) The appellant appeals on 9 grounds, with which I deal in turn
            below. Grounds (1) and (2) assert that the FtT applied the wrong
            burden and standard of proof. Contrary to the grounds, the FtT
            referred himself correctly at [14] to Rosa v. Secretary of State
            for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and the correct
            standard of proof at [13]. The FtT's findings were in that
            context and the grounds disclose no arguable error of law.


         3) Ground (3) asserts that by referring to parts of a large bundle
            of evidence is irrelevant, the FtT had failed to consider
            material evidence and focused inappropriately on the contents of
            the marriage interviews. However, contrary to the grounds, the
            FtT considered the wider evidence, in particular, but not
            limited to, the detailed additional evidence and submissions on
            the context and explanation for supposed inconsistencies in the
            marriage interviews, the evidence of an uncle, and photographs.
            The reference to the bundle being large and containing
            irrelevant material discloses no arguable error of law.


         4) Grounds (4) and (5) assert that the FtT failed to consider the
            appellant's explanations that there were no inconsistencies in
            the marriage interviews, as alleged, and instead focused on
            inaccurate summaries stated in the respondent's refusal letter,
            without an analysis of the actual answers provided. However,
            contrary to the grounds, the FtT considered in extensive detail
            those explanations ([25 a to y]) and the FtT's analysis
            discloses no arguable error of law.


         5) Ground (6) asserts that the FtT erred in imposing a requirement
            that an uncle be an 'independent' witness for his evidence to be
            assessed as credible. However, as the FtT make clear at [72], he
            attached limited weight to that evidence because it was of
            limited assistance in resolving the inconsistencies in the
            evidence of the appellant and Ms. Roman. the ground discloses no
            arguable error of law.


         6) Ground (7) asserts that the FtT had erred in focusing on the
            issue of the appellant wanting to have a cigarette break during
            the interview, when there was a reference to the appellant
            needing a break in interview notes, which might have a bearing
            on inconsistencies in the appellant's answers. However, as
            pointed out by the FtT, this issue was raised by the uncle
            ([72]); and the reference cited in the grounds to the interview
            notes indicates that the appellant was provided the break. The
            ground discloses no arguable error of law.


         7) Ground (8) asserts that the FtT erred in assessing the
            appellant's and Ms. Roman's interview answers as rehearsed, when
            this had not been asserted in the respondent's refusal. However,
            the FtT was entitled to consider, and assess the possibility, in
            the context of the claim of a marriage of convenience, that some
            consistency in answers might be explained by prior rehearsal,
            when key elements of the answers contain inconsistencies that
            could not satisfactorily be explained. The ground discloses no
            arguable error of law.


         8) Ground (9) asserts that the FtT erred in disregarding
            photographic evidence of the couple's relationship, on the basis
            that the photographs were 'staged' (FtT). While the FtT was
            entitled to scrutinise the material, the FtT arguably erred in
            explaining the basis for that finding or providing the parties
            the opportunity to give evidence on that possibility. Bearing in
            mind that the FtT's conclusion that the couple's marriage was
            one of convenience is necessarily fact sensitive, the issue is
            arguably material to that conclusion. Permission is granted on
            that solid ground.'

Consequent to directions issued by UTJ Rimington on 13 July 2020 the
Secretary of State filed a response, authored by Mr. Diwnycz, Senior
Presenting Officer, dated 20 August 2020 observing, inter alia:

         '... R is prepared to state that the matter of the staging of the
         photographs, as found by the FTT IJ, is the only point on which she
         is sighted with which she can give some qualified agreement. The
         HOPO did not record any putting of the issue to the appellant by
         the judge. That acknowledges a potential for error by the FTT IJ.

         R is of the opinion that the other findings of the judge stand
         unvitiated by the finding on the photographs. R is of the opinion
         that all the findings of the FTT save that on the photographs be
         preserved. The most apposite format for the review of the FTT
         decision complained of would be by way of a live hearing, during
         which the court may examine the photographs again and have their
         provenance adumbrated.'

Decision on Error of Law

Mr.  Collins represented the appellant with his usual skill, observing that
the ground before me was a narrow one. He asserted that the photographs
were central to the consideration as to whether the marriage was either
genuine or one of convenience. In such circumstances the Judge acted
unlawfully in effectively placing the photographs into a different category
of evidence to the rest relied upon by the appellant. By not asking the
witnesses as to his concerns that the photographs were 'staged' the Judge
had acted unfairly and failed to consider all matters in the round.

Mr. Collins placed particular emphasis upon the failure of the Judge to put
his concerns to the appellant's uncle who had attended the wedding, the
reception and the hearing.

I have considered the photographs relied upon by the appellant. They are
located in a bundle prepared by his representatives and sent to the First-
tier Tribunal under cover of a letter dated 16 August 2019. They are to be
found at pages 212 to 269 of the bundle and consist of one hundred and
twelve (112) photographs that solely relate to the wedding ceremony, held
at a civic registry office, and the wedding reception, held at a
bar/restaurant.

Twenty-eight (28) of the photographs were taken at the wedding ceremony.
Many of the photographs appear to be taken seconds apart. The attendees are
identifiable as the appellant, his wife, his stepson, and two male
witnesses.

Several of the photographs of the reception appear to be taken seconds
apart. They establish that approximately 20 people were in attendance. Mr.
Collins agreed at the hearing as to such number. The appellant's wife can
be seen to be wearing her wedding dress. A wedding cake is identifiable. A
number of photographs were taken during the meal. There are several
photographs of guests dancing.

No other photographs were relied upon by the appellant showing shared
instances of the time the couple have spent together since the commencement
of their relationship, said by the appellant in his application for a
residence card to have been in January 2015.

The failure of the Judge to put his concerns as to the photographs to the
appellant and witnesses at the hearing constitutes an error of law. The
appellant should have been notified of such concerns and permitted the
opportunity to address them: Browne v. Dunn (1893) 6 R. 67. I further find
that in circumstances where it is not disputed that the wedding ceremony
took place it is an error of fact, and in these circumstances an error of
law, to declare that the photographs were 'staged'.

However, despite his efforts on behalf of the appellant, Mr. Collins comes
nowhere close to undermining the reasoned observation of the Judge at [58]
of his decision that the photographs were incapable of aiding the appellant
in respect of the many inconsistencies provided by the couple at interview.
The lack of basic knowledge as to personal history and shared events
exhibited at the interview was such that photographic evidence confirming
the undisputed fact as to a wedding ceremony and subsequent reception
having taken place could not on any rational basis be said to cure such
significant inconsistencies.

Consequently, whilst the Judge erred in his consideration at [76] of his
decision, there is no rational basis for concluding that such error was
material. The photographs are limited in their nature and the significant
inconsistencies lawfully identified by the Judge were themselves sufficient
to lawfully establish that the appellant's marriage is one of convenience.

The appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
material error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sent to the parties on 11 September
2020 is upheld and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 January 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and so no fee can be awarded.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 January 2021


