
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/02674/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 December 2019                       |On 20 December 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                Ahmed Shahir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan of Counsel, instructed directly
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                      (Given orally on 4 December 2019)

Introduction

The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born in December 1992.  He
appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge
O'Callaghan, challenging a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated
on 10 May 2019 dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of State for the
Home Department's decision of 26 October 2015 refusing to issue him with an
EEA residence card as an extended family member of Mr Abdullah Sefati who,
as we understand it, is the appellant's brother-in-law.

Secretary of State's decision

In refusing the appellant's application, the Secretary of State rejected
both the contention that the appellant was dependent on Mr Sefati prior to
his (the appellant's) arrival in the United Kingdom on 4 June 2012 and the
further contention that the appellant was dependent upon, or lived in the
household of, Mr Sefati subsequent to his (the appellant's) arrival here.

Legal Background

Article 3(2) of the Citizens Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC), states as
follows:

"Article 3

1    This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or reside
in a Member State other than that of which they are a national, and to
their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or
join them.

2.   Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence the
persons concerned may have in their own right, the host member state shall,
in accordance with its national legislation, facilitate entry and residence
for the following reasons:

(a)  any other family members, irrespective of their nationality, not
falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in the country
from which they have come, are dependants or members of the household of
the Union citizen having primary right of residence ...;

(b)  the partner with whom the Union Citizen has a durable relationship,
duly attested

             The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination
             of the personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of
             entry or residence to these people"

             [emphasis added]

Article 3(2) of the Citizen's Directive was, for the purposes of the
instant appeal, incorporated into UK law by regulation 8 of the Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2006 (although there have been subsequent EEA
Regulations, given the date of the application in the instant case it is
the 2006 Regulations which apply).

 1. Regulation 8 of the 2006 EEA Regulations  is  headed  "Extended  Family
    Member" and reads:

         "(1) In these Regulations 'extended family member' means  a  person
          who is not a family member of an  EEA  national  under  Regulation
          7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in  paragraph
          (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2) A person satisfies the  condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
          person is a relative of an  EEA  national,  his  spouse  or  civil
          partner and -

             (a) the person is residing in a country other than the  United
             Kingdom and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a  member
             of his household;

             ...

             (c) the person satisfied the condition in (a), has joined  the
             EEA national  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  continues  to  be
             dependent upon him or to be  a  member  of  his  household.  "
             Regulation 8 of the 2006 EEA Regulations states:

The meaning of dependency, as applied in the instant scenario, was
summarised in the decision of Lebon [1987] ECR 2811, where at [43] the
Court of Justice of the European Union stated as follows:

"Dependent on them means that members of the family of a Community national
established in another member state within the meaning of Article 43 EC
[which was subsequently changed] need the material support of that
Community national or his or her spouse in order to meet their essential
needs in the state of origin of those family members or the state from
which they have come at the time when they apply to join the Community
national."

This approach has been approved domestically by the Court of Appeal in Lim
v Entry Clearance Officer [2015] EWCA Civ 1383, in which the Court said at
[29]:

"Receipt of support is a necessary but not sufficient condition.  It is
still necessary to determine that a family member is dependent in the sense
of being in need of the assistance.  I accept that the authorities clearly
establish that it is irrelevant why he or she is dependent, whether because
he has given his money away or because he is unwilling to work, save for
abuse of rights being established, but paragraph 62 of Pedro [an earlier
case of the Court of Appeal] does not establish that dependency is
determined by the mere fact that the EU national makes resources available
to the dependent relative."

Discussion and Decision

Returning to the instant case, the First-tier Tribunal rejected the
appellant's case on both limbs of the requirements under regulation 8 of
the 2006 Regulations/Article 3 of the Citizen's Directive. In challenging
this decision, the appellant drafted grounds of appeal without legal
assistance.

Mr Khan summarised the grounds of challenge thus:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal's failure to adjourn the proceedings
             to enable production of evidence from the appellant in support
             of his contention that he was not working in a pizza shop when
             encountered there in a uniform by immigration officials was
             procedurally unfair;

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal's adverse credibility findings are
             perverse;

Taking these grounds in turn, the first ground is targeted at the
conclusion in paragraph 26 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision that the
appellant was working in a pizza shop in the UK and thus was not dependent
on his sponsor post-arrival. The evidence relied upon by the Secretary of
State in support of such assertion was only produced on the day of the
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant contends that he
could have provided evidence to the contrary had he been given an
opportunity to do so. Thus, he says, the First-tier's findings were founded
on a procedural unfairness.

At first blush there is some merit in the assertion that the First-tier
Tribunal ought to have adjourned the hearing to allow the appellant to
produce the evidence that he asserts contradicts the SSHD's position, given
the late hour at which the Secretary of State disclosed her evidence.
However, when further analysed it is clear that the refusal to adjourn the
proceedings could not and did not have any material impact on the outcome
of the appeal and therefore did not render the proceedings procedurally
unfair.

First, the issue of whether the appellant has been dependent on his sponsor
post his arrival in the UK was only one two issues the First-tier Tribunal
was required to determine. The appellant required success on both issues to
succeed in his appeal. He was unsuccessful on both limbs and we do not
accept that the findings made in relation to the appellant working in a
pizza shop post his arrival in the United Kingdom impinged on the adverse
findings made in regard to the appellant's claimed pre-arrival dependency
on the sponsor.

Second, the First-tier Tribunal made clear that even absent the adverse
finding on the issue of whether the appellant worked in a pizza shop in the
United Kingdom, it would nevertheless have found against him on the issue
of post-arrival dependency.  This is made clear in the second sentence of
paragraph 27, where the Tribunal states "I find, in any event that there is
a lack of credible documentary evidence that the appellant has been
maintained by the sponsor since his arrival in the United Kingdom."  That
is a finding that was open to the First-tier Tribunal.

In any event, the appellant has now produced the evidence that he says that
he would have produced had the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal been
adjourned. In our view that evidence is not capable of altering the First-
tier Tribunal's conclusion. It does not, contrary to the claim made by the
appellant, demonstrate that he was not working in the pizza shop, nor is it
capable of demonstrating such.

The evidence that the appellant now relies upon is a document authored by
Immigration Enforcement and headed "Objection Outcome Notice (Penalty
Reduced) Illegal Working". It is a notification to the owner of a pizza
shop that, although he/she previously incurred a Civil Penalty Charge of
�15000 for employing a person who was not entitled to work in the UK, that
charge has been reduced to �10000 upon consideration of representations.
The person named as the illegal worker in the notice is not the appellant.

The appellant asserts that the fact that his name is not on the notice
demonstrates that he was not working illegally at the pizza shop. We do not
accept that this is the case. The notice refers to the initial Civil
Penalty Notice having been issued on the 8 June 2017. It makes no mention
of the 21 April 2017, the date that it is said that the appellant was found
'working' in the pizza shop. The document now produced does not demonstrate
a mistake of fact by the First-tier Tribunal, nor is it capable of doing
so.

In all the circumstances, the failure to adjourn to allow the appellant to
produce such evidence has not been demonstrated to have led to procedural
unfairness.

The second ground of challenge is an attack on the general credibility
findings of the First-tier Tribunal which, at the hearing, Mr Khan resolved
down to the assertion that the First-tier Tribunal's credibility findings
are perverse.

We reject this contention and conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's
decision contains clear adequately reasoned findings of fact, demonstrates
that it took account of all relevant evidence, and is rational in its
conclusions.

The assertion in the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing
to take account of Home Office guidance on the assessment of credibility in
refugee status cases is unarguable. The Tribunal was not obliged to take
account of such guidance, and there is nothing in the decision which
suggests that when coming to its conclusions on credibility the First-tier
Tribunal took an approach which was not open to it.

The grounds make reference to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 369, which is also entirely irrelevant for the
purposes of the instant case and Mr Kahn did not submit to the contrary.

The First-tier Tribunal's findings on the issue of pre-arrival dependency
are admirably clear.  The appellant did not put forward sufficient evidence
of dependency pre-arrival to make out his case. We emphasise that it is not
only the sending of monies by the sponsor to the appellant, which is a
necessary element of dependency, but it must also be demonstrated that such
monies were necessary for the appellant to meet his essential living costs.
 There was simply no evidence on this latter issue before the First-tier
Tribunal that could have led to a positive conclusion for the appellant, as
the First-tier Tribunal found at [21].

We observe, although not a point taken by the First-tier Tribunal, that in
his application form for an EEA residence card (which led to the decision
under challenge) the appellant was specifically asked (in section 6
thereof) whether he was dependent on his sponsor prior to coming to the
United Kingdom. He answered in the negative.

In our conclusion, given the available evidence the First-tier Tribunal did
not err in concluding as it did on the issue of pre-arrival dependency;
indeed, we find that the First-tier Tribunal was bound to come to the
conclusion that the appellant had not made out his case on this issue.

We finally turn to briefly address the assertion in the grounds that the
First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider Article 8 ECHR. This is
not a point that Mr Khan addressed during the course of his submissions,
and he was correct not to do so. Following the Court of Appeal's decisions
in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1223 and Amirteymour [2017] EWCA Civ 353
this ground is wholly unarguable.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                              Date 17 December 2019
Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor




























