
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/03510/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 June 2021                     |On: 30 June 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                     Mrs sangeeta malhotra chander kanta
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rahman, consultant, Jaswal Johnstone LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)
    refusing to issue the appellant  with  an  EEA  Family  Permit  as  the
    dependent relative of her son who is married to a Polish national  (the
    EEA sponsor).



Anonymity

 2. No application for anonymity was  made  and  there  appears  to  be  no
    obvious reason why anonymity should be directed.

The decision under appeal

 3. On 21 June 2019, the ECO refused the appellant's application for an EEA
    Family  Permit.  The  reasons  given  were  that  the  money   transfer
    remittances which were submitted dated from immediately  prior  to  the
    application and  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's  family
    circumstances including her financial position which would  prove  that
    her essential living needs could  not  be  met  without  the  financial
    support of the sponsor.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15 May 2020. That decision was set aside by the
    Upper Tribunal, on the papers, in a decision promulgated on 11 December
    2020, with a direction that the matter be remade in the Upper Tribunal.
    None of the previous findings were preserved.

The hearing

 5. The appellant's son, Mr Anuj Malhotra was  the  sole  witness.  He  was
    examined and cross-examined thoroughly by the representatives. I made a
    note of Mr Malhotra's evidence and the submissions made in my record of
    proceedings and have taken them into consideration in determining  this
    matter. Consequently, I will not rehearse the evidence and  submissions
    except where it is relevant to my findings.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The relevant legal provision in  this  case  is  Regulation  7  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 which treats as  a  "family  member"
    the "dependent direct relatives"  in  the  ascending  line  of  an  EEA
    national who is a qualified person, or that of their  spouse  or  civil
    partner. If the requirements of the Regulations are met, Regulation  12
    states that an EEA Family Permit  "must"  be  issued.  The  sole  issue
    before me  was  whether  the  appellant  was  dependent  upon  the  EEA
    national.

 7. I found Mr Malhotra to  be  a  witness  of  truth.  His  testimony  was
    detailed, given without evasion and was  broadly  consistent  with  the
    other evidence before me. Indeed, Mr Whitwell did  not  seek  to  argue
    that there were issues with the witness's credibility, the emphasis  of
    his  submissions  being  on  the  absence  of  supporting   documentary
    evidence.  While I note that the  documentary  evidence  had  not  been
    updated since the earlier appeal, this was  owing  to  the  solicitor's
    decision not to seek permission to adduce further evidence in the Upper
    Tribunal rather than any omission on the part of the sponsors.

 8. I accept that the EEA sponsor's  financial  support  of  the  appellant
    commenced following the death of the latter's husband in May  2017  and
    continued to date. Mr Malhotra's evidence was  that  his  wife  brought
    cash to India during two of her visits to India.  I accept as plausible
    the explanation he gave as to why there is no documentary  evidence  of
    the exchange of pounds  to  rupees,  that  being  that  informal  money
    changers were used. Furthermore, I am prepared to accept Mr  Malhotra's
    explanation that he wrongly used the  term  "sent"  instead  of  "gave"
    regarding how his wife transferred funds to him during her  visits  and
    that this was, in essence, a slip of the  tongue.   After  Mr  Malhotra
    joined his wife in the UK, funds were indeed sent by him and  his  wife
    to the appellant by Western Union.  Mr Malhotra and his  wife  are  now
    parents to a daughter and are both are still employed, and I accept  Mr
    Malhotra's account that he  and  his  wife  continue  to  send  varying
    amounts of funds to the appellant.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the appellant had referred  to  receiving  a
    variable income in the visa application form but this accords  with  Mr
    Malhotra's account of the appellant's outgoings  being  dependent  upon
    whether she had to pay for medical treatment in any  particular  month.
    It is also the case that the Western Union remittances are  of  varying
    amounts.   There is no inconsistency in the evidence here.

10. The ECO was concerned that the remittances commenced only from December
    2018 however this is consistent with Mr Malhotra's  evidence  that  the
    appellant did not require financial support while her husband was still
    alive because the latter continued to work until  he  passed  away.  In
    addition, Mr Malhotra was living with his mother until  he  arrived  in
    the UK in 2018 and during that  time  his  wife  contributed  funds  in
    person during visits and he was working in India. I  therefore  do  not
    accept that there was a need for evidence  of  substantial  remittances
    over a prolonged period of time as the ECO contended.

11. There is no evidence to support the submission that the  appellant  has
    other sources of income. It was not disputed that Mr Malhotra  was  the
    only son, that remittances of varying amounts had been made by  Western
    Union, that the appellant is widowed and had never worked. Mr  Malhotra
    credibly explained why his late father's  savings  had  run  out,  with
    reference to the dowries of his three  sisters  and  bills  for  cancer
    treatment. The evidence before me was that the appellant's late husband
    was a self-employed accountant paid in cash who  kept  his  savings  in
    cash. The explanation that the appellant's husband had no pension as  a
    self-employed person is plausible. I accept that other than the  modest
    family home, the appellant has no assets or savings and is dependent on
    money sent by the EEA sponsor and Mr Malhotra for her material support.

12. I am bound by the judgment in Lim [2015] EWCA Civ  1383  where  it  was
    held that it was not enough to show that the financial support  was  in
    fact provided by the EEA national to  a  family  member  but  that  the
    family member must need that support  in  order  to  meet  their  basic
    needs. Mr Malhotra's evidence was that the funds sent by  him  and  his
    wife were used to pay for food, medical bills and utility bills. I find
    that the funds sent are required for the appellant's  essential  needs,
    with the exception of accommodation.

13. I have carefully considered Mr Whitwell's submission that the appellant
    could sell the family home which Mr Malhotra believed  was  worth  ï¿½12-
    13,000, however she would still require accommodation and there was  no
    evidence before me to show that the sale proceeds would support her for
    very long as she would then need to pay rent.   In any event, it is not
    necessary for an EEA sponsor to meet  the  appellant's  every  need  in
    order for the appellant to be considered a dependent relative under the
    Regulations.

14. I accept that there exists a situation of real dependency  between  the
    appellant and sponsors in that  the  appellant  is  in  need  of  their
    material support.  Although it is legally irrelevant why the  appellant
    is dependent, it is easily explained by her widowhood and  the  absence
    of savings. There  is  no  evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant  could  support  herself  without  the  sponsors'   financial
    support. Nor was there any evidence that  the  appellant  could  obtain
    material support from her married daughters. Mr Malhotra explained that
    his family are a  traditional  Punjabi  family  where  it  is  a  son's
    responsibility to  look  after  parents  whereas  married  sisters  had
    responsibility for their husbands and children.  Furthermore,  I  heard
    that none of his sisters worked and therefore had no money of their own
    to contribute. While I  accept  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  as  to  the
    paucity of supporting evidence, but this is a case where  the  evidence
    never existed because the  appellant's  husband  did  not  use  a  bank
    account, he was never employed or  in  receipt  of  a  pension  and  no
    records are kept of informal money exchanges. I find that  the  absence
    of evidence in this case does not undermine the clear,  consistent  and
    plausible evidence of Mr Malhotra.

15. I conclude, on balance, that the appellant has made out her case to  be
    a dependent family member of an EEA national in line with regulation  7
    of the 2016 Regulations and that she  is  entitled  to  an  EEA  Family
    Permit under regulation 12.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                 Date 23 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed:                             Date: 23 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


 3.  Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

