
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04589/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2018                            |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                manzar massoD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Makka Solicitors
Ltd
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the appellant, hereinafter  "the
claimant" against the decision of the Secretary of  State  refusing  him  a
residence card as the  former  husband  of  a  Hungarian  citizen  who  had
retained rights of residence.

2.  The  reasons  for  refusing  the  application  are  probably  summarised
adequately in the report of Immigration Officers following a visit  to  the
claimant's home in April 2017.  The writer said:

  "The evidence clearly shows that the relationship is on  the  balance  of
  probabilities one of  convenience,  there  are  contradictory  claims  by
  family members of the address, text messages clearly show  that  [S]  is,
  and has been in a relationship with Manzar's friend, and that she herself
  has lived in East and south east London for several years, at least  from
  2013 to 2015, where she was the  director  of  her  own  Hair  extensions
  business."

3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  on  grounds  of  appeal
which might be described more  accurately  as  a  skeleton  argument.   The
"grounds" complain that although the  Immigration  Officer's  evidence  was
coloured by very clear opinion evidence about the claimant it did little or
nothing to justify the opinions it so vehemently expressed.  The  Secretary
of State had previously given a Residence Card on the basis of the marriage
now held to be one of convenience without explaining adequately or  at  all
why he had changed his mind.

4. At the time of the hearing it was thought that  the  Secretary  of  State
had an evidential burden to establish the contention that the marriage  was
one of convenience.  We now know that is not right and  there  is  a  clear
legal burden on the Secretary of State to prove that the marriage is one of
convenience.  Be that as it may, the Secretary of State was very  aware  at
the hearing that it was his task to assist the Tribunal by laying  out  the
evidence to support his case but the Secretary of State did not attend.  It
follows that the judge had to make findings on contentious  issues  without
any assistance from the party who relied on them beyond the refusal letter.
 I fully appreciate that the Secretary of State's resources  are  stretched
and possibly stretched to the point where they are stretched too far.  That
is not for me to decide.  However I record plainly, although  this  is  not
something that should have to be spelled out, that  a  party  who  bears  a
burden of proof and chooses not to attend a hearing is likely to  run  into
difficulties as the Secretary of State did on this occasion.

5. Nevertheless, the Secretary of State, like any other absent litigant,  is
entitled to a fair hearing and a decision that is correct  in  law.  He  is
entitled to complain that the decision is not correct in law and has  being
given permission to argue precisely that.   There  were  three  grounds  of
appeal.  Grounds 1 and 2 are not impressive.  Ground 1 maintains  that  the
judge found that there were  reasonable  grounds  for  suspicion  that  the
marriage was one of convenience and  then  "contradicts  this  finding"  by
determining the reports were unreliable.  There is nothing in  this  point.
All the judge was saying was that there was evidence which, if taken at its
highest, tended to show that the marriage was one of convenience  but  when
the evidence was looked at carefully it should not, in his  judgment,  have
been taken very highly at all.  Ground 2 complains that the judge was wrong
to dismiss the reports because they were not supported by  a  statement  of
truth.  This was described as a "mistake as to the purpose of the reports".
 The grounds might explain why the reports were prepared but the grounds do
not explain why they were served in evidence in the form  used.   It  would
have been perfectly straightforward for  an  Immigration  Officer  to  have
supplemented the report by supporting it with a statement of truth and even
by attending to explain to the judge what had happened.   The  reports  may
not have been produced for the purpose of litigation but  if  that  is  the
purpose for which they were used the judge was entitled to give  them  less
weight than he might have otherwise been inclined if they have been in  the
form of high quality admissible evidence.  The judge had to choose  between
reports that were not explained and not supported by oral evidence and  not
advanced by an  advocate  for  the  Secretary  of  State  against  evidence
prepared with the assistance of  a  solicitor  and  argued  by  experienced
Counsel.  It is wholly unremarkable that he decided the case the  way  that
he did.

6. For the record I make it plain that I see  no  error  whatsoever  in  the
judge's findings.  I should emphasise that this is  not  to  say  that  the
judge's findings were the only findings permissible on the facts.  It was a
matter for the judge to consider carefully what was before him and how well
it was explained and balance it against the other submissions and  evidence
made.  I am far from saying that reports from Immigration  Officers  should
be regarded as having little or no value.  However, it is very clear, in my
judgment that when a judge reads such reports and decides they  are  of  no
value or limited value having considered  everything  else  the  judge  has
acted entirely properly and lawfully.

7. Ground 3 requires a little more thought.  I  set  out  the  Secretary  of
State's case below. He said:

  "Given the respondent has not accepted that the marriage  was  genuinely,
  the appellant's case was refused wholesale under Regulation 10(5) as  set
  out in the notice of decision dated 25 April 2017.  It is submitted  that
  in considering the case the judge had to turn his  mind  to  whether  the
  appellant met the requirements of Regulation 10(5) at  the  date  of  the
  hearing.  The judge claims that because the RFRL did not deal  with  this
  he was under no duty to do so either.  This approach is incorrect because
  even if the appellant  succeeded  on  the  marriage  of  convenience  the
  respondent made no acceptance that he met Regulation 10(5) and  that  was
  for the appellant to prove, the burden being upon him."

8. It was established in R v IAT and Another ex parte Kwok  on  Tong  [1981]
Imm AR 214 and reaffirmed in RM (Kwok on Tong: HC395 para 320) India [2006]
UKAIT 0039 that an Immigration Judge cannot allow an appeal on  the  ground
that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration  Rules  unless
each of the requirements of the Rules is met.

9. Clearly the reasoning does not translate seamlessly into appeals  against
EEA decisions where "not in accordance with the law" is not  a  permissible
ground. In EEA case the  sole  permissible  ground  is  that  the  decision
breaches the claimant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry to
or residence in  the  United  Kingdom  (Clause  1  of  Schedule  2  of  the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016). The appeal is about
the claimant's ability to satisfy  the  rules  and  Kwok  on  Tong  remains
relevant.

10. It is extremely easy for the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  plain  the
points that are in issue.  If,  for  example,  an  application  is  refused
solely because a marriage is said to be one of convenience and for no other
reason then that can be said expressly so the unsuccessful applicant  knows
the extent of the issues between them. That does not appear  to  have  been
done here.

11. In her skeleton argument Ms Daykin contended that  it  was  contrary  to
the Surendran guidelines to require a point to be resolved when it had  not
been put in issue.  That may be taking things too far.  Certainly,  subject
to the duty to act fairly, a judge does not have to allow an  appeal  where
the Home Office has not taken an obvious point although it  may  be  better
not to investigate a point when there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the
Secretary of State is dissatisfied.

12. However, Ms Daykin also pointed out that  it  was  the  claimant's  case
that he continued to work in his own business and the respondent seemed  to
have accepted in the Immigration Officer's report that the sponsor's former
partner was continuing to work for  Sainsburys.   When  the  point  is  not
clearly in issue and was not argued by the Secretary of State who  did  not
attend to present the case, the judge is not to  be  criticised  for  being
satisfied on very slim evidence that a person satisfies the requirements of
the Rules.

13. Different considerations apply if the point has been  put  in  issue  or
where there is no evidence at  all  on  the  point  but  there  is  nothing
irrational  in  accepting  at  face  value  a  plausible   and   apparently
unchallenged claim of the kind made here.

14. It follows that although the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  is  by  no
means the only one possible on the evidence and may not have  been  reached
by many other judges, it was entirely rational and the First-tier  Tribunal
did not err in law in deciding the appeal as it did.  If a lesson is to  be
drawn it is for the Secretary of State to state clearly what is  in  issue,
to present the evidence in the best possible form and to attend before  the
First-tier Tribunal and argue his case.

Notice of Decision

15. The First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  and  this  appeal  by  the
Secretary of State is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 May 2019                     |



