
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/04932/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 September 2019                 |On 1 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                      natalja pereira de camargo silva
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Abbas, instructed by Imperium Group Immigration
                    Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Brazil born on 19 July 1996  who  arrived  in
the UK on 10 April 2017 to join her mother and step-father. Her  step-father
is a Portuguese national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

The appellant made an application on 24 April  2018  for  an  EEA  residence
card, under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2016,  to
confirm that she was a family member of an EEA national. At the time of  her
application she was 21 years of age. Her application was refused on  2  July
2018 on  the  basis  that  she  had  failed  to  provide  adequate  evidence
demonstrating that she was dependent upon her EEA national sponsor  or  that
she resided in the same household as her EEA national sponsor.

The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal  was  heard  on  16
May 2019 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanes. The judge considered  that,
in light of the judgments in Reyes v Migrationsverket [2014] EUECJ  C-423/12
and Lim v Entry Clearance Officer Manila  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1383,  she  was
bound to find that dependency must have existed before  the  appellant  came
to the UK, in Brazil, and that since it did not,  the  appellant  could  not
meet the requirements of the EEA Regulations. The judge  accepted  that  the
appellant had been living with her mother and step-father since her  arrival
in the UK and that she was financially  dependent  upon  them  but,  in  the
absence of evidence that she did not  have  her  own  resources  in  Brazil,
found that she could not  show  dependency  for  the  purposes  of  the  EEA
Regulations.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought, and granted,  on  the
grounds  that  the  judge  had  arguably  erred  in  her  understanding  and
application of the principles in Reyes.

At the hearing before me Ms Bassi conceded that the judge had erred  in  law
in her understanding  of  Reyes  as  there  was  no  requirement  for  prior
dependency in Brazil. Ms Bassi accepted that, on the findings  made  by  the
judge in regard to living in the same household and dependency  on  the  EEA
national sponsor, the appeal ought to be allowed.

Accordingly I set aside Judge Hanes' decision and re-make  the  decision  by
allowing the appellant's appeal. The appellant has demonstrated that she  is
dependent upon her EEA national sponsor and is therefore able  to  meet  the
requirements of Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) and is entitled to a  residence  card
as the family member of her EEA national sponsor. The respondent's  decision
was not in accordance with the EEA Regulations.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. I set aside the decision and allow  the  appellant's  appeal
under the EEA Regulations 2016.

Signed:     [pic]      Dated: 27 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
