
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04173/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th October 2020                 |On 12th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WELSH


                                   Between

                               MS SABINA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:              Mr G � Ceallaigh, instructed by Lexwin
Solicitors
For the respondent:             Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 30th October 2020.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C H Bennett (the 'FtT'),  promulgated  on  5th  February
    2020,  by  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   under   the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, against the respondent's refusal to
    issue her a residence card as the  extended  family  member  of  an  EU
    (Italian)  national,  her  maternal  uncle,  Mr  Shofiqul  Islam   (the
    'sponsor').

 3. The background to the appeal  is  that  the  appellant,  a  Bangladeshi
    national, had entered the UK, aged 22, on a Tier  4  (General)  student
    visa on 2nd April 2010.  However,  before entering the UK, as  the  FtT
    later found, she lived with her family in Bangladesh.  Her father  died
    in 2003, after which  time  she  was  dependent  financially  upon  the
    sponsor, who lived in Italy at the time,  and  who  regularly  remitted
    monies to the appellant, her mother and his mother.  The sponsor  later
    settled in the UK on 5th April 2013 and in support of her  application,
    the appellant provided a copy of the  sponsor's  Italian  ID  document.
    There was a dispute as to when the sponsor was  naturalised  as  an  EU
    (Italian) citizen but the appellant accepts that  this  was  after  she
    entered the UK (possibly only a matter of a few  weeks  afterwards,  in
    May 2010) and not when she was dependent on  him  while  she  lived  in
    Bangladesh.

 4. The respondent refused the appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    she was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  a  dependent  extended
    family member of the sponsor.

The FtT's decision

 5. The FtT considered the appellant's appeal on the basis that she was  an
    extended family member and so potentially  qualified  under  Regulation
    8(2) of the 2016 Regulations.  At �13(c), the FtT cited the  well-known
    case of Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 341 (IAC), the reported
    decision of a Presidential panel of this Tribunal, as authority for the
    proposition that at the time of her pre-entry  dependency,  (i.e.  when
    the appellant lived in Bangladesh), the sponsor needed  to  be  an  EEA
    national.

 6. The FtT accepted (and there is no appeal on the core facts) that:

      1. the sponsor, a Bangladeshi national, had moved to  Italy  in  1989,
         where he was resident until coming to the  UK  in  late  2012/early
         2013;

      2. the  sponsor  acquired  Italian  citizenship  in  2010,  after  the
         appellant entered the UK;

      3. the sponsor and the appellant were  related  as  claimed  (maternal
         uncle and niece) (�22 of the decision);

      4. the sponsor  paid  the  costs  of  the  appellant's  education  and
         supported the appellant and her family,  after  the  death  of  the
         appellant's father in 2003, up to her arrival in the  UK  in  April
         2010 and thereafter (�28).

 7. At �32, the FtT cited Moneke,  and  noted  that  either  dependency  or
    membership of the household must be "on a person who is an EEA national
    at the material time....It is necessary for the pre entry dependency to
    be on the EEA national and not on a person who subsequently  became  an
    EEA national" (�40(ii) of Moneke)).   As  a  consequence,  despite  the
    appellant's dependency on the sponsor while she  lived  in  Bangladesh,
    she did not meet the  requirements  of  regulation  8(2)  of  the  2016
    Regulations, as an extended family member of the sponsor.

 8. The appellant appealed against the  FtT's  decision  on  18th  February
    2020.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers initially refused  permission
    on 14th April 2020, but following a renewed application, permission was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 18th June 2020.   The  gist  of
    the grounds, which are set out in further detail below, is whether  the
    proposition from Moneke, set out above at �7, was wrongly decided.

 9. We should add for completeness that  amended  grounds  of  appeal  were
    drafted and submitted on 25th June 2020, after Judge  Gill's  grant  of
    permission, but Mr Tufan did not object to us considering  the  amended
    grounds.  We granted permission for those amended grounds to proceed.

The hearing before us

The appellant's grounds

10. We set out below the appellant's amended grounds.

          0. "The sole basis on which the Appellant's appeal was dismissed
             was that the Appellant had not been reliant on the Sponsor
             before entry into the United Kingdom at a time when he was an
             EEA national, and although he became an Italian citizen the
             same year the Appellant entered the United Kingdom, possibly
             the same month, there was no evidence that he became an
             Italian citizen on or before 2 April 2010 when the Appellant
             entered the United Kingdom.  The Sponsor has in fact lost his
             certificate of naturalisation, but believes that the date was
             at or around the date on which the Appellant entered the
             United Kingdom. [Mr � Ceallaigh confirmed to us that the
             sponsor's naturalisation was after the appellant entered the
             UK.]

          0. The FTT's conclusion was compelled by the authority of Moneke
             and others (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 341 (IAC) which
             concluded:

                  '... dependency or membership of the household must be  on
                  a person who is an EEA national at the material time.  For
                  this reason it is essential that tribunal judges establish
                  when the sponsor acquired EEA nationality.' [Headnote]

                  'It is necessary for the pre entry dependency to be on the
                  EEA national and not a person who subsequently  became  an
                  EEA national.  Thus if  a  sponsor  has  been  financially
                  supporting OFMs who live abroad for many years  before  he
                  became an EEA national, but  there  was  no  such  support
                  after the sponsor acquired EEA nationality, there would be
                  no evidence of dependency on an EEA national.' [40(iii)]

                  'Membership of a household has the meaning set out  in  KG
                  (Sri Lanka) and Bigia (above); that is to say  it  imports
                  living for some  period  of  time  under  the  roof  of  a
                  household that can be said to be that of the EEA  national
                  for a time when he or  she  had  such  nationality.   That
                  necessarily requires that whilst  in  possession  of  such
                  nationality the family member has lived somewhere  in  the
                  world in the same country as the  EEA  national,  but  not
                  necessarily in an EEA state.' [40(iv)]

         Grounds

          0. The Appellant submits that the FTT erred in law in following
             the decision in Moneke as it was wrongly decided on this
             point, and that this Tribunal should depart from it.  The
             Appellant submits that this is an important point of principle
             and practice.  That decision is routinely relied upon in this
             Tribunal and has not received consideration, on this point,
             either from any domestic or European Court.

          0. Moreover, the relevant conclusion in Moneke, though it forms
             part of the Headnote, does not appear to have been the subject
             of any argument in that case and therefore: (i) should never
             have been in the Headnote; and (ii) is at least arguably
             obiter dictum.

          0. The Appellant submits that this Tribunal should grant
             permission and depart from the decision in Moneke that an
             Extended Family Member can only succeed where the dependence
             relied on in the country of origin was at a time when the EEA
             Sponsor was an EEA national on the following basis.

          0. Firstly, the decision in Moneke includes no analysis at all as
             to why it must be the case that the EEA Sponsor was an EEA
             national at the time of the dependence prior to entry into the
             United Kingdom.  There is lengthy analysis of where the
             applicant/sponsor should have lived prior to entry, but none
             at all on this issue, for which Moneke is also the only
             authority.  The conclusion is obiter.  Given the seriousness
             of the consequences of the decision some detailed
             consideration of the issue was required, and the absence of
             such is a reason not to follow it.

          0. Second, insofar as there is any authority cited in support of
             the conclusion set out above in Moneke itself, it is KG (Sri
             Lanka) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 13 and Bigia & Ors v SSHD [2009]
             EWCA Civ 79 which the Upper Tribunal referred to.  However,
             neither provides any support for the proposition at all, or
             makes any reference to the issue.  There is, as noted above,
             no higher court authority either domestically or in the CJEU
             endorsing or examining this issue that the Appellant has been
             able to find.  Moneke is the sole authority cited in support
             of this issue in Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice at
             [6.140].

          0. Third, there is nothing in the 2016 Regulations at all
             limiting the circumstances in which prior dependency is
             relevant to a period in which the Sponsor was an EEA national.
              Quite the contrary - an EEA national is exhaustively defined
             in Regulation 8(6) for the purposes of Regulation 8(2) as
             '...the EEA national to whom the extended family member is
             related'.  There is no basis for reading the Regulations more
             strictly than they appear to be on their face, by specifying a
             time during which they must hold such status.

          0. Fourth, there is nothing in the Directive itself which
             indicates any temporal limitation on when a person became a
             Union citizen so as to limit the circumstances in which they
             are entitled to have dependents join them in a Member State.
             There is no basis for reading such a limitation into the
             Citizens' Directive.  Nor has the Court of Justice done so.

          0. Fifth, the approach of the Tribunal in Moneke appears to run
             directly contrary to the reasoning of by the Court of Justice
             of the European Union in several cases.  Firstly, in Lassal
             (European citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-162/09 where it was held
             that residence in a host member state in advance of the
             Directive being transposed counted towards the acquisition of
             permanent residence.  Secondly, that Court also found in
             Ziolkowski and Szeja v Land Berlin [2011] ECR I-14051 that
             residence of Polish nationals in a host member state in
             advance of Poland joining the Union also counted towards the
             acquisition of permanent residence.  That was in part because
             in the absence of transitional provisions the protections of
             the Directive may 'be relied on by nationals from any Member
             State and be applied to the present and future effects of
             situations arising before the accession of that State to the
             European Union'.  The consistent approach of the Court of
             Justice points directly away from the approach adopted by the
             Tribunal in Moneke.

          0. Sixth, rights derived from EU law apply to Union Citizens
             themselves and not to the Other Family Members per se except
             as parasitic on those Union Citizens' rights.  There is no
             basis for distinguishing between European Citizens in respect
             of their right to free movement by reference to the date at
             which they became Union citizens.  Further, to discriminate
             between Union Citizens in terms of their free movement rights
             by reference to the date on which they became EU citizens is
             contrary to the clear aims of the Directive, as set out in the
             Recital at (3):

                  'Union citizenship should be  the  fundamental  status  of
                  nationals of the Member States when  they  exercise  their
                  right of free movement and residence.'

          0. It should follow, in the absence of powerful reasons to the
             contrary, that all Union Citizens are entitled to the same
             protections in the Directive, providing its terms are met.
             There is nothing in the Directive itself that supports the
             Moneke limitation.

          0. Seventh, the Court of Justice of the European Union recently
             gave guidance in SM (Enfant place sous kafala algerienne)
             (Citizenship of the European Union - 'Direct descendant' -
             Judgment) [2019] EUECJ C-129/18 as follows:

'60. As follows from recital 6 of Directive 2004/38, the objective of
Article 3(2)(a) thereof is to 'maintain the unity of the family in a
broader sense' by facilitating entry and residence for persons who are not
included in the definition of 'family member' of a Union citizen contained
in Article 2(2) of that directive but who nevertheless maintain close and
stable family ties with a Union citizen on account of specific factual
circumstances, such as economic dependence, being a member of the household
or serious health grounds (judgment of 5 September 2012, Rahman and Others,
C-83/11, EU:C:2012:519, paragraph 32).

61.  According to the case-law of the Court, Article 3(2) of Directive
2004/38 imposes an obligation on the Member States to confer a certain
advantage on applications submitted by the third-country nationals referred
to in that article, compared with applications for entry and residence of
other third-country nationals (see, to that effect, judgments of 5
September 2012, Rahman and Others, C-83/11, EU:C:2012:519, paragraph 21,
and of 12 July 2018, Banger, C-89/17, EU:C:2018:570, paragraph 31).

62.  Thus, the Member States must, in accordance with that provision, make
it possible for the persons envisaged therein to obtain a decision on their
application that is founded on an extensive examination of their personal
circumstances, taking account of the various factors that may be relevant,
and, in the event of refusal, is justified by reasons (see, to that effect,
judgments of 5 September 2012, Rahman and Others, C-83/11, EU:C:2012:519,
paragraphs 22 and 23, and of 12 July 2018, Banger, C-89/17, EU:C:2018:570,
paragraphs 38 and 39).

63.  It is true that each Member State has a wide discretion as regards the
selection of the factors to be taken into account, provided that their
legislation contains criteria which are consistent with the normal meaning
of the term 'facilitate' used in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 and
which do not deprive that provision of its effectiveness (see, to that
effect, judgments of 5 September 2012, Rahman and Others, C-83/11,
EU:C:2012:519, paragraph 24, and of 12 July 2018, Banger, C-89/17,
EU:C:2018:570, paragraph 40).

64.  However, that discretion must, having regard to recital 31 of
Directive 2004/38, be exercised in the light of and in line with the
provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ('the
Charter') (see, by analogy, judgment of 6 December 2012, O and Others, C-
356/11 and C-357/11, EU:C:2012:776, paragraphs 79 and 80 and the case-law
cited).

65.  In that regard, Article 7 of the Charter recognises the right to
respect for private and family life.  As is apparent from the Explanations
relating to the Charter of Fundamental Rights (OJ 2007 C 303, p. 17), in
accordance with Article 52(3) of the Charter, the rights guaranteed by
Article 7 thereof have the same meaning and the same scope as those
guaranteed by Article 8 of the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, signed in Rome on 4 November 1950
(see, to that effect, judgments of 5 October 2010, McB., C-400/10 PPU,
EU:C:2010:582, paragraph 53, and of 5 June 2018, Coman and Others, C-
673/16, EU:C:2018:385, paragraph 49).'

          0. It follows from the above extract:

               a. That the Directive is to be construed purposively;

               b. That the Directive is to be construed so as to give effect
                  to the right to family life enshrined in the Charter;

               c. That the objective  of  Article  3(2)(a)  is  to  maintain
                  family unity in a broader sense.

          0. Each of the considerations above militates strongly against
             the narrow approach taken by the Tribunal in Moneke, which the
             Appellant submits was wrong.

          0. On the facts found by the FTT the Appellant has maintained
             close and stable family ties with her Sponsor, whom she looks
             upon as a father figure, and upon whom she has been
             economically dependent, for 17 years.  She has been a member
             of his household for the past 7 years.  The Appellant submits
             that it simply cannot be right that the Directive must be
             interpreted such that the fact that the Sponsor appears to
             have become an Italian citizen a month or so after she entered
             the United Kingdom has the effect that he is deprived of the
             EU law right to have her with him, despite the essential
             relationship of dependence having existed throughout.

          0. Finally, it is clear from the decision in Moneke that the
             Tribunal had itself some doubts as to its interpretation in
             what was at that stage a rapidly evolving area of law.  The
             Tribunal on two separate occasions notes that the guidance it
             is giving is subject to clarification 'by the higher courts'
             (�8; �40).  There has been no such clarification.

         Conclusion

          0. The Appellant submits that the decision on this issue in
             Moneke is wrong in principle, unsupported by the Regulations
             or Directive, unsupported by any other authority and contrary
             to EU law.  The Upper Tribunal is invited to grant permission
             to appeal, to depart from it and to allow this Appellant's
             appeal."

The respondent's Rule 24 response

11. The respondent provided the following Rule 24 response, on 24th  August
    2020.

"Introduction

1.   THE SSHD ASKS THE UT TO ACCEPT THIS DOCUMENT AS THE SSHD'S RULE 24
RESPONSE.  THE SSHD HAS HAD SIGHT OF THE APPELLANT'S ('A'S') GROUNDS OF
APPEAL (DATED 3RD JUNE 2020) IN THE DRAFTING OF THIS DOCUMENT.

The SSHD's response to the grounds:

2.   THE SSHD ASSERTS THAT THERE IS, WITH RESPECT, NO MERIT IN THE A'S
GROUND OF APPEAL, NAMELY THAT THE FTT MATERIALLY ERRED IN FINDING THAT THE
A'S DEPENDENCY UPON HER MATERNAL UNCLE IN BANGLADESH WAS NOT MATERIALLY
RELEVANT TO REG. 8(2)(B)(I) OF THE 2016 EEA REGULATIONS BECAUSE THE UNCLE
('SI') DID NOT SHOW, ON THE BALANCE OF PROBABILITIES, THAT HE WAS AN EU
NATIONAL AT THAT TIME (THE A ENTERED THE UK ON 22ND APRIL 2010 ON T4 ENTRY
CLEARANCE, SEE �1(A)).

3.   The A does not directly challenge the finding that there had been a
failure to prove, on balance, that SI became an Italian Citizen earlier
than when the relevant passport was issued (11th March 2011, see �36) and
so simply relies upon the argument that EU law does not require the
supporting relative to have been an EU national during the claimed
dependency/household residence in a country other than the UK (Reg.
8(2)(b)) - the stage prior to the later (established) dependency/household
membership.  This also requires the A to argue that Moneke (EEA - OFMs)
Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC) is wrong in law and should not have been
followed by the FtT (albeit that this argument was not run before the FtJ).

4.   Firstly, in respect of paras. 7-8, the SSHD contends that the A makes
no legal argument at all.  The A simply asserts that, in Moneke, the UT did
not particularly analyse why the supporting relative should have to be an
EU national prior to entry to the UK.  The A posits no reason in law why
that should not be the case bearing in mind the clear wording of Regulation
8 and Article 3(2) of the Directive (2004/38/EC).

5.   Secondly, in respect of the latter part of the A's argument, the SSHD
respectfully argues that such a contention is contrary to domestic and
European authority.

The policy purpose of Article 3(2):

6.   THE SSHD CONTENDS THAT THE PURPOSE OF ARTICLE 3(2) HAS BEEN ANALYSED
BY BOTH THE COURT OF JUSTICE AND DOMESTIC COURTS IN SECRETARY OF STATE FOR
THE HOME DEPARTMENT V ISLAM & ANOR [2012] EUECJ C-83/11 ('ISLAM' ALSO KNOWN
AS RAHMAN); METOCK V MINISTER FOR JUSTICE, EQUALITY AND LAW REFORM
('METOCK'); BIGIA V ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER [2009] EWCA CIV 79 ('BIGIA');
OBOH & ORS V SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT [2013] EWCA CIV
1525 ('OBOH'); ALADESELU V SSHD [2013] EWCA CIV 144 ('ALADESELU'); EO
(NIGERIA) V SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT [2014] EWCA CIV 1418
('EO').  THE EFFECT OF THESE JUDGMENTS IS:

a.   Article 3(2) centres upon the qualified rights of the third-country
national extended family member - Member States are required to confer 'a
certain advantage' upon such people (Islam, �21);

b.   The objective of the provision is described at Recital 6 of the
Directive, namely ''to maintain the unity of the family in a broader' sense
by facilitating entry and residence ... [for those who] 'maintain close and
stable family ties with a Union citizen'' (Islam, �32);

c.   The objective is not however, one of family reunion - this is a fixed
point in the assessment of the underlying policy as a consequence of Metock
- it is one of 'facilitating the EU citizen maintaining his household
wherever he is in the Union.  This seems to us to be a critical
consideration' (Oboh, see �57);

                      In Bigia, the Court of Appeal expressly said:

                           '43. In my judgment, Metock does not impact on
                           these propositions.  I accept that Article 3.2(a)
                           is based on the same policy considerations as
                           Article 2.2 - 'ensuring the protection of the
                           family life of nationals of the Member States in
                           order to eliminate obstacles to the exercise of
                           the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the EC
                           Treaty' (here the right of free movement and
                           residence of the Union citizen) and aiming 'to
                           strengthen the right of free movement and
                           residence of all Union citizens'.  That is why
                           the Directive goes beyond Article 2.2 family
                           members and makes provision, albeit in a
                           different way, for OFMs.  However, the emphasis
                           remains on elimination of obstacles to the Treaty
                           rights of the Union citizen rather than a policy
                           of family reunification...'

d.   When interpreting the underlying policy of Article 3(2) it was only
necessary that there was the 'possibility' of an adverse effect on the
rights of the EU national to free movement and residence - this was the
threshold condition for this provision (Aladeselu at �49);

e.   The dependence does not have to have existed in the same country as
the Union citizen (Islam, �33);

f.   The dependence may have occurred only shortly before or at the same
time as the Union citizen settled in the host state but it must exist in
the country from which the third-country national comes when he/she applies
to join the Union citizen (Islam, �33);

g.   It does not matter if the third-country national entered the Member
State before the Union citizen (Aladeselu, at �44 & �48);

h.   The dependency must continue from the previous country to the host
Member State (Oboh at �47);

i.   Though there must be a 'nexus of recency' between the arrivals of the
other family member and the Union citizen (EO at �21):

'... This is because the purpose of these provisions in the Citizenship
Directive is to ensure that the EU citizen is not deterred from exercising
treaty rights by being unable to move with members of his or her
household.'

7.   The SSHD asserts that it is plain from the natural wording of the
provision in Article 3(2) that the provision is designed to provide
qualified protection for Union citizens who have an established
relationship of dependency with an extended family member in another
country and that the Article facilitates the qualified entry and residence
of such a dependent in order to prevent the automatic situation that the
Union citizen is deterred from exercising his/her free movement rights.

8.   It is also the natural interpretation of the policy context of Article
10(2)(4) of Directive 2004/38 which authorises the Member States to require
family members referred to in Article 3(2) of the directive to present a
'document issued by the relevant authority in the country of origin or
country from which they are arriving certifying that they are dependants
... of the Union citizen' (this is given emphasis by the Court of Justice
in Islam at �30).

9.   In the context of this case, the entry into the UK by the A (22nd
April 2010) at a time when the A's supporting uncle was not an EU citizen
(the Italian passport was not issued to SI until 11th March 2011, at �26) -
cannot be described as admission and residence which was relevant to the
Treaty rights of an EU national.  That entry in 2010 had absolutely nothing
to do with EU law (either in the personal or broader family context) and at
this point the previous dependency outside of the UK ended.

10.  In the alternative, SI did not in fact enter the UK until sometime
around January 2014 (�30) and, applying EO, there was equally no 'nexus of
recency' between the arrival of the A and that of the supporting EU
national."

Oral submissions

The appellant's oral submissions

12. Mr � Ceallaigh reiterated Article  3(2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC.  It
    contained no temporal requirement of nationality and focussed on  entry
    and residence of other family members of Union citizens.  That lack  of
    a temporal requirement in relation to  Union  or  EEA  nationality  was
    similarly reflected in the implementing Regulations, and in particular,
    Regulation 8(2)(b)(ii), which had as  a  condition  that  the  extended
    family member "has joined the EEA national in the  United  Kingdom  and
    continues to be dependent upon the EEA national, or to be a  member  of
    the EEA national's household."   Moving  on  to  Regulation  8(6),  the
    relevant EEA national meant referred to: "the EEA national to whom  the
    extended family member is related."

13. Any suggestion that Regulation  8(2)(b)(ii)  might  be  interpreted  as
    imposing some sort of temporal limitation, was incorrect - see  �44  of
    Aladeselu:

         "44. The second element is that the person  "has  joined"  the  EEA
         national (specifically in this case the EU citizen) in  the  United
         Kingdom. The concession made by the Secretary of State in  relation
         to  the  meaning  of  "join"  in  regulation  8(2)(b)  is   equally
         applicable to "has joined" in regulation 8(2)(c).  It  involves  an
         acceptance that the expression "has  joined"  does  not  of  itself
         impose a temporal limitation: it does not matter whether it is  the
         relative or the EU citizen who arrives first in the United Kingdom,
         and one cannot glean from the  expression  any  requirement  as  to
         contemporaneity  or  recent  arrival.  The  argument  that  such  a
         requirement is to be derived from Rahman is a  matter  to  which  I
         will return. Subject to that argument, it is clear that each of the
         applicants "has joined" the sponsor in  the  United  Kingdom,  even
         though each of them arrived here before the sponsor."

14. Turning next to the question of dependency, the purpose of Article 3(2)
    of Directive 2004/38/EC was to ensure the maintenance of the unity of a
    family in the broader sense.  Support for this was at  ��31  to  33  of
    Rahman:

"31. As the Advocate General has explained in points 91, 92 and 98 of his
Opinion, there is nothing to indicate that the term 'country from which
they have come' or 'country from which they are arriving' ['pays de
provenance'] used in those provisions must be understood as referring to
the country in which the Union citizen resided before settling in the host
Member State. On the contrary, it is clear, on reading those provisions
together, that the country referred to is, in the case of a national of a
third State who declares that he is a 'dependant' of a Union citizen, the
State in which he was resident on the date when he applied to accompany or
join the Union citizen.

32. So far as concerns the time at which the applicant must be in a
situation of dependence in order to be considered a 'dependant' within the
meaning of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38, it is to be noted that, as
follows from recital 6 in the directive's preamble, the objective of that
provision is to 'maintain the unity of the family in a broader sense' by
facilitating entry and residence for persons who are not included in the
definition of family member of a Union citizen contained in Article 2(2) of
Directive 2004/38 but who nevertheless maintain close and stable family
ties with a Union citizen on account of specific factual circumstances,
such as economic dependence, being a member of the household or serious
health grounds.

33. It is clear that such ties may exist without the family member of the
Union citizen having resided in the same State as that citizen or having
been a dependant of that citizen shortly before or at the time when the
latter settled in the host State. On the other hand, the situation of
dependence must exist, in the country from which the family member
concerned comes, at the time when he applies to join the Union citizen on
whom he is dependent."

15. Mr � Ceallaigh  then  referred  to  two  cases  which  illustrated  the
    absurdity of imposing a temporal restriction.  The first case  was  the
    case of Lassal and in particular, ��26 to 31.

         "Observations submitted to the Court

         26.  Among  the  interested  parties  who   have   lodged   written
         observations, in accordance with Article 23 of the Statute  of  the
         Court of Justice of the European Union, two positions of  principle
         may be distinguished.

         27. On one hand, the Belgian and United  Kingdom  Governments  take
         the view that only periods of residence either ending on  30  April
         2006 or thereafter, or which commence after 30 April  2006,  should
         be taken into account. In support of such  an  interpretation,  the
         United Kingdom Government relies  essentially  on  the  phrase  'in
         compliance with the conditions laid  down  in  this  Directive'  in
         recital 17 in the preamble to Directive  2004/38  and  its  travaux
         pr�paratoires, while the Belgian Government relies, in  particular,
         on the fact that that directive does not  have  retroactive  effect
         and on the principle of legal certainty.

         28. On the other hand, CPAG and the European  Commission  take  the
         view that, even if the right of permanent  residence  was  acquired
         only from 30 April 2006, continuous five-year periods completed  in
         accordance with the EU law instruments pre-dating Directive 2004/38
         and ending before that date should be taken into  account  for  the
         purposes of Article  16  of  that  directive.  Both  CPAG  and  the
         Commission base their arguments in particular on the objective  and
         ratio legis of that directive, which,  they  submit,  require  that
         Article 16 is applied in  full  to  those  residence  periods.  The
         Court's reply

         29. As a preliminary point, it must be observed that citizenship of
         the Union confers on each citizen a primary and individual right to
         move and reside freely within the territory of the  Member  States,
         subject to the limitations and restrictions laid down by the Treaty
         on the functioning of the European Union and the  measures  adopted
         for their implementation, freedom of movement  for  persons  being,
         moreover, one of the fundamental freedoms of the  internal  market,
         which  was  also  reaffirmed  in  Article  45  of  the  Charter  of
         Fundamental Rights of the European Union.

         30. With regard to Directive 2004/38, the  Court  has  already  had
         occasion to point out that that directive aims  to  facilitate  the
         exercise of the primary and individual right  to  move  and  reside
         freely within the territory of the Member States that is  conferred
         directly on Union citizens by  the  Treaty  and  that  it  aims  in
         particular to strengthen that right, so that Union citizens  cannot
         derive less rights from that directive than from the instruments of
         secondary legislation which it amends or repeals (see Case C-127/08
         Metock and Others [2008] ECR I-6241, paragraphs 82 and 59).

         31. The Court has also observed that, having regard to the  context
         and  objectives  of  Directive  2004/38,  the  provisions  of  that
         directive cannot be interpreted restrictively, and must not in  any
         event be deprived of their effectiveness (see  Metock  and  Others,
         paragraph 84)."

16. While the Belgian  and  UK  governments  had  argued  that  periods  of
    residence, for the purposes of permanent residence, which pre-dated the
    implementation of the Directive could not be taken  into  account,  the
    Commission had taken a different view and the Court agreed  with  them,
    making clear that  the  provisions  of  that  Directive  could  not  be
    interpreted restrictively and must not in  any  event  be  deprived  of
    their effectiveness.  The absurdity  would  be  to  impose  a  temporal
    limitation in the case of extended family members.  Any  argument  that
    do to so would retroactive effect and lead  to  legal  uncertainty  was
    addressed in ��38 to 39 of Lassal, which noted:

         "38. Furthermore, it should be noted that, in so far as  the  right
         of permanent residence provided for  in  Article  16  of  Directive
         2004/38 may only be acquired from 30 April 2006,  the  taking  into
         account of periods of residence completed before that date does not
         give retroactive effect to Article 16  of  Directive  2004/38,  but
         simply gives present effect to situations which  arose  before  the
         date of transposition of that directive.

         39. It should be borne in mind in that regard that  the  provisions
         on citizenship of the Union are applicable as soon  as  they  enter
         into force and therefore  they  must  be  applied  to  the  present
         effects of situations arising previously (see Case C-224/98  D'Hoop
         [2002] ECR I-6191, paragraph 25 and the case-law cited)."

17. The second case along a similar theme was that of Ziolkowski and  Szeja
    and in particular, ��58 to 62:

         "58. Furthermore, the Court has also held that  the  provisions  on
         citizenship of the European Union are applicable as  soon  as  they
         enter into force and must  therefore  be  applied  to  the  present
         effects of situations arising previously (see Case C-224/98  D'Hoop
         [2002] ECR I-6191, paragraph 25, and Lassal, paragraph 39).

         59. In  the  present  case,  there  is  no  transitional  provision
         concerning the  application  to  the  Republic  of  Poland  of  the
         European Union legal provisions on freedom of movement  of  persons
         in the Act concerning the conditions of accession to  the  European
         Union of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the  Republic
         of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of  Lithuania,  the
         Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland,
         the  Republic  of  Slovenia  and  the  Slovak  Republic   and   the
         adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is  founded
         (OJ 2003 L 236, p. 33), except for certain transitional  provisions
         concerning freedom of movement for workers and freedom  to  provide
         services in the Annexes to that act.

         60. Consequently, the provisions  of  Article  16(1)  of  Directive
         2004/38 can be relied by Union  citizens  and  be  applied  to  the
         present  and  future  effects  of  situations  arising  before  the
         accession of the Republic of Poland to the European Union.

         61. It is, admittedly, true that the periods of residence completed
         in the territory of the host Member State by a national of  another
         State before the accession of the  latter  State  to  the  European
         Union fell not within the scope of European Union  law  but  solely
         within the law of the host Member State.

         62. However, provided the person  concerned  can  demonstrate  that
         such periods were completed in compliance with the conditions  laid
         down in Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38, the taking into  account
         of such periods from the date of  accession  of  the  Member  State
         concerned to the European Union does not give retroactive effect to
         Article 16 of Directive 2004/38, but simply gives present effect to
         situations which arose before the date  of  transposition  of  that
         directive (see Lassal, paragraph 38)."

18. The appellant's case was a paradigm  case  of  applying  EU  rights  to
    present effects of situations which had arisen previously.  Contrary to
    the respondent's suggestion in the Rule 24 response that  a  "nexus  of
    recency" applied here (because the appellant had arrived in the  UK  in
    2010 and the sponsor had only begun exercising treaty rights  in  2013,
    (as per �21 of EO) that only made sense  when  prior  membership  of  a
    household was relied on, but did not make sense when  prior  dependency
    (which had continued until the exercise of treaty  rights)  was  relied
    on, as in the appellant's case.

19. There was  no  valid  justification  for  limiting  the  sponsor's  and
    appellant's EU rights. It was now accepted that the appellant had  been
    dependent on the sponsor since her father died in 2003 and the  sponsor
    had been a father figure to the appellant.  Mr � Ceallaigh urged us  to
    consider, that Moneke may not have been decided the way it was, had  it
    not pre-dated Aladeselu.  Crucially, there was nothing in the Directive
    or the Regulations which compelled us to  impose  a  restriction  which
    Moneke impermissibly did, in clear breach of the approach  endorsed  by
    the CJEU against a restrictive interpretation of the  Directive.  Mr  �
    Ceallaigh reiterated that the perversity of the result was reflected in
    the pure happenstance of the sponsor becoming an Italian citizen in May
    2010.  Had he done so in March 2010, before the appellant's arrival  in
    the UK, she would meet the limitation set out in Moneke.

20. We briefly explored with Mr � Ceallaigh two  further  authorities.  The
    first was Latayan v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 191, where, as �24 records, Mr
    � Ceallaigh, who appeared in that case, sought to rely on  Moneke.   In
    response, Mr � Ceallaigh pointed out  that  Moneke  in  that  case  was
    relied on for a  different  proposition  in  relation  to  evidence  of
    dependency, which did not arise in the appellant's case.

21. The second was the case of Fatima & Ors v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 124  and
    in particular �25, which made clear that to 'bite', any rights based on
    dependency must be based upon the EEA national, as opposed  to  another
    third-party  sponsor.   Once  again,  with  admirable  clarity,  Mr   �
    Ceallaigh agreed that the dependency needed to be on the EEA  national,
    but that the appellant was so dependent.  The challenge to  Moneke  was
    the impermissible temporal requirement.

22. Mr � Ceallaigh had referred to the  discriminatory  impact  of  such  a
    requirement and the "chilling effect" on the exercise of free  movement
    rights. We explored with Mr � Ceallaigh whether there might be such  an
    impact, if, taking the appellant's case, she could bring herself within
    the 'Moneke' interpretation of the Directive, simply  by  returning  to
    Bangladesh while remaining dependent, and then re-entering the UK.   Mr
    � Ceallaigh that this was analogous to R (SSHD)  v  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal and Surinder Singh (Case C-370/90); [1992] ECR I-04265, namely
    seeking alternative routes to having EU rights recognised,  and  was  a
    practical solution rather than a legal answer to the impact of Moneke.

23. We also explored with Mr � Ceallaigh whether it might be said that  the
    'Moneke' principle that the sponsor must be  an  EEA  national  at  the
    material time, was simply a practical requirement, based  on  the  need
    for the Directive and Regulations to have something to 'bite'  on.   He
    accepted that prior to somebody becoming an  EEA  national,  there  was
    nothing on which the Directive and Regulations could 'bite'.   However,
    the crucial point here was that once the sponsor was an  EEA  national,
    there needed to be recognition  of  the  present  effects  of  previous
    dependency.

   The respondent's oral submissions

24. Mr Tufan accepted that the recognition of the scope  of  dependency  in
    Article 3(2) had widened over the years, as confirmed in  the  analysis
    of the authorities in Aladeselu.

25. While  not  binding  on  us,  Moneke  was  a  reported  decision  of  a
    Presidential panel of this Tribunal and its reasoning  and  conclusions
    should be accorded significant weight.

26. It was plain from the natural wording that Article 3(2) was designed to
    provide only qualified rights to facilitation of entry and residence to
    other family members of EEA citizens where  there  was  an  established
    relationship of dependency  or  membership  of  household  of  the  EEA
    citizen.  The purpose of the Article was to facilitate qualified  entry
    and residence, in order to prevent an automatic  situation  of  an  EEA
    national  being  deterred  from  exercising  treaty  rights.   In  that
    context, the appellant's pre-entry dependency on the sponsor could  not
    be described as having an impact meriting the facilitation of entry and
    residence, for the simple reason  that  the  sponsor  was  not  an  EEA
    national.

27. The authorities which we had asked to consider had all focussed on  the
    rights of EEA nationals and their family  members  (in  Aladeselu,  the
    sponsor was an EEA national prior to the application).  The absence  of
    EEA nationality in the appellant's case meant that  there  were  no  EU
    rights  to  'bite'  on.  Lassal  and  Ziolkowski  and  Szeja  could  be
    distinguished as applying either to the arrangements  on  accession  or
    the timing of implementation of a new Directive.  Neither dealt with  a
    change in personal circumstances,  namely  the  acquisition  of  a  new
    nationality on which rights and obligations would hinge.

Discussion and conclusions

28. Drawing together the arguments and in reaching our conclusions,  first,
    we make the point, as reflected in the Upper Tribunal  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No  2:  Reporting  Decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber  dated  1st  March  2014,
    (�10), that in the absence of a starred case, the common  law  doctrine
    of judicial precedent does not apply and earlier reported decisions  of
    this Tribunal such as Moneke do not, as  a  matter  of  law,  bind  us.
    Nevertheless,  we  accept  Mr  Tufan's  submission  that   a   reported
    Presidential panel decision is of significant persuasive weight.

29.  Whilst  we  appreciate  the  attractiveness  of   Mr   �   Ceallaigh's
    submissions, we do not accept his fundamental proposition  that  Moneke
    imposes a temporal  restriction  on  EU  rights,  which  amounts  to  a
    restrictive interpretation of those  rights.   Instead,  we  accept  Mr
    Tufan's  submission  that  there  is  a  theme  running   through   the
    authorities to which we have been referred, that the sponsor,  on  whom
    the extended family member rights hinge, must be an EEA  national  when
    the dependency or membership of household exists, in the  country  from
    which the extended family member comes. Indeed, taking the  example  of
    �33 of Rahman, to which Mr � Ceallaigh's cited to us, it ends:

         "33. It is clear that such ties may exist without the family member
         of the Union citizen having resided  in  the  same  State  as  that
         citizen or having been a dependant of that citizen  shortly  before
         or at the time when the latter settled in the host  State.  On  the
         other hand, the situation of dependence must exist, in the  country
         from which the family member concerned comes, at the time  when  he
         applies to join the Union citizen [our  emphasis]  on  whom  he  is
         dependent."

30. In other words,  there  are  core  components  such  as  dependency  or
    membership of household in the country from  which  the  family  member
    comes; and the sponsor must be an EEA national.  We  agree  with  Mr  �
    Ceallaigh that the focus of Article 3(2) is to avoid barriers  to  free
    movement because of dependency on an EEA national.  We  do  not  accept
    that that the appellant's dependency on the sponsor, in her country  of
    origin, restricted the sponsor's free movement rights,  as  he  had  no
    such free movement rights.  The decision  in  Moneke  reflects  not  an
    additional temporal requirement, but the fact that both  the  Directive
    and Regulations are only engaged upon somebody becoming an EEA citizen,
    by virtue of which they may then exercise free movement  rights.   This
    is implicit in Mr � Ceallaigh's agreement  with  us  that  prior  to  a
    sponsor's naturalisation as an EEA citizen,  no  rights  under  Article
    3(2) 'bite'.  Mr � Ceallaigh seeks to meet that challenge, saying  that
    it is answered by Lassal and Ziolkowski and Szeja, namely we must apply
    those rights to "present effects  of  situations  arising  previously",
    just as rights were recognised for residence  prior  to  the  Directive
    coming into force; and in the context of EU accession.

31. We do not accept that Lassal and Ziolkowski and Szeja are  relevant  to
    this case.  The sponsor has gained  individual  rights,  from  being  a
    third  country  national  to  becoming  an  EEA  national.  Lassal  and
    Ziolkowski and Szeja reflect changes at a national level; the extent to
    which transitional  provisions  might  apply  in  the  move  from  non-
    membership to membership of the EU; or the implementation of new, time-
    related EU rights (permanent residence). Neither relate to a change  in
    individual, personal circumstances, as in  the  case  of  the  sponsor.
    What the Courts were resolving in both cases were circumstances where a
    member state was, effectively, being treated as having  always  been  a
    member state (thereby avoiding tiers of states  and  citizens'  rights,
    depending on when  a  country  joined  the  EU)  and  the  transitional
    implementation, at nation-state level, of new rights, in a way that was
    not restrictive.  Both are different  scenarios  from  where  a  person
    moves from being a third-country national,  with  no  possible  Article
    3(2) rights (as Mr Mr � Ceallaigh accepts), to  having  new  individual
    rights, on acquiring nationality.   The principle  of  recognising  the
    "present effect" of "situations arising previously" does not mean  that
    no distinction can be drawn between when a person was an EEA  national,
    with full individual rights; and an earlier period  when  he  was  not,
    with no such relevant rights, otherwise  the  purpose  of  facilitating
    entry and settlement, has nothing to 'bite on,'  as  there  is  no  EEA
    nationality.  At the individual level, (as opposed to the  nation-state
    level of the cases of Lassal and Ziolkowski and  Szeja)  the  appellant
    was never dependent on the sponsor, in the country from which she  came
    to join him, as  an  EEA  national.   His  subsequent  acquisition  and
    exercise of free movement rights cannot therefore have  been  inhibited
    by that pre-entry dependency.    Moneke  does  not  so  much  impose  a
    temporal limitation, but reflects a new nationality (with corresponding
    rights at an individual level), which the sponsor has not  always  had.



32. In these circumstances, we  decline  to  depart  from  this  Tribunal's
    interpretation of Article 3(2) in Moneke.  The FtT was correct to apply
    that authority and his decision discloses no error of law.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   J Keith  Date:  9th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
