
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04038/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2021                       |On 18 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         Ms Durgadevi Babubhai Dubal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                The hearing was conducted on Microsoft Teams

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by A Y & J
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Abebrese ("the judge"), promulgated on 25 March 2020, by
which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal
to issue a residence card pursuant to regulations 9 and 18 of the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the Regulations").

The Appellant, a citizen of India, is the daughter of Mr Babulal ("the
Sponsor"), a British citizen who had exercised free movement rights in the
Republic of Ireland and had then come back to the United Kingdom.  The
Appellant had resided in the Republic of Ireland with the Sponsor, albeit
for a brief period of time, before she too came back to this country.

The Appellant had had a previous appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
dismissed in 2017 (EA/07842/2017, decided by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Rowlands).  Judge Rowlands had not been satisfied that the Appellant had
intended to reside permanently in Ireland and that her residence in that
country had not been genuine.  However, he had also concluded that the
Sponsor's residence in that country had been genuine. Judge Rowland's
overall conclusion that the Appellant's appeal felt to be dismissed was
upheld on appeal by the Upper Tribunal, errors were identified, but
considered to be immaterial. The Upper Tribunal noted the absence of
evidence on certain matters relating to the Appellant's residence in
Ireland.

In respect of the present appeal, the judge directed himself to the
Devaseelan principles and concluded that there were no reasons to "reverse
the previous decision of the Tribunal."  He found that the Appellant's
residence in Ireland was not genuine and was simply a method of seeking to
circumvent the "domestic Rules."  The judge also concluded that the
Sponsor's reasons for moving to Ireland was to facilitate the Appellant's
ability to obtain status in the United Kingdom and that the Sponsor had not
transferred the centre of his life to Ireland.  The appeal was accordingly
dismissed.

The grounds of appeal in essence assert that the judge erred in respect of
the Devaseelan issue, having failed to take any or any adequate account of
new evidence and that the judge misdirected himself in respect of the
decision of the Upper Tribunal in ZA (Reg 9. EEA Regs; abuse of rights)
Afghanistan [2019] UKUT 281 (IAC).

At the outset of the hearing, Ms Everett accepted that the judge had
materially erred in law, as asserted in the grounds of appeal.

I can deal with my conclusions in this case briefly, given the Respondent's
stated position, with which I agree.  The relevant errors of law are as
follows:

      a) the judge failed to engage with the new and relatively detailed
         evidence provided by the Appellant and her Sponsor, all of which
         post-dated the 2017 decision of Judge Rowlands;

      b) if the judge was purporting to reject this new evidence, he failed
         to provide adequate reasons for so doing;

      c) that whilst purporting to follow the findings of Judge Rowlands in
         line with the Devaseelan principles, the judge misunderstood what
         at least one of those findings amounted to, namely that the
         Sponsor's residence in Ireland had been genuine;

      d) that the judge failed to adequately consider the potential impact
         of ZA.  That decision, on the face of it, had a direct bearing on
         the issues in the present case. However, the judge's only reference
         to it was in passing and only to the effect that he believed it did
         not "sufficiently affect" his conclusions. With respect, that was
         inadequate.

The errors are material, the judge's decision is flawed, and I exercise my
discretion and set it aside.

In terms of disposal, I have concluded that this appeal should, on an
exceptional basis, be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-
hearing.  The question of the Appellant's intentions in residing in Ireland
need to be addressed in light of the new evidence and ZA.  None of this has
yet been done and in my view it is appropriate for this factual assessment
to be undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal.  No findings of fact are to be
preserved.  The Devaseelan principles will continue to apply in respect of
the remitted hearing.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be  re-heard
         by a judge other than Judge Abebrese;




      2) The First-tier Tribunal will issue any additional  case  management
         directions deemed appropriate.




Signed   H Norton-Taylor                Date: 4 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

