
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/04896/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 5 November 2020                   |On 17 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                Hamza Shaukat
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, instructed by Albus Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Rushforth, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 29 December 1988.

On 5 July 2011, the appellant married an EU national, Linda Dimanta, who is
a Latvian citizen.  On 3 July 2012, the appellant was granted a residence
card as a family member (a spouse) of an EU national exercising treaty
rights in the UK.

On 13 December 2017, the appellant made an application for a permanent
residence card, based upon five years' continuous residence in the UK in
accordance with EU law as the spouse of an EU national exercising treaty
rights.  That application was refused by the Secretary of State on 22 March
2018 on the basis that the appellant had failed to provide a valid passport
or ID card as confirmation of his spouse's identity.  Following a judicial
review claim, which was withdrawn following a consent order dated 1 July
2019, the Secretary of State reconsidered the appellant's application for a
permanent residence card.

On 23 August 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
application under reg 15 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI
2016/1052 as amended) (the "EEA Regulations").  The Secretary of State
concluded that the appellant's marriage to Linda Dimanta was a "marriage of
convenience" and, as a result, it was not established that he was a
"spouse", and thus a "family member", of an EEA national as defined in reg
7 read with reg 2(1) of the EEA Regulations.

The Appeal

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by
Judge N M K Lawrence on 12 November 2019.  Having determined that the
appellant had a right of appeal, and that is not now in issue, the judge
went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal on the basis that the judge was
also satisfied that the appellant was a party to a "marriage of
convenience" and so it was not established that he was a "family member" of
an EU national exercising treaty rights and could not establish the five
years' continuous residence in accordance with the EEA Regulations in order
to establish a permanent right of residence.

The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds.  First, the
appellant contended that the judge had wrongly placed the burden of
establishing that his marriage was, in effect, not a "marriage of
convenience" upon the appellant.  Secondly, the respondent had not provided
the appellant with a copy of his 'marriage interview' which was unfair as
the appellant had had no opportunity to examine the evidence in advance of
the hearing.

On 20 April 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E M Simpson) granted the
appellant permission to appeal on both grounds.

As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, on 1 July 2020, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ
Bruce) issued directions expressing the provisional view that the issues of
whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and, if so, whether the
decision should be set aside should be determined without a hearing.  Both
parties were invited to make submissions both on the merits of the appeal
and whether or not a hearing was required.

On 20 July 2020, the Secretary of State filed submissions in response
seeking to uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the judge had
correctly placed the burden of proof upon the Secretary of State to
establish that the appellant's relationship was a "marriage of convenience"
and on the basis that there had been no procedural unfairness.  The
Secretary of State indicated in a covering email that she had no objection
to the error of law hearing being conducted remotely.

Further directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Owens) on 29
September 2020 directing that the error of law hearing be listed for a
remote hearing.  It would appear that the appellant's representatives had
made no submissions in response to UTJ Bruce's earlier directions.

As a consequence the appeal was listed before me on 5 November 2020 at the
Cardiff Civil Justice Centre.  I was present in court whilst Mr Chohan, who
represented the appellant, and Ms Rushforth, who represented the
respondent, joined the hearing via Skype for Business.

The Submissions

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Chohan relied upon the grounds of appeal.

First, he submitted that the judge had wrongly placed the burden of proof
in respect of whether the appellant's marriage was a "marriage of
convenience" upon the appellant.  He submitted that at para 10 of his
determination, Judge Lawrence had stated that the legal burden of proof
"from start to finish" was upon the appellant.  Mr Chohan acknowledged that
in para 11 the judge had directed himself in accordance with the leading
case of Sadovska & Anor v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 and the Court of Appeal's
decision in Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 that the legal burden was upon
the Secretary of State and that the evidential burden was initially upon
the Secretary of State but shifted to the appellant if there was evidence
capable of reaching the conclusion that the marriage was one of
convenience.  However, Mr Chohan submitted that the judge had not, in fact,
applied that approach.  He referred me to para 21 of the judge's
determination where, having set out some of the evidence concerning the
circumstances of the appellant and his spouse, the judge said that the
"appellant bears the legal burden of proof and the standard is on a balance
of probabilities".  That was a legal error, Mr Chohan submitted.

Secondly, Mr Chohan submitted that the proceedings were unfair because the
appellant had not been provided with a record of the marriage interview
upon which the Secretary of State, both in her decision letter and before
the judge, relied.  He also pointed out that the respondent had not
provided the judge with the documents which had been submitted with the
appellant's application and which were relevant to the issue of the nature
of the appellant's marriage which was for the judge to determine.  He
submitted that the judge had been wrong to state, in para 16, that there
had not been "any evidence of [] cohabitation; any photographs; tenancy
agreements and the like."  Mr Chohan submitted that relevant documents had
been submitted with the application and, although these documents were not
now available in these proceedings, Mr Chohan referred me to the marriage
certificate of the appellant and sponsor (at page 35 of the appellant's
bundle) which showed an address for the sponsor in London ("61 Pentire
Road, London E17 4BY") which was the address at which the appellant claimed
he lived with the sponsor after their marriage.  Mr Chohan submitted that
the judge needed to see the full interview in order to assess the matters
relied upon by the respondent, both in the decision letter and at the
hearing, in context.

On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Rushforth accepted that the judge
had been wrong in para 10 to state that the legal burden of proof was "from
start to finish" upon the appellant.  However, she relied upon para 11
where the judge had correctly directed himself in accordance with Sadovska
and Rosa.  She submitted that, in considering the evidence in the
paragraphs up to para 21, the judge correctly concluded that the Secretary
of State met the evidential burden and that from para 21 onwards the judge
had found that the appellant had not rebutted that evidential burden and,
as a result, the Secretary of State had established that the relationship
was a "marriage of convenience".

Secondly, as regards the appellant's marriage interview, Ms Rushforth
accepted, in response to a question from me, that it was usual to disclose
this interview.  She submitted, however, that in this appeal the judge had
refused the Presenting Officer's request to rely upon the transcript and
had restricted the Presenting Officer to cross-examining the appellant on
the issues that were raised in the refusal decision.  She pointed out that,
at para 15, the judge noted that the appellant, in his evidence, accepted
what was said in the decision letter based upon the marriage interview.  Ms
Rushforth was unable to 'shed any light' on the issue of why the
appellant's documents, submitted with the application, were not in the
respondent's bundle.  She pointed out, however, that these documents were
the appellant's and he could have provided copies of them himself.

Ms Rushforth accepted that rule 21(1)(c) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (SI 2014/2604)
required the Secretary of State to provide the Tribunal with "any record of
an interview with the appellant in relation to the decision being appealed"
and that applied to the appellant's marriage interview.  However, she
submitted that it was the judge who prevented the Presenting Officer from
providing the Tribunal with the interview when he refused to allow the
Presenting Officer to cross-examine on its contents beyond those referred
to in the decision letter.

Ms Rushforth invited me to dismiss the appeal.

Discussion

Before the judge, the appellant's case was that he was entitled to a
permanent residence card under reg 15(1)(a) as a "family member of an EEA
national" who has resided in the UK with the EEA national in accordance
with the EEA Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

It was not in dispute that the appellant married the sponsor on 5 July
2016.  The appellant also accepted that he and his wife had separated,
although the precise date was in issue.  In his evidence, the appellant
variously said that they separated in 2014, 2015 and 2016.  Of course, the
fact that the appellant and his wife had separated would not prevent him
acquiring a permanent right of residence provided that both she and he
continued to live in the UK and during the required five year period, she
was exercising treaty rights.  The issue was rather whether, under the EEA
Regulations, the sponsor was not his "spouse", and so a "family member",
because their marriage was a "marriage of convenience" (see reg 2(1)
defining "spouse" as not including "a party to a marriage of convenience").

The first ground of appeal contends that the judge wrongly placed the
burden of proof upon the appellant to establish the negative, that he was
not in a "marriage of convenience".  It is clear from the case law that the
legal burden of proof that a marriage is a marriage of convenience lies
upon the Secretary of State to establish on a balance of probabilities (see
Sadovska & Another and Rosa).  There is an evidential burden upon the
Secretary of State to raise a reasonable suspicion that the marriage is one
of convenience, namely one where the predominant purpose of contracting the
marriage was for one of the parties to gain an immigration advantage.
Thereafter, if that is the case, the evidential burden shifts to the
individual.

In his determination, Judge Lawrence made conflicting self-directions on
the burden of proof.  As Ms Rushforth accepted, the judge wrongly placed
the burden of proof "from start to finish" on the appellant in para 10 of
his determination.  Likewise, at para 21, having set out some of the
appellant's evidence in cross-examination the judge said this:

         "The respondent has set out his decision in clear terms that the
         appellant's marriage to Ms Dimanta is one of convenience.  The
         appellant bears the legal burden of proof and the standard is on a
         balance of probabilities". (my emphasis)

Both of those are incorrect self-directions.

However, in para 11 the judge correctly directed himself in accordance with
Sadovska & Another and Rosa, that the legal burden of proof is on the
Secretary of State and that that burden lies with the Secretary of State
throughout although the evidential burden shifts to the appellant if there
is a reasonable suspicion (and so the Secretary of State discharges the
evidential burden upon her) that the marriage is one of convenience.

It is difficult to understand how Judge Lawrence could set out in such
close proximity contradictory statements as to the burden of proof.  Whilst
of course, the burden of proof was upon the appellant to establish that he
was entitled to a permanent residence card, that burden did not include
establishing the negative, namely that he was not in a marriage of
convenience.

However, when Judge Lawrence's determination is read as a whole, despite
these disparate statements of the burden of proof, it is plain that he
correctly applied the burden of proof in fact.

At paras 12 - 20, the judge set out the evidence concerning the appellant's
relationship with the sponsor.  This included conflicting evidence from the
appellant as to when he and the sponsor had separated - whether it was in
2014, 2015 or 2016 (see paras 12 - 14).  The judge also set out evidence
concerning the appellant's suspicion that the sponsor and a Mr Bilal were
in a relationship (see para 15).  The judge then noted that there was not
"any evidence of [] cohabitation; any photographs; tenancy agreements and
the like" and that his and Ms Dimanta's joint bank account were closed in
2012 or 2013 (see para 16 - 17).  The judge then referred to the
appellant's evidence that, again he and Ms Dimanta had separated and that
"we have a Decree Nisi in June 2019" but that that had not been provided
(see paras 18 and 19).

Then at paras 20-24, the judge reached his conclusions as follows:

"20. The respondent bears the evidential burden of proving his assertion
that the appellant's marriage to Ms Dimanta is one of convenience.  This is
clearly set out in his 23 August 2019 Decision.  The respondent appears to
base this decision on three points.  The lack of evidence of cohabitation.
This is based on observations made by the Officers when they attended the
appellant's home address on 26 September 2017.  In cross-examination the
appellant accepted this.  The appellant informed the offices (sic) that he
had separated from Ms Dimanta.  He gave two different dates.  In cross-
examination he accepted he gave two different dates.  In cross-examination
he gave a third.  As I have indicated I do not find it credible that a
person would or could be confused on this momentous issue unless he or she
provides cogent evidence of some recognised vulnerability.  None has been
adduced.

21.  In cross-examination Ms Arif [asked] the appellant if he had any
evidence that he had a relationship with Ms Dimanta.  He asked Ms Arif what
evidence she was asking for.  The appellant is represented by two lawyers.
One a firm of 'solicitors', Albus Law and the other is Mr Magsood who
appeared to represent him at the hearing.  The respondent has set out his
decision in clear terms that the appellant's marriage to Ms Dimanta is one
of convenience.  The appellant bears the legal burden of proof and the
standard is on a balance of probabilities.  The appellant, having been
notified the nature of the respondent's case, has failed to address it,
even though he has solicitors acting for him.  It is incongruous that he
should tell Ms Arif that he does not understand what evidence he should
provide in support of his claim that his marriage to Ms Dimanta is not a
marriage of convenience.  Relationships do not exist in a vacuum.  The
relationship is said to have been conducted here in the UK and not in some
remote part of the world devoid of access to any means of communication.

22.  It appears to me that the respondent has demonstrated, on balance,
that the appellant's marriage to Ms Dimanta is one of convenience.  In my
view, the appellant's contradictory dates as to when the couple separated
is indicative of non-committal attitude to this marriage.  Secondly, he has
provided no evidence of the relationship, except the fact of the marriage.
The appellant has failed to rebut the respondent's assertion on balance.

23.  The third basis is Ms Dimanta's relationship with Mr Bilal.  In cross-
examination the appellant accepted that the contents of the 23 August 2019
Decision.  He accepted that he himself had suspicion Ms Dimanta was in a
relationship with Mr Bilal whilst they shared the same address.  I find
that the respondent has raised the issue of commitment to this marriage, on
balance.  I next turn to assess whether the appellant has rebutted it, on
balance.

24.  I find the appellant's oral evidence is that he suspected that Ms
Dimanta was in a relationship with another man when he was entitled to
expect her total commitment is indicative of his knowledge that it was a
marriage of convenience.  He did not challenge her, never mind Mr Bilal.
It matters not whether she treated the marriage as one of convenience or
the appellant did.  A marriage, in the context of EU Freedom of Movement
laws, is one of convenience when one party has more than one relationship
at the same time and the other suspicious of such does not challenge that
party.  The appellant's acquiescence demonstrates he considered it to be
one of convenience."

As a result of, in para 25 the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Despite what the judge said in para 10 and in para 21, at para 20 he
recognised that the respondent had an evidential burden of proof placed
upon her to establish that the marriage was a "marriage of convenience".
The judge then addressed the issue of whether the appellant had countered
that evidential burden.  At para 22, the judge stated, properly reflecting
the burden of proof, that "the respondent has demonstrated, on balance,
that the appellant's marriage to Ms Dimanta is one of convenience."
Despite the judge's misstatements, it is clear that in the end he correctly
followed his detailed (correct) self-direction in para 11 that the legal
burden of proof on the single issue of whether the marriage was a "marriage
of convenience" was upon the Secretary of State, who bore the initial
evidential burden, that burden had (in the judge's view) been discharged on
the evidence and that the appellant had not rebutted that such that the
respondent had discharged the legal burden "on balance" on this issue.

Read as a whole, therefore, I am not persuaded that the judge wrongly
placed the burden of proof upon the appellant on the issue of whether his
marriage was a "marriage of convenience".

Turning now to the second ground of appeal, it is clear that the
appellant's marriage interview was not served upon the Tribunal or the
appellant prior to the hearing.  In fact, as I understood Mr Chohan's
instructions, the appellant has never seen his marriage interview.
Further, the documents which the appellant sent with his application in
July 2017 and November 2017 (see covering letters at pages 61 and 31
respectively in the bundle) do not appear to have been sent by the
respondent as part of her bundle.  These documents, on the face of it,
included material relevant to the appellant's claim that, until the
marriage broke down and he and his spouse separated, they had lived
together.

Ms Rushforth accepted that it was usual for the marriage interview and the
documents sent with an individual's application to be included in the
respondent's bundle.  She was unable to assist me on why that had not been
the case in this appeal.  It may be, as was suggested during the course of
submissions, that the documents (perhaps including the interview) were not
included with the initial decision letter and bundle sent to the Tribunal
and appellant in March 2018 as the respondent refused that application, not
on its merits as such, but because the appellant had not provided (as was
said to be required) a valid passport or ID card for his spouse.  When the
reconsideration decision was taken on 23 August 2019, following the
judicial review proceedings, the respondent's bundle sent to the appellant
and Tribunal under cover of 1 November 2019 overlooked that the documents
had not previously been provided and only provided the decision letter,
papers relating to the judicial review and the appellant's notice of appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal.

As regards the marriage interview, the First-tier Tribunal's Rules
undoubtedly imposed an obligation upon the Secretary of State to send that
interview to the First-tier Tribunal, along with a number of other
documents. Rule 24(1), so far as relevant, provides as follows:

         "(1) Except in appeals to which rule 23 applies [i.e. entry
         clearance appeals], when a respondent is provided with a copy of a
         notice of appeal, the respondent must provide the Tribunal with -

             ....

             (c)  any record of an interview with the appellant in relation
             to the decision being appealed;

             (d)  any other unpublished document which is referred to in a
             document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) [i.e. the notice of
             decision or decision letter] or relied upon by the respondent;
             ..."

Rule 24(3) sets out that the documents must be provided within 28 days of
the date on which the Tribunal sent to the respondent a copy of the notice
of appeal.

The obligation arises prior to the hearing.  I do not accept Ms Rushforth's
submission that, as matter unfolded before Judge Lawrence, his decision not
to allow the Presenting Officer to cross-examine on matters raised in the
interview that were not raised in the decision letter, precluded the
respondent from complying with that duty.

That said, however, the consequence of not complying with that obligation
rests, in my judgment, upon an assessment of whether it resulted in
unfairness to the appellant.  That is also the issue in relation to the
failure to enclose in the respondent's bundle the documents which
accompanied his application.

Of course, in relation to both the interview and the appellant's documents,
it could be argued - and Ms Rushforth did so argue - that the appellant
knew what was in the interview and the documents were his and he could have
provided copies.  That is an argument which is not without some merit.
Certainly as regards the documents submitted with the application, given
that the appellant was legally represented, one might have expected those
representatives to provide any documents that the appellant had already
submitted but now wished to rely upon before the judge at the hearing.  If
it became plain that those documents were not available, it would have been
open to the legal representatives to seek an adjournment in order that they
could obtain those documents (whether from the appellant or by the
respondent providing them to the appellant's representatives and the
Tribunal).  That does not appear to have been the stance taken by the
appellant's legal representatives at the hearing.  It is difficult to see,
as a result, how the proceedings were unfair to the appellant on this
basis.

However, that argument cannot be made good, in my judgment, in relation to
the appellant's marriage interview.  As Ms Rushforth accepted, and it is
also my experience in EEA cases, where a marriage interview takes place and
there is an assertion by the Secretary of State that a marriage is one of
convenience, the marriage interview is disclosed to the appellant.  Of
course, at least in theory, the appellant knows what is in that interview
since he was present and the evidence is his.  Although that would not be
the case where there was also an interview with his spouse.  However, that
argument only goes so far.

First, it presupposes that the appellant is able to recall all that was
said and is able to provide his representatives and, if appropriate, the
Tribunal with further evidence as to what he said.  That may place an
unrealistic expectation upon an individual's powers of recall.

Secondly, in this appeal, the marriage interview took place on 26 September
2017.  The appeal hearing was on 12 November 2019 which was over two years
later.  Whilst the appellant might well have been asked to recall contents
of the marriage interview earlier, its importance at the hearing arose two
years later.  It would be unrealistic, in my judgment, to expect the
appellant to recall what was asked of him in detail and what his replies
were in detail.  It is no answer to that point that the respondent was, as
a result of the judge's ruling set out in para 7 of his determination,
restricted to cross-examining on material from the marriage interview which
was relied upon in the decision letter and which, during the course of the
hearing, the appellant accepted had been said.

Both the appellant's representatives and the Tribunal needed, as a matter
of fairness, to consider the appellant's answers at that interview (said to
be adverse to him) in the context of the whole of the interview.  As has
been said, "[i]n law context is everything" (see R v SSHD, ex parte Daly
[2001] UKHL 26 at [28] per Lord Steyn).  There may have been exculpatory
evidence which the judge was unaware of in the interview.  The underlying
fairness in disclosure of the interview record to the Tribunal (and of
course to the appellant who must usually be provide with the same
documents) is reflected in rule 24(1)(c).  It is also reflected in the
common practice to disclose a marriage interview in a case of the present
kind.

In the recent decision of Nimo (appeals: duty of disclosure) [2020] UKUT
0088 (IAC), the UT stated that there was no obligation upon the respondent
to disclose advice or recommendations from the officers who carried out the
marriage interview.  However, the decision was premised on the normal
situation pertaining, namely that both the appellant and judge had
"verbatim records of the interviews" with the appellant and his spouse (see
[27]).

In my judgment, it was unfair not to disclose to the appellant his marriage
interview in this appeal.  What, if anything, the appellant's
representatives could have made of what was said in that interview in the
appellant's favour is of course, dependent on its contents.  The
opportunity to make an assessment of that evidence was the very matter of
which the appellant was unfairly deprived.  Consequently, whilst the judge
was, I have no doubt, seeking to ensure fairness to the appellant by
denying the Presenting Officer's application to introduce the transcript of
the interview, in fact that resulted in unfairness to the appellant as the
appellant was denied an opportunity (through his legal representatives) to
consider what was being said against him in that document (including
matters that might have been favourable to him in that interview) and
address the judge on those matters.

For these reasons, I am satisfied that, in dismissing the appellant's
appeal, the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law.  Its decision
cannot stand and is set aside.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appellant's appeal
involved the making of a material error of law and the decision is set
aside.

Both representatives agreed that if the appellant succeeded in his appeal
then the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo
rehearing.

Having regard to the nature of the legal error and the nature of fact-
finding required, and also having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior
President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this appeal is to
remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge
other than Judge N M K Lawrence.

Given the error of law, the respondent should serve upon the appellant and
Tribunal a record of his marriage interview which took place on 26
September 2017 no later than 14 days before the re-listed hearing before
the FtT.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            10 November 2020
