
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05314/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th August 2020                  |On 26th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                              Ermal Hasandocaj
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the Appellant's bundle of 58  pages  and  the  Respondent's  bundle  of  157
pages,  the  contents of which I  have  recorded. The   order   made
is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born in 1986. He appeals against
the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Browne promulgated on 21 February
2020 dismissing his appeal against the refusal of a residence card as
confirmation of a right of residence under the Immigration (EEA)
Regulations 2016 [the Regulations]. The judge decided the appeal on the
papers at the Appellant's request.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that the judge:

             i)   applied the wrong burden of proof;

             ii)  erred in law in her approach to the evidence and in
             making irrational findings; and

             iii)     made a material mistake of fact.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria on 6 May
2020 for the following reasons:

"The grounds assert inter alia that in determining whether the marriage
between the Appellant and his EEA Sponsor was one of convenience the judge
erred in requiring the Appellant to show that the marriage was genuine and
not one of convenience rather than the legal burden being on the
Respondent.

In an otherwise well-reasoned Decision it is arguable, that the judge erred
as asserted.  The Judge states the burden of proof is on the Appellant
[11], however as clarified in Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14 "... the legal
burden lies on the Secretary of State to prove that an otherwise valid
marriage is a marriage of convenience ... ."  I do not consider it
appropriate to limit the grant of permission.  Permission is granted on all
grounds."

Submissions

4.   Mr Pipe submitted the judge misdirected herself at [11] on the burden
of proof stating: "The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities
(i.e. it is more likely than not) and the burden of proving this case is on
the Appellant. The relevant date for my consideration of this appeal is at
the date of determination." Mr Pipe submitted that there was no further
self-direction and no reference to any of the case law on marriages of
convenience.  At [44] the judge stated "The Appellant does not qualify as a
family member under Regulation 2 and 7, as a spouse, as he is a party to a
marriage of convenience. He does not satisfy the Regulations so he is not
entitled to issue of confirmation under the Regulations and has not
established an entitlement to a residence card under the Regulations. The
Sponsor cannot exercise her treaty rights as an EEA national and worker in
the UK in relation to the Appellant, as the Appellant and Sponsor are
parties to a marriage of convenience."

5.   Mr Pipe submitted the Sponsor was a qualified person and there was a
legal marriage between the Appellant and the Sponsor. Therefore, he had
established an entitlement under the Regulations and it was for the
Respondent to show that the marriage was one of convenience. There was
nothing in the decision to indicate that the judge had applied the correct
burden of proof in her findings.

6.   Mr Pipe then made submissions on ground 3 and referred me to the
marriage certificate in which the Appellant's occupation was blank and the
Appellant's father's occupation was stated as a lorry driver.  There was a
clear mistake of fact at [17] of the decision where the judge stated:

"The application states that the Appellant is a lorry driver (marriage
certificate) and she is a food factory worker.  The claim that he is a
lorry driver is inconsistent with his evidence in interview, he said he had
been a casual waiter in Albania.  The fact that he is a lorry driver goes
against him in relation to his overall credibility as he travelled
illegally into the UK first by car and then by lorry.  This is his stated
profession on a legal document and the documentary evidence is at odds with
the evidence he provided in the Home Office interview.  He has gained
illegal entry by planning along the lines of his work and he is evasive
about his purpose in the UK."

7.   Mr Pipe submitted that this mistake of fact was taken as a significant
point of credibility against the Appellant and therefore it was
sufficiently weighty to give rise to an error of law. Mr Pipe submitted
that, taking grounds 1 and 3 together, the decision was fundamentally
flawed and should be set aside.

8.   In relation to ground 2, Mr Pipe submitted that the judge had erred in
law in her approach to the evidence.  Applying Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC
54 the judge had to balance the totality of the evidence. The judge had
failed in the decision to refer to any of the questions in interview where
the Appellant and Sponsor gave consistent answers. The judge only referred
to discrepant evidence and not consistent evidence. She failed to
demonstrate that she had balanced all of the evidence before her and she
erred in law in not looking at the totality of the evidence.

9.   In relation to paragraph 12(vi) of the grounds Mr Pipe submitted that
the judge was in danger of importing irrelevant considerations into her
assessment of the witnesses' evidence at [31] and [33] of the decision. He
referred me to paragraph 12(i) to 12(iii) of the grounds and submitted the
judge's approach was flawed. The judge irrationally rejected the evidence
of witnesses and the documentary evidence was not inconsistent. The
photographic evidence was clear evidence of a relationship. Mr Pipe
accepted there were credibility issues but, looking at the totality of the
evidence, the judge had erred in law and the decision should be set aside.

10.  Ms Everett submitted that on the face of the decision the judge had
misdirected herself on the burden of proof. However, this was not a
material error of law because when the judge's findings were considered
that error did not affect the judge's approach to the evidence. It was not
clear on reading the decision as a whole that the judge's findings were
infected by a misapplication of the burden of proof because the judge did
not take the assertion from the Respondent, that this was a marriage of
convenience, and stop there. The judge went on to consider the Appellant's
evidence and her findings were intermingled with what the Respondent had
said in the refusal decision. Although there was a profound and
acknowledged legal error, unusually it was not material to the decision to
dismiss the appeal.

11.  In relation to ground 3, Ms Everett submitted that the judge's
findings at [17] could be 'ringfenced' because, notwithstanding the
significant weight attached to this mistake, there were so many other
findings which adversely affected the Appellant's credibility. This mistake
of fact was not material so as to amount to an error of law.

12.  In relation to ground 2, Ms Everett submitted that, although there
were questions in interview where the Appellant and Sponsor gave consistent
answers, the judge had looked at the interview as a whole. The judge
decided the appeal on the papers with the Appellant's consent. It was
difficult to deal with credibility when there was no opportunity to clarify
the Appellant's and the Sponsor's evidence and no cross-examination. When
the decision is looked at as a whole, the judge's inferences were open to
her on the evidence before her.

13.  The witnesses who submitted letters in support of the application were
foreign nationals and all had dealings with immigration. The judge's
inference that they had knowledge of immigration issues may not be correct
but it was one that was open to the judge on the evidence and one that was
not challenged because the appeal was decided on the papers. Whilst an
appeal on the papers should not be held against the Appellant, the judge
cannot step into this evidential void and must decide the issues on the
evidence before her. On the evidence in this appeal, it is hard to suggest
that the judge would not have found that the Respondent had satisfied the
burden of proof.

14.  Before Mr Pipe responded to Ms Everett's submissions, I pointed out
the evidence at pages 147 and 148 of the Respondent's bundle which is a
statement dated 11 June 2019 from the Home Office in relation to the
interview. It stated:

"The couple were initially spoken to in the waiting room where (S) claimed
she spoke Romanian and some Albanian. (A) was unable to understand what was
being asked of him as he only appeared to speak Albanian. There did not
appear to be any common language and as such a communications test was
authorise (sic) by the duty CIO. The test was then conducted with an EO
colleague in attendance.  A number of questions were given to an Albanian
interpreter prior to the couple entering the room. The interpreter was
asked to read the question to the applicant so he could relate the same
question to the sponsor. What was found (sic) that there was no clear
evidence that they could actually hold a normal conversation but by using
short words in broken English and by using hand actions and signals, they
could attempt some idea of what was being asked although the answers
provided were far from fluid.  As such a full interview was then conducted.


From the very start it was noticed numerous discrepancies including the
fact (A) stated that (S) had the same year of birth (1986) as his own,
adding that this was something they had in common.  He was asked again to
confirm her date of birth and again stated 19/07/1986 when in fact it was
19/07/1996! This was confirmed still further at Q.20 where (S) confirmed
she had no problems with (A) being ten years older!

What was also apparent was that (S) had only been in the UK for a matter of
days before the couple allegedly met and within a further 3 days were
living together. Both were asked how they could have had an actual
conversation together given there was no common language. (A) admitted it
was so hard, in fact unbelievable.  (S) said they used Google Translate to
hold a conversation.  At question 134, (A) was asked about the language
barrier between a Romanian and an Albanian. He replied, 'If someone speaks
to me in perfect English I don't understand a word but if someone speaks in
broken English I understand perfectly.'

A full transcript of the marriage interview with both parties conducted in
their respective languages is recorded on ICD5257

         Findings

         Following lengthy interviews with both parties and examination of
         all evidence provided the investigating officer concludes that this
         is clearly a relationship of convenience and not one that is akin
         to marriage.  It is likely that this relationship has been arranged
         solely to assist (A) to remain in the UK."

15.  I asked Mr Pipe that, given this evidence, the Respondent had clearly
discharged the evidential burden of raising a reasonable suspicion that the
marriage was one of convenience. Therefore, it was for the Appellant to
raise sufficient evidence to show otherwise and there was no material error
of law in the judge's approach.

16.  Mr Pipe submitted that it was accepted the judge had misdirected
herself in law. This misdirection was material because the judge had also
made a material mistake of fact, in finding the Appellant had lied in legal
documents, and the judge had failed to balance the positive answers in
interview with the negative ones. Further, the judge took into account
irrelevant considerations. The misdirection coupled with the other errors
of law meant that the decision was fundamentally flawed. Mr Pipe accepted
that stating the wrong burden at [11] might not have been material if there
had been a proper assessment of the evidence. However, the judge had made
other errors of law and her findings were not properly balanced. It was not
possible to isolate the errors as submitted by Ms Everett and therefore the
errors were material.

17.  I indicated that I was going to reserve my decision and Mr Pipe
submitted that, if I found there was a material error of law, I should
remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. The Sponsor had
lodged an appeal against the decision to deport her. A remittal should be
on the basis that this appeal is linked to the deportation appeal
DA/00174/2020 in the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham. Mr Pipe also
submitted that the Sponsor was in the early stages of pregnancy and this
may affect any listing of a future oral hearing.

Conclusion and Reasons

18.  The Appellant entered the UK illegally in August 2017 and the Sponsor
arrived in the UK in September 2018. The Appellant and Sponsor met in a
bar/club on 3/4 October 2018. They spent that first night together and the
Sponsor asked the Appellant to move in a few days later. At that stage they
communicated by a combination of hand gestures, body signals and using
google translate.

19.  In the application form the Appellant stated they started living
together in November 2018 and they decided to get married in December 2018.
The council tax bills in both names are dated April and July 2019. The
water bill dated March 2019 was in the Sponsor's name. The Appellant's
neighbour stated (in his statement dated 8 January 2019) that they moved in
together in October 2018 and he was introduced to the Appellant in November
2018.

20.  The Appellant applied for a residence card as an extended family
member on 14 May 2019 which was refused and he was served with notice of
removal on 4 June 2019. The Appellant and Sponsor were interviewed on 5
June 2019 and were married on 19 July 2019. There was an affidavit dated 29
June 2019 from the Sponsor's mother agreeing to the marriage. The Appellant
applied for a residence card as a family member on 5 August 2019. The
Respondent refused the application on 19 September 2019 on the basis the
marriage was one of convenience.

21.  The judge made the following findings:

         (a)  The Appellant's occupation of lorry driver in his marriage
         certificate was inconsistent with his interview in which he stated
         he was a casual waiter in Albania. This fact went against him in
         relation to his overall credibility [17];

         (b)  The Appellant and Sponsor were not credible witnesses and the
         marriage was contrived [18] and [19]. The reasons for these
         conclusions were set out in the subsequent paragraphs;

         (c)  It was improbable that a woman new to the UK would ask a
         stranger from another country to move in so quickly and to do so
         whilst relying on hand gestures, body signals and google translate
         [20] and [21];

         (d)  There were no text messages or other evidence of messages
         between the Appellant and Sponsor to show that the relationship
         began in October 2018 [22];

         (e)  The photographs sent with the application were undated. The
         photographs had handwritten dates added at a later date [22] and
         [30];

         (f)  There was no correspondence or bills to indicate that the
         Appellant and Sponsor had been living together since
         October/November 2018 [22];

         (g)  The Appellant and Sponsor were unable to speak a common
         language and agreed to marry without knowing very much about each
         other [23] and [36];

         (h)  The Sponsor stated in response to the one stop notice that her
         family in Romania were coming to the wedding. They did not attend
         the wedding. The Sponsor's aunt from Germany attended the wedding
         [24];

         (i)  There was no evidence from the Appellant's relatives in the UK
         or his brother in Albania [27];

         (j)  The letters from friends had been obtained post refusal and
         testified to seeing the Appellant and Sponsor together on limited
         occasions. They attracted little weight [26], [31] to [34];

         (k)  The council tax and water bills did not support the
         Appellant's claim that he moved in with the Sponsor in November
         2018 [28] and [29];

         (l)  The Appellant and Sponsor married and friends attended the
         ceremony and reception [31];

         (m)  The conflicting evidence and circumstances of the Appellant
         did not lend weight to the impression that this was a genuine
         relationship, notwithstanding the letters of support [34];

         (n)  The answers in interview were inconsistent and did not support
         the Appellant's claim that the relationship was genuine [37] to
         [39].

22.  The mistake of fact at [17] was not material to the judge's conclusion
that the Appellant was not a credible witness (Ground 3). It was one of a
number of factors taken into account. The judge's adverse credibility
finding was not infected by this error because the judge gave numerous
other reasons at [20] onwards for why he concluded at [19]:

         "He has provided proof of marriage by way of a marriage certificate
         and hence the evidence required but I find it is more likely than
         not and hence probable that the marriage is contrived in order to
         avoid deportation on account of the following further facts."

23.  The appeal was decided on the papers at the Appellant's request and
the judge considered the documentary evidence, including witness statements
and letters of support from friends and neighbours. The judge did not find
the Appellant and Sponsor to be credible and gave cogent reasons for coming
to that conclusion at [19] to [42].

24.  It was apparent from [37] and [38] that the judge considered the
interview as a whole. The judge's conclusion that the Appellant and Sponsor
had only basic knowledge of each other and little knowledge about each
other's family background was open to her on the evidence before her. The
judge was not obliged to set out the consistent answers given in interview.
Those consistent answers would not have led to a different conclusion in
any event. The judge gave adequate reasons for why the answers given in
interview did not support the Appellant's claim that his marriage was
genuine.

25.  The judge considered the interview in the context of the other
evidence and gave adequate reasons for why he attached little weight to the
evidence of the Appellant's witnesses. The letters were very brief and
lacking in detail. In general, they are dated November 2019 and either
state that the writer has been to dinner with the Appellant and Sponsor or
that the writer attended the wedding. There was no error of law in the
judge's consideration of the Appellant's case (Ground 2).

26.  I am satisfied that the judge's misdirection at [11] was not material
to the decision to dismiss the appeal under the Regulations on the basis
that the marriage was one of convenience for the following reasons (Ground
1).

27.  The evidence at pages 147 and 148 of the Respondent's bundle (set out
above) was sufficient to show that there was a reasonable suspicion the
marriage was one of convenience. The Respondent had discharged the
evidential burden. The judge's failure to state this in the decision was
not material because there was clear evidence before her to enable her to
come to such a conclusion. The evidential burden shifted to the Appellant.
There was no error of law in the judge's assessment of the Appellant's
evidence for the reasons given above.

28.  The consistent evidence when balanced against the inconsistent
evidence and the lack of other documentary evidence to support the
Appellant's and the Sponsor's account could lead to only one conclusion in
this case:  The marriage was one of convenience. Therefore, had the judge
correctly stated the burden of proof she would have come to the conclusion
that the Respondent had discharged the legal burden in showing that this
was a marriage of convenience.

29.  Accordingly, I find that there is no material error of law in the
decision promulgated on 21 February 2020 and I dismiss the Appellant's
appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 21 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 21 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
