
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/05537/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2020                    |On 20 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                ALDRI CEPELE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


   Decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Lloyd-Lawrie ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 10 January 2020 by which
the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to
grant him an EEA residence card as a family member of an EEA national was
dismissed.

By a decision sent to the parties on 2 June 2020 the appellant was granted
permission by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nightingale to appeal on all
grounds.

The appellant's legal representatives are BMAP, London.

Rule 34

This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread of
Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule 2(1) of the 2008
Rules, and also at rule 2(2)-(4), UTJ Grubb indicated by a Note and
Directions sent to the parties on 2 July 2020 his provisional view that it
would be appropriate to determine the following questions without a
hearing:

      i) Whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved
         the making of an error of law, and if so

     ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

The parties were requested to inform the Tribunal if, despite the
directions, a face-to-face hearing was required. Neither party made
submissions within the required time-limit, which has now expired. Neither
party availed themselves of the opportunity to file written submissions and
the time limit for filing has expired.

In the circumstances, being mindful of the importance of these proceedings
to the appellant and to the overriding objective that the Tribunal deal
with cases fairly and justly, and having considered the grounds of appeal,
I am satisfied that it is just and appropriate to proceed under rule 34.



The appellant

The appellant is a national of Albania and aged 30. His wife is a Romanian
national who is exercising EU Treaty rights in this country. He asserts
that he initially entered the United Kingdom in November 2014. He was
arrested for producing class B drugs and on suspicion of being an
immigration offender in June 2017 and voluntarily departed this country in
August 2017.

He asserts that he re-entered the United Kingdom in October 2017. He was
arrested in January 2018 and convicted at Harrow Crown Court on 13 June
2018 for possession with intent to supply cannabis. He was sentenced by HHJ
Barrie to 15 months' imprisonment and subsequently deported to Albania on 8
August 2018.

He sought admission as the spouse of an EEA national at UKCZ Coquelles on 2
November 2018. He was refused entry on the basis that he was the subject of
a deportation order.

On 28 June 2019, the appellant applied in-country for an EEA residence card
as the spouse of a qualifying national. He further applied for his
deportation order to be revoked. His passport evidenced his admission to
the Republic of Ireland on 31 December 2018. He asserts that he
subsequently travelled to the United Kingdom the next day by car. The
respondent refused the application by way of a decision dated 1 October
2019.



Decision

The appellant relies upon five grounds of appeal, though his primary
challenge is to the Judge having misdirected herself in law by applying an
erroneous burden of proof. At [15] of her decision, the Judge identified
the burden of proof applicable in this matter as resting upon the appellant
and the civil standard of proof, namely the balance of probabilities, as
applying.

By her decision dated 1 October 2019, and having taken into account the
appellant's personal conduct, the respondent refused to issue an EEA
residence card having concluded that the appellant poses a genuine, present
and serious sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of
society The application was refused under regulation 24(1) of the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ('the 2016
Regulations') on the grounds of public policy/public security in accordance
with regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations.

Consequently, having made such assertions the burden of proof rests upon
the respondent to the civil standard to justify her refusal on public
policy grounds and so establish that the appellant represents a genuine,
present and sufficiently serious threat to one of the fundamental interests
of society. It is for the respondent to establish that the decision is
proportionate. That the burden of proof rests upon the respondent to so
prove was confirmed by the Tribunal in Arranz (EEA Regulations -
deportation - test) [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC) and amplified by the Supreme
Court in Sadovska v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC
54; [2017] 1 W.L.R. 2926.

Upon considering the record of proceedings the Tribunal observes that
though counsel for the appellant did not expressly refer to Arranz in his
closing submissions before the Judge, he is clearly recorded as submitting
that the burden of proof rested upon the respondent.

The failure to correctly apply the burden of proof is a material error of
law having adversely infected the subsequent assessment of evidence. In the
circumstances, the decision must be set aside.



Remaking the decision

Neither party has indicated their position as to the appropriate venue to
undertake the remaking of the decision.  I have given careful consideration
to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal. I am
satisfied that the effect of the material error identified above has been
to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
and so it would be just to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal:
paragraph 7.2(a) of the Joint Practice Statement.



Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a material
error on a point of law and the Judge's decision promulgated on 10 January
2020 is set aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
before any judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lloyd-Lawrie.

No findings of fact are preserved.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 14 August 2020

