
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06684/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th March 2021                            |On 28th June 2021             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           Ibrahim Keifala Sheriff
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Sierra Leone against a decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent by an Entry Clearance Officer, refusing him an EEA family permit
to join his sister-in-law, an Austrian national in the United Kingdom, as a
family member of an EEA national.

2. In outline, it is the appellant's case that he is the dependent  brother-
in-law of the EEA national and is entitled to join her and her husband, the
appellant's brother, in the United Kingdom.

3. I begin not by considering the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  but  the
Reasons for Refusal of an EEA family permit.

4. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  begins,  appropriately,  by  referring  to
Regulation 8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2016.
The Entry Clearance Officer noted that it was the appellant's case that his
sister-in-law was his sponsor and the Entry Clearance Officer was satisfied
that she is indeed an Austrian  and  therefore  EEA  national.   The  Entry
Clearance Officer said:

  "I note that on your application  you  state  that  you  are  financially
  supported by your sponsor.  As evidence of this you have  provided  money
  transfer remittance receipts covering the period 28 September 2014 to  23
  October 2019.   However,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  sufficiently
  demonstrates that  you  are  dependent  on  your  sponsor  to  meet  your
  essential needs.  Unfortunately,  this  limited  amount  of  evidence  in
  isolation does not prove that  you  are  financially  dependent  on  your
  sponsor.  I note that for the transactions completed in  2018,  you  have
  provided handwritten collection receipts.  These are of poor quality  and
  cannot be verified because of this.  You have produced no  evidence  that
  you have received these funds in the form of  transfers  into  your  bank
  account, for example.  As a result, I cannot be satisfied that  you  have
  received these funds and they contribute to your essential  needs  during
  this period."

5. The Entry Clearance Officer continued:

  "I note that you have also provided two lists  of  money  transfers,  one
  from  Ria  Financial  Services  and  the  other  from  Money   Remittance
  Worldwide, purportedly  from  your  brother  to  you.   Whilst  you  have
  provided a list of transactions, this office would  also  expect  to  see
  money  transaction  remittance  sender   and   collection   receipts   to
  corroborate the details listed on the document  and  to  further  confirm
  that you have been in receipt of the funds from  your  sponsor.   Without
  further evidence I cannot be satisfied that  these  funds  contribute  to
  your essential needs, as claimed.  Further, you have provided no evidence
  to demonstrate yours  and  your  family's  circumstances  including  your
  income, expenditure and evidence of your financial position  which  would
  prove that without the financial support of your sponsor  your  essential
  living needs could not be met."

6. In short, the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that  dependency
had been established.  Broadly two reasons are given.  First, the  evidence
that any money was transferred was  weak  and,  second,  the  evidence  was
insufficient to show that even if the money was transferred it  established
a relationship of dependency rather than being a  welcome  gift.   Although
the Entry Clearance Officer was clearly  aware  that  the  evidence  showed
money being transferred from the appellant's brother to the  appellant  the
Entry Clearance Officer expressed no concern about this route.

7. The judge summarised the appellant's case.

8. The appellant said that his father died in 2012 and his  mother  was  not
able to support him financially.  He was studying for a  bachelor's  degree
in social work and the sponsor and the appellant's  brother  paid  for  his
education, rent, medical bills, food and clothing.

9. The sponsor explained that she had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
2007.  She married the  appellant's  brother  in  May  2014  and  had  been
exercising treaty rights since her marriage.

10. It is not entirely clear from the judge's summary  but  it  is  entirely
clear from the sponsor's witness statement that she said that she  and  her
husband (the appellant's brother) "provide him with the money for  all  his
basic needs".  It was then, as recognised by the judge, explained  that  it
was more convenient for the appellant's  brother  to  physically  make  the
money transfers, which is why the receipts were in his name.   Occasionally
money would be sent by cash.

11. At paragraph 28  of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  the  judge  found  "an
abundance of evidence" from the period September 2014 to  July  2020  about
money transfer receipts but was concerned that every transfer came from the
appellant's brother rather than the EEA national.

12. The judge was satisfied that the appellant's brother had made  financial
contributions to the appellant but was not satisfied that the EEA  national
had  contributed  to  any  of  the  financial  remittances  that  had  been
transferred.  The judge says somewhat enigmatically:

  "I have taken into account the explanation the EEA sponsor has  given  in
  her statement as to why her husband has paid the remittances. "

13. After considering all of the evidence, the judge remained not  satisfied
that the sponsor had contributed anything and dismissed the appeal  on  the
evidence before her.  The judge also dismissed it on Article 8 grounds.

14. As far as I can see,  the  judge  has  not  determined  the  issue  that
concerns  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  which  was  whether  there   was
dependency. Rather, without resolving that issue, the judge  has  dismissed
the appeal for a different reason, namely that the money did not come  from
the EEA national.

15. Permission was given by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noting  that  the
grounds asserted that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  consider  that
"material support" can  be  provided  by  the  community  national  or  the
community national's spouse.   Reference is then made to  the  decision  in
Jia v Migrationsverket C-1/05 [2007] QB 545.  However, the  judge  granting
permission also said that it was arguable that  the  judge  had  failed  to
consider whether the appellant was dependent on the EEA national spouse and
if so whether the dependency was sufficient to satisfy the Regulations.

16. Before me both parties were critical of the  alleged  relevance  of  the
decision in Jia.  Mr Lindsay said it  should  not  have  been  relied  upon
because it was not talking about  extended  family  members.   Mr  Briddock
accepted this.

17. I have to say I found Jia a difficult case.  Clearly,  the  grounds  had
in mind paragraph 35 in Jia where the court said:

  "According to the case-law of the Court, the status of 'dependent' family
  member is the result of a factual situation  characterised  by  the  fact
  that material support for that family member is provided by the Community
  national who has exercised his right of free movement or  by  his  spouse
  (see, in relation to Article 10 of Regulation No 1612/68 and Article 1 of
  Council Directive 90/364/EEC of 28 June 1990 on the  right  of  residence
  (OJ 1990 L 180, p. 26), Lebon, paragraph 22, and Case  C-200/02  Zhu  and
  Chen [2004] ECR I-9925, paragraph 43, respectively).

18. However, although I have read that decision, and the decisions in  Lebon
and Zhu, I find it hard to discern anything that unequivocally extends  the
required support from the EEA national to that EEA national spouse.   As  I
read the decision in Jia, support from a spouse appears to be an additional
route introduced by Swedish legislation.

19. That aside, I have no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal erred in law.  There are no clear findings  on  whether  there  is
dependency but there was perfectly clear evidence, which of course does not
have to be accepted, that the money transferred by the appellant's  brother
came from the EEA national, that is the brother's wife.  These points  have
not been resolved.

20. It is really unhelpful when judges take points that have  not  concerned
the parties and made them the main reason for determining an appeal but  do
not deal with the points that have been taken by the parties.   The  First-
tier Tribunal erred and I set aside this decision.

21. However, the appellant asked for a paper appeal and there  has  been  no
application to adduce new evidence.  There is every  reason  why  I  should
proceed immediately to determine the appeal  myself.   This  I  do,  having
reminded myself that the burden of proof is on the appellant who must prove
his case on the balance of probability.

22. For reasons that I will explain later,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
dependency has been established.  Therefore I have not had to determine  if
support from the non-EEA  national  brother  would  suffice.   I  find  the
position is rather more subtle than "who paid the money".  Dependency is  a
matter of fact and the source of that dependency must also be a  matter  of
fact.  It is common for married people to intermingle  their  finances.   I
incline to the view that I certainly  would  not  dismiss  an  appeal  just
because money said to come from the EEA national was physically transferred
through the accounts of a non-EEA national.

23. However if, for example, the EEA national was earning barely  sufficient
to support herself and her husband, but the husband happened to be  a  very
wealthy man, subject to argument, I would decline to the view that that was
not support from the EEA national, although I do not regard the  matter  as
clear.  There is evidence that the appellant's brother is in  regular  work
with an annual salary of �22,052.  He works in  the  health  service  as  a
housekeeping assistant.  It is not clear to me that any dependency that the
appellant might establish is dependency on the EEA national rather than the
EEA national's partner  but  as  I  am  not  satisfied  the  dependency  is
established I have not had to resolve the point.

24. I also make it plain that I am far from saying that  the  appellant  has
been untruthful in any way.  My concern is not  with  the  honesty  of  the
evidence, about which I do not actually make any  findings,  but  with  its
breadth.

25. The appellant himself provided  a  witness  statement  and  a  Statutory
Declaration.  In his witness statement he said that his brother had  always
supported him financially following the death of his  father  in  2012  and
that he started university in  2016  with  his  brother  and  sister-in-law
supporting him and that his brother and sister-in-law continued to  support
him and pay for his education, that is rent, medical bills, food,  clothing
and all life expenses.  He described himself as "wholly dependent on  them"
as he finds it hard to obtain work in Sierra Leone.  He then explained that
when they sent him money either his sister-in-law or his brother called him
or texted him and told him how much was due and to pass on a code  that  he
would use to access the funds.  He also  said  that  initially  there  were
handwritten statements from the agent in Sierra Leone who later changed  to
give electronic receipts.  He asserted that  without  the  support  of  his
brother and sister-in-law he would be destitute.

26. This was supported with an  "affidavit  of  support"  sworn  before  the
Justice of the Peace on official notepaper.  Crucially he says there that:

  "MR ARUNA KEMOH SOWA AND MISS. HUMU KOROMA are my guardian who are always
  sending support to me immediately after the  death  of  my  father  since
  2012.  These include feeding, schooling, clothing and medical etc etc and
  up-to-date. "

27. His sponsor made a statement in  which  he  explained  that  she  is  an
Austrian national living in the United Kingdom since 2007 and that she  met
her husband (the appellant's brother) in 2013 and married him in  2014  and
that  since  her  marriage  she  had  been  exercising  treaty  rights  and
supporting the appellant.  She said that, with her  husband,  she  provided
the appellant with money for all  his  basic  needs  and  particularly  his
university education, medical bills when they arise,  accommodation,  food,
clothing and all his expenses. She asserted that the appellant  was  wholly
dependent "on us".

28. She explained she worked as  a  children's  nursery  nurse  and  so  her
husband was better placed to go to the money transfer agency  to  send  the
money.  Accordingly, all the transfer receipts were in her husband's  name.



29. The appellant's brother made a statement saying that  he  supported  the
statement made by the appellant and agreed with what was said in his wife's
statement. He  then  confirmed  that  he  started  supporting  his  brother
financially since 2012 when the appellant's father, that is  the  witness's
stepfather, died and that the witness continued to support the appellant as
he is "wholly dependent on us for all his basic needs".

30. I remind myself that the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  careful  not  to
find the appellant dishonest but found  the  evidence  unsatisfactory  and,
knowing that was the reason the application was refused, the appellant  had
prepared the detailed statements and a skeleton argument but had opted  for
an appeals process which meant they could not be cross-examined.

31. Like the First-tier Tribunal, I have  no  hesitation  in  accepting  the
evidence that considerable  sums  of  money  had  been  paid  over  to  the
appellant over many years.  He is clearly being assisted financially by his
brother but that is not the same as saying he is dependent on his brother.

32. When refusing the EEA family permit the Entry Clearance Officer said:

  "Furthermore, you have provided no evidence to demonstrate that yours and
  your  family's  circumstances  including  your  income,  expenditure  and
  evidence of your financial situation which would prove that  without  the
  financial support of your sponsor your essential living needs  could  not
  be met."

33. This is important because it  could  give  context  to  the  appellant's
clear claims that he depends on his brother's income and has depended on it
for some time.

34. I am very aware that there are clear assertions that the  dependency  is
considerable and that the appellant is wholly dependent on his brother  and
sister-in-law for his basic needs. However, I have no details, for example,
of how the appellant lives in Sierra Leone, what sort of  accommodation  he
has and how he or, if as appears to be the case, he lives with his  mother,
they, pay for it. Nor am I  given  any  breakdown  of  his  expenditure  to
indicate what he can purchase with the money sent from the United  Kingdom.



35. I am aware of the letter from the Njala University speaking well of  the
appellant and saying how he is sponsored by his elder brother in the United
Kingdom.  This supports the contention that money is used for his education
but not that he depends on the money.  The transferred funds are useful but
it is not enough to establish dependency.

36. Like the Entry Clearance Officer, I make it plain that I am  not  making
any adverse findings  here.   The  appellant  has  NOT  been  shown  to  be
dishonest but there are gaps in the evidence which have not been addressed,
even though they were flagged up by the Entry Clearance Officer.

37. I am not satisfied on the evidence before me, having reminded myself  of
the standard of proof, that dependency rather than mere financial  transfer
has been established here and I dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

38. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its  decision  but  I
have redetermined the appeal and, like the First-tier Tribunal,  I  dismiss
the appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2021                   |



