
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/06176/2018
     EA/00146/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th July 2019                    |On 25th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Mr Qudus Arif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel, instructed by Hudson Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

For ease of reference, in I shall refer to the parties as they were before
the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State is once more the
Respondent and Mr Arif is the Appellant.

This is a challenge by the Appellant to the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Cohen ("the judge"), promulgated on 10 April 2019, dismissing his
appeals against the Respondent's decisions of 3 September 2018 (refusing to
issue a permanent residence card) and 5 November 2018 (revoking an existing
residence card). Both decisions were made under the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

The Appellant had married a Lithuanian national ("the EEA national") on 24
February 2013.  In applying for an initial residence card, the Respondent
had asserted that the marriage was one of convenience.  The Appellant was
successful on an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier Tribunal
Judge Keane emphatically found in the Appellant's favour, concluding that
both he and the EEA national were credible witnesses.  As a result of the
successful appeal a residence card was issued.  The Appellant divorced the
EEA national on 21 February 2017.  He applied for and was granted a
residence card on the basis of retained right of residence.  This ran from
29 August 2017 until 23 August 2022.  On 8 May 2018 the Appellant made his
application for a permanent residence card.

The Respondent's refusal of that last application was once again based on
the allegation that the Appellant's marriage to the EEA national had been
one of convenience only.  This allegation was now based upon the outcome of
criminal proceedings in relation to the activities of a criminal gang.
Evidence was relied on to show that the gang had operated by bringing
Lithuanian nationals to the United Kingdom to be married to individuals in
this country, particularly nationals of African and South Asian countries.
Two members of the gang had been shown to have connections to the EEA
national.



The judge's decision

On appeal, neither the Appellant nor the EEA national gave evidence
although both had provided statements.  The specific evidence before the
judge in relation to the criminal proceedings consisted of a witness
statement from an Immigration Officer dated 21 May 2018 and a copy of an
indictment relating to two individuals who had been convicted by a jury in
2017 of being part of the criminal gang.  The judge noted the application
of the principles set out in Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1, but found that the
evidence relating to the criminal proceedings all post-dated the decision
of the previous First-tier Tribunal Judge and therefore needed to be
considered in that context.

The judge found there to be a direct link between the EEA national and the
two individuals named in the indictment.  The judge noted a number of
payments going from the two individuals to the EEA national and some going
in the opposite direction.  He also noted that the Appellant's marriage had
been one of those identified by the investigative team as being a sham
marriage.

The judge goes on to consider the nature of the link between the EEA
national and the two co-defendants in the criminal trial.  He notes some
similarities between the modus operandi of the gang and the circumstances
of the Appellant's marriage.  In noting the previous First-tier Tribunal
Judge's decision he found it "entirely plausible" that the parties could
have rehearsed their evidence before the hearing.  [23] reads as follows:

"I find in the light of the fact that the convicted individuals were both
clearly connected with the Sponsor and that there were financial
transactions passing to and from them on frequent occasions for significant
amounts of money and in the light of the details of the statement of
offence in respect of the convicted individuals that the marriage between
the Appellant and Sponsor was a sham marriage and marriage of convenience
and I find that the Respondent's refusal of the Appellant's application for
a permanent residence card and revocation of the Appellant's residence card
were correct in all the circumstances."



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The grounds of appeal are threefold, first, that the judge failed to apply
the correct burden of proof, second, that the judge failed to apply the
Devaseelan principles, third, that the judge failed to give reasons on
material matters.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Chohan on 10 June 2019.



The hearing

At the hearing before me I heard helpful submissions by both
representatives.  Mr Khan relied on the grounds of appeal.  He urged me to
conclude that the judge had not in fact applied the correct burden, which
had clearly rested with the Respondent.  On the Devaseelan point and
related to the third ground, Mr Khan submitted that the judge had failed to
conduct a proper balancing exercise between the evidence of the criminal
proceedings and the previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal in 2015.

Mr Whitwell submitted that as a matter of substance the judge had correctly
applied the burden of proof, with specific reference to [23] (quoted
above).  On grounds 2 and 3 Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had been
entitled to take account of significant new evidence relating to the
criminal proceedings and that all relevant evidence had in fact been
properly considered by the judge.



Decision on error of law

I conclude that there are no material (and I emphasise that) errors of law
in the judge's decision such that I should exercise my discretion under
section 12(1)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and set
it aside.

At the outset I would state that the judge's decision is by no means a
model of a well-structured, detailed determination of an appeal. Having
said that, I have endeavoured to read it holistically, sensibly, in the
context of the evidence before the judge, and with reference to substance
over form.

I acknowledge that at [15] the judge provides what may be described as a
standardised statement of the burden of proof applicable to the generality
of cases, namely that the onus rests with an appellant.  He does not at
that stage modify the location of the burden of proof in cases concerning
allegations of marriage of convenience.  It is right to say that more care
should have been taken to tailor the decision to the nature of the specific
appeal being considered.

However, as mentioned above, it is right to look not simply at the form but
at the substance of any judge's decision to see what has actually been
done.  Mr Whitwell is in my view correct to submit that when one reads the
decision as a whole and in light of the evidence, and ultimately arrives at
[23], it is tolerably clear that the judge has as a matter of substance
concluded that the Respondent had shown that the marriage was one of
convenience only.  In my view this does show that he has ultimately,
correctly located the burden of proof in this case.

Three particular points need to be made in respect of my conclusion on this
issue. First, the judge has not stated, for example, that the "Appellant
failed to prove that his marriage was genuine". When the core conclusion is
set out, it is apparent that there is no clear reversal of the burden.

Second, it is of significance that the Applicant did not give evidence
before the judge. That was a matter of choice for the Appellant, but its
effect was that the judge had before him untested (and relatively brief)
written evidence contained in the witness statement. Furthermore, although
I was told that the EEA national now lives in Scotland, I cannot see any
evidence (at least none that was before the judge) to indicate that she was
unable and/or unwilling to give testimony at the hearing. As with the
Appellant's statement, the judge was left to consider the untested evidence
contained in her affidavit. It is clear from [21] that the judge found
there to be several important unanswered questions relating to the EEA
national's connections to the criminal gang. The unsatisfactory nature of
the evidence emanating from the Appellant is highly likely to have
increased the strength, or at least in no way undermine, the Respondent's
evidence.

Third, and following on from the point just made, there is the nature of
the evidence produced by the Respondent.  The indictment confirmed that two
individuals were implicated in the criminal gang. The Immigration Officer's
witness statement clearly linked these individuals to the EEA national (she
herself had accepted the existence of a link, albeit not to the extent
alleged by the Respondent). The link set out in the witness statement
related to financial transactions at the material time (leading up to and
subsequent to the marriage to the Appellant). It was undisputed that the
two individuals named in the indictment were in fact convicted by a jury on
5 January 2017.

A final, and very significant, aspect of the evidence emanating from the
Respondent  is the fact (not challenged in the grounds of appeal) that the
Appellant's marriage was one of twenty-six chosen by the authorities as an
example of a sham marriage. As I read the Immigration Officer's witness
statement, those twenty-six specimen marriages were in fact put before the
jury. That jury of course convicted (applying the criminal standard of
proof to the evidence) the two individuals with whom the EEA national had
had connections.

Alternatively, I conclude that even if the judge has erred by failing to
place the legal burden of proof on the Respondent, this would have made no
material difference to the outcome. On the strength of the new evidence
before him, the absence of live evidence from the Appellant and the EEA
national, and the applicable standard of proof, it is extremely likely that
the judge would have come to the same conclusion.

In respect of the Devaseelan point, Mr Khan is right to say that the judge
has not set out a detailed consideration of the previous judge's decision,
although he rightly acknowledged the favourable credibility assessment that
had been made.  However, it is undoubtedly the case that what the judge
considered to be significant evidence relating to the criminal proceedings
post-dated that decision, at least in respect of the outcome of the
criminal investigation, which had only cumulated in 2017 when the
convictions were obtained.  The judge was undoubtedly right to state that
he had to consider the new evidence in that context. For the reasons set
out in paragraph 16 and 17, above, the context also included the fact that
the new evidence produced by the Respondent was very significant.

I would also add that there is no question in this case of the new evidence
having been produced at the time of the hearing before the previous judge.
The criminal investigation was ongoing, and the disclosure of information
then would obviously have been highly determinantal, if not fatal, to the
outcome.

In light of what I have said, above, it was open to the judge at [22] to
find that there was a strong enough possibility of the Appellant and the
EEA national having rehearsed their evidence before the previous judge.

To the extent that there is a lack of more detailed analysis by the judge
of the 2015 decision, and to the extent that this may constitute an error,
I conclude that the new evidence was in any event sufficiently strong to
justify a departure from the previous findings.

I conclude that the judge himself has taken into account evidence put
forward by the Appellant and the EEA national in the appeals before him.
It is of some note that the EEA national, whilst having divorced the
Appellant back in February 2017, had clearly maintained contact and had
provided an affidavit in March of this year in support of the appeals.

Although it is right that not each and every feature of the modus operandi
of the criminal gang was present in the Appellant's case, the judge
recognised this in [21].

In all the circumstances, the conclusions reached by the judge were
tolerably open to him.  and the Appellant's appeals to the Upper Tribunal
must be dismissed.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law requiring it  to  be  set  aside  under
section 12(1)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.







Signed   [pic]             Date: 22 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

