
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06579/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 5th November 2019                 |On 21st November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                         Nichola Natalee Cunningham
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Bhachu of Counsel, instructed by Burton &
Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 29th June 1980 and is a national of Jamaica.
 She says that she met the sponsor, a Spanish national, in 2009 and they
married on 17th April 2010.

2.   On 2nd May 2018 she sought a permanent residence card on the basis of
being a family member of the EEA national exercising treaty rights in the
United Kingdom.

3.   That application was refused in a decision of 14th September 2018.  It
was refused on the basis that there had been insufficient evidence
presented with the application to demonstrate that the marriage was not one
of convenience.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against the decision, which appeal came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler at a hearing on 25th April 2019.
It was noted that when the sponsor's address, [~] Close, Nottingham, was
searched by Immigration Officers on 14th August 2018 there was no trace of
the appellant being there or any of her property or possessions.  The
explanation provided by the appellant to the Tribunal was essentially that
the sponsor was having serious drink problems and there had been in effect
a separation six months prior to the hearing for him to sort himself out.
She said that she was living at [~] Avenue but was unable to produce any
agreement or utility bills.  She indicated that she would go occasionally
to No 15 to look after the sponsor.  The Judge for reasons, cogently set
out in the determination, found that there was a lack of credibility from
both.  There was no evidence that the appellant lived at No 15 and her
explanation as to where she lived and her association with the sponsor was
found not to be credible.

5.   The Judge concluded at paragraph 23 of the determination that the
appellant and sponsor had not lived together in a genuine and subsisting
relationship at [~] Close.  It was noted that two marriage interviews had
been avoided without a reasonable excuse and therefore the conclusion was
that this was a marriage of convenience.  Challenge is made to the decision
and permission to appeal was granted in the Upper Tribunal on the basis
that material evidence may have been overlooked by the Judge in the
assessment. Also that in practical terms the Judge was concentrating upon
the events in the past few years without raising issue as to the
genuineness of the marriage in its inception.  It is not a requirement of
EU law that for a marriage to subsist, the parties must live together.  A
marriage is, however, a marriage of convenience if indeed it was originally
started for the purpose of misleading the immigration authorities as to the
true nature of the relationship and continues.  Criticism offered to the
Judge was that that distinction was not clearly acknowledged in the
determination.

6.   Thus, the matter comes before me to consider the challenges that are
made.

7.   As Ms Bhachu submits, this is a relationship spanning some eight years
from 2010 and the focus of consideration by the Judge, in practical terms
seems to be on the last few years.  The parties failed to attend two
interviews to be conducted to determine whether or not the marriage was
genuine, one in 2012 and one in 2018.  The point made on behalf of the
appellant was that there was a reasonable explanation for non-attendance,
namely that of ill health.  The respondent, however, counters that by
indicating that little medical evidence was submitted and that in the
interviewing years both seemed to be in good health to go on holiday.  A
potential complication of course, as highlighted by Ms Bhachu, was that
notwithstanding the failure to attend the interview to determine the nature
of the marriage in 2012 the appellant was granted a registration document
on the basis of her relationship to the sponsor.  Thus, it is argued that
there was at least an initial acceptance as to the genuineness of the
marriage.  The fact that the parties may now have separated and lived apart
does not necessarily detract from the bona fides of the marriage in the
early stages.

8.   The case has some unusual features about it.

9.   Following the marriage in 2010, there was a hearing before the First-
tier Tribunal on 12th December 2012 (IA/20356/2012) to determine the issue
whether or not the sponsor was a worker for the purposes of exercising
treaty rights.  The conclusion was that he was and thus the appeal was
allowed.  The appellant was a witness in that hearing and, as has been
noted at paragraph 17 of that determination, she indicated that she was not
living with the sponsor and could make no comment as to his work history
other than what was told by him.  She referred to a witness statement which
is not presently before me.  The only other direct evidence of residence or
otherwise is that of the pastoral visit carried out at [~] Close on 14th
August 2018 when only the sponsor was found in the house and no indication
of any possessions or influence of the appellant.

10.  A question perhaps to be considered in the light of that evidence, is
whether the appellant has ever lived with the sponsor at that address and
if not, why not.  If not, that clearly calls into question the credibility
of her explanation.

11.  It would seem that the nominated address for both is the address [~]
Close, Nottingham.

12.  A medical report of 13th July 2011 at Annex H of the respondent's
bundle of documents puts the sponsor at that address, as does a letter from
JobCentre Plus of 1st March 2018 at page 191 of the appellant's bundle of
documents.  Clearly, the visit by immigration authorities also puts him at
that address.

13.  There is a paucity of evidence that supplements that to which
reference has been made.  The only document which is also of relevance is
the marriage certificate itself, which shows that on 17th April 2010 the
sponsor was living at [~] Close.

14.  Thus, there would seem to be some evidence which links him over the
period as living at that address.

15.  The evidence which links the appellant to that address are a series of
Halifax bank statements, dating from May 2017 to February 2012, which show
that they are addressed to the appellant at [~] Close.  As the Judge
remarked in the course of the determination, the fact that the documents
are sent to that address is not evidence necessarily that she lives there.
There seems to be a marked absence of utility bills or matters or documents
in the bundle to show any joint residence other than potentially one from
St. Patrick's Catholic Primary and Nursery School of 22nd January 2013,
which seems to confirm that [R], who lives at [~] Close, was admitted to
the school on 9th November 2011 and is attending Year 1 class.  Both her
parents, the appellant and sponsor, collect her from school, signed by the
headmistress.

16.  Thus, there is clearly a paucity of clear information to support the
contention of any cohabitation as between the appellant and sponsor,
Although  cohabitation is not a requirement of a subsisting marriage for
the purposes of the grant of a permanent residence card, the lack of
cohabitation may be indicative of a state of mind or relationship that has
always existed. In can be understood that sometimes relationships break
down, leading to separation.  The real issue in this case is when the
marriage was entered into, was it a genuine marriage or merely a vehicle
for immigration deception and the gaining of status.

17.  As I have indicated, the learned First-tier Tribunal Judge perhaps did
not direct the consideration to that key issue in what was otherwise a very
fair determination.

18.  In those circumstances and with some reluctance, I do find that there
has been a material error of law in the approach that was taken such that
the decision is to be set aside to be remade by a rehearing in the First
tier Tribunal.

19.  Any directions shall be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal but I
highlight to assist a number of matters.  The first is to identify, if
possible, the reason why the residence card was issued to the appellant and
upon what information being supplied.  There was also a suggestion that the
appellant has claimed child benefit as a single person on 23rd June 2017
and claimed to be single in her daughter's application for naturalisation.
Documentation needs to be produced to support those concerns.

20.  Clearly, it is important for the parties to adduce evidence to show
cohabitation at some stage in the relationship or alternatively to indicate
why that was not ever done.

21.  Criticisms are also made by the lack of detail provided by the
appellant as to her residence at [~] Avenue.  No doubt, that should be
addressed in fairness to her.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision is set aside to be
remade in the First tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 14 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

