
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/07324/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 July 2019                         | On 08 August 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Mr Ranjit Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Waterfords
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Trevaskis ("the judge"), promulgated on 15 April 2019, in
which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the
Respondent, dated 29 October 2018, refusing to issue the Appellant with a
permanent residence card pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic
Area) Regulations 2016 ("the Regulations").

By way of brief background, the Appellant, an Indian national, had married
a Polish national, DK ("the Sponsor") on 20 January 2012.  At that point
the Appellant became the Sponsor's family member within the meaning of the
Citizens' Directive and Regulations.  Prior to this, the Appellant asserted
that he had been in a relationship with the Sponsor since 2009.  Following
the marriage and upon application, the Respondent issued the Appellant with
a residence card valid from 29 July 2012 until 29 July 2017.  The couple
separated in early 2013 and divorce proceedings were initiated on 24
November 2017.

For reasons that are unclear to me, the divorce has not yet been finalised
and therefore at all material times the Appellant and Sponsor have remained
married.  The application for a permanent residence card was made on 10
August 2018.  In refusing that application, the Respondent noted that the
Appellant remained married to the Sponsor and therefore he could not have a
retained right of residence pursuant to Regulation 10(5) of the
Regulations.  In addition, the Respondent concluded that there was
insufficient evidence to show that the Sponsor had been exercising her
Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.  A point was also
taken in respect of Regulation 21(5) in relation to an alleged a failure to
have produced documentation relating to the Sponsor's identity.

The judge's decision

On appeal, the judge found in favour of the Appellant in respect of
Regulation 21(5) (see para. 24).  At para. 25 the judge correctly concluded
that the Appellant did not have a retained right of residence as he
remained married to the Sponsor.  At para. 27 the judge noted that the
Appellant had only lived with the Sponsor for just under two years
following the marriage in 2012.  In his view this meant that the Appellant
could not satisfy the requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) of the
Regulations and therefore could not have acquired a right of permanent
residence in the United Kingdom.  On this basis alone, the appeal was
dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The grounds of appeal assert that the judge was wrong in para. 27 to have
imposed a requirement that the Appellant actually reside with the Sponsor
at all material times.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal in PM (EEA -
spouse - 'residing with') Turkey [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC) is cited in support
of the challenge.

Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 26 June
2019.

The hearing

At the hearing before me Ms Cunha quite properly conceded that the judge
had erred by effectively imposing a cohabitation requirement in this case.
PM is clear: there is no such requirement.

Decision on error of law

I conclude that the judge has materially erred in law as set out in the
grounds and as accepted by Ms Cunha before me.  The judge simply
misdirected himself as to the law on the issue of whether the Appellant
continued to be a family member of the Sponsor.

I therefore set the judge's decision aside.



Re-making the decision

Both representatives were agreed that I could and should remake the
decision based on the evidence before me, and this I now do.

I have before me: the Respondent's original appeal bundle; what is called a
supplementary bundle for the Appellant, indexed and paginated 1 - 445 (from
which Mr Bellara has helpfully provided relevant extracts comprising pages
185 - 220); a separate witness statement from the Appellant that was before
the First-tier Tribunal; and evidence obtained by the Respondent from HMRC
as regards the Sponsor's work history in the United Kingdom.

The following matters are not in dispute and the facts are as follows.  The
Appellant had been in a relationship with the Sponsor prior to his marriage
on 20 January 2012.  Prior to him becoming her family member on the
occurrence of the marriage, he had not been issued with a residence card as
an extended family member (on the evidence before me, there had never any
application for documentation).  The Appellant separated from the Sponsor
in January 2013.  Divorce proceedings were initiated in November 2017, but
the couple remain married to date.

The nature of the Sponsor's work history in this country is disputed.  On
the evidence before me it is more likely than not that the Sponsor derived
earnings from activity as a cleaner in the following sums and during the
following periods:

                i. 2009 - 2010, with a turnover of �1,590;

               ii. 2010 - 2011, with a turnover of �7,864 and a taxable
                   profit of �6,566;

              iii. 2011 - 2012, with a profit of �3,046;

               iv. 2012 - 2013, with a profit of �5,977;

                v. 2013 - 2014, with a profit of �2,320;

               vi. 2016 - 2017, with a profit of �2,717;

              vii. 2017 - 2018, with a profit of �2,922.

I shall return to the years 2014 - 2015 and 2015 - 2016, below.  In respect
of the figures I have just cited, Ms Cunha submits that these do not show
genuine and effective work, but only marginal and ancillary earnings.

With respect to the period 2009 until the end of the tax year ending 5
April 2013, a time when the Appellant was living together with the Sponsor,
I disagree with Ms Cunha's position.  I have considered relevant case-law
relating to the definition of a "worker" under the Directive and
Regulations.  In summary, the term "worker" is to be interpreted broadly
and with full regard to the need to provide effectiveness to the right of
EEA nationals to exercise rights of free movement.  In this regard, I have
been referred to the decision of the CJEU in Kempf [1986] EUECJ R-139/85,
in particular at paras. 13 - 16:

         "13 THE COURT HAS CONSISTENTLY HELD THAT FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT FOR
         WORKERS FORMS ONE OF THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE COMMUNITY . THE
         PROVISIONS LAYING DOWN THAT FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOM AND , MORE
         PARTICULARLY , THE TERMS ' WORKER ' AND ' ACTIVITY AS AN EMPLOYED
         PERSON ' DEFINING THE SPHERE OF APPLICATION OF THOSE FREEDOMS MUST
         BE GIVEN A BROAD INTERPRETATION IN THAT REGARD , WHEREAS EXCEPTIONS
         TO AND DEROGATIONS FROM THE PRINCIPLE OF FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT FOR
         WORKERS MUST BE INTERPRETED STRICTLY .




         14 IT FOLLOWS THAT THE RULES ON THIS TOPIC MUST BE INTERPRETED AS
         MEANING THAT A PERSON IN EFFECTIVE AND GENUINE PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT
         CANNOT BE EXCLUDED FROM THEIR SPHERE OF APPLICATION MERELY BECAUSE
         THE REMUNERATION HE DERIVES FROM IT IS BELOW THE LEVEL OF THE
         MINIMUM MEANS OF SUBSISTENCE AND HE SEEKS TO SUPPLEMENT IT BY OTHER
         LAWFUL MEANS OF SUBSISTENCE . IN THAT REGARD IT IS IRRELEVANT
         WHETHER THOSE SUPPLEMENTARY MEANS OF SUBSISTENCE ARE DERIVED FROM
         PROPERTY OR FROM THE EMPLOYMENT OF A MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY , AS WAS
         THE CASE IN LEVIN , OR WHETHER , AS IN THIS INSTANCE , THEY ARE
         OBTAINED FROM FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE DRAWN FROM THE PUBLIC FUNDS OF
         THE MEMBER STATE IN WHICH HE RESIDES , PROVIDED THAT THE EFFECTIVE
         AND GENUINE NATURE OF HIS WORK IS ESTABLISHED .




          15 THAT CONCLUSION IS , INDEED , CORROBORATED BY THE FACT THAT ,
         AS THE COURT HELD MOST RECENTLY IN LEVIN , THE TERMS ' WORKER ' AND
         ' ACTIVITY AS AN EMPLOYED PERSON ' FOR THE PURPOSES OF COMMUNITY
         LAW MAY NOT BE DEFINED BY REFERENCE TO THE NATIONAL LAWS OF THE
         MEMBER STATES BUT HAVE A MEANING SPECIFIC TO COMMUNITY LAW . THEIR
         EFFECT WOULD BE JEOPARDIZED IF THE ENJOYMENT OF RIGHTS CONFERRED
         UNDER THE PRINCIPLE OF FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT FOR WORKERS COULD BE
         PRECLUDED BY THE FACT THAT THE PERSON CONCERNED HAS HAD RECOURSE TO
         BENEFITS CHARGEABLE TO PUBLIC FUNDS AND CREATED BY THE DOMESTIC
         LEGISLATION OF THE HOST STATE."

In light of what is said in Kempf, I am willing to accept that the
Sponsor's earnings, whilst certainly very low, must be seen in the context
that she was living with her then-partner, who was himself working (of this
there is no dispute).  Thus, the Sponsor was in all likelihood deriving
remuneration from a member of her family (interpreting this term broadly),
namely the Appellant.  This reliance does not, in my view, preclude her
from having been a "worker" when seen in the overall context of her
circumstances at that time.  I conclude that her work was not marginal and
ancillary.

However, the Appellant and Sponsor separated in early 2013.  From that
point onwards, it cannot be said that the Sponsor was able to rely on any
earnings from the Appellant.  Her earnings, as evidenced by the HMRC
document, were �2,320 for the tax year 2013 - 2014.  In the absence of any
additional evidence (and I do not criticise the Appellant for this, given
the circumstances) I am unable to conclude that she was supplementing her
minimal (if not negligible) earnings as a cleaner with other sources.
There is no evidence that she claimed any benefits, or that there are any
other undisclosed sources of income, or that she was receiving money from
relatives or indeed a new partner.  I conclude that the earnings during
this period were so minimal as to be ancillary and marginal, and her
activity did not represent genuine and meaningful work. I have not been
referred to evidence which shows that the birth of the Sponsor's child had
the effect of her retaining the previous status as a "worker". Nor is there
any evidence that she was a "jobseeker" or "self-sufficient".

I acknowledge that the Appellant asserts in his witness statement that he
believes the Sponsor has worked throughout. He cannot, however, know this
to be the case following their separation.

I now turn to the two tax years 2014 - 2015 and 2015 - 2016.  There is a
nil figure contained in the HMRC evidence for both these years.  Mr Bellara
has submitted that there may be a number of reasons for why this nil figure
is stated and that it may not necessarily represent a true reflection of
the Sponsor's financial circumstances during this period.  With respect,
this submission is wholly speculative.  Whilst it is possible that the
Sponsor was, for example, earning money in one way or another but not
declaring it to HMRC, this, in my view, is too remote a scenario for me to
be satisfied that it represents the likely state of affairs at that time.
There are of course many other possibilities including the Sponsor having
relied on friends and/or relatives for support.

Ultimately, I conclude that the Sponsor was not economically active in any
material form between 2013 - 2016, nor was she a qualified person in any
other category during this period.

What are the consequences of this?

The Appellant became the family member of the Sponsor upon his marriage on
20 January 2012.  He cannot rely on a period prior to him acquiring that
status for the purposes of the accrual of time going to a right of
permanent residence (see Kunwar (EFM - calculating periods of residence)
[2019] UKUT 63 (IAC)).  The Appellant can rely as his status as a family
member of the Sponsor only from the point of his marriage onwards.

Two questions then arise.  First, had the Sponsor acquired a permanent
right of residence prior to the marriage?  On my findings, she had not.
There iois no evidence at all to suggest that she had been exercising
Treaty rights earlier than 2009. Whilst she was exercising Treaty rights
between 2009 and 2013, this did not amount to a five-year continuous
period.  In consequence, the Appellant cannot rely on any permanent right
of residence acquired by the Sponsor prior to the marriage.

The second question then is whether, as the family member of the Sponsor,
he can rely on the Sponsor having exercised Treaty rights for a five-year
period since the marriage.  Again, on my findings, he cannot do so.  There
has been no continuous five-year 'block' on the Sponsor's part.

Mr Bellra has relied on the decision in Samsam (EEA: revocation and
retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 (IAC). This does not materially
assist the Appellant. The Respondent did accept that the Sponsor was
exercising Treaty rights when the application for a residence card was
granted in 2012. However, this is not a case in which there is no
independent evidence of the EAA national's activities post-separation: HMRC
has provided relevant information and I have found this to be relaible.

Adopting a 'belt-and-braces' approach, I have considered whether the
Appellant has an extended right of residence under Regulation 14. He does
not. This is because, on the evidence before me, the Sponsor has not
acquired a permanent right of residence and, although I acknowledge that
the HMRC evidence shows some earnings in the 2017/2018 tax year, there is
nothing to show that she is currently exercising Treaty rights in the
United Kingdom.

In light of the above, the Appellant's appeal must fail.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 31 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

