
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07454/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 September 2019                 |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                Shazia Waseem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person, not legally represented
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellant's appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Moxon promulgated on 21 June 2019 dismissing her appeal against a
decision of the Secretary of State dated 13 November 2018 to refuse her
application made on 26 March for an EEA residence card as a family member
(spouse) of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK pursuant to
the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2019 (the Regulations).

First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission to appeal on 12 August
2018, though I have to say that the reasons for granting permission are
difficult to follow or understand.

Error of Law

For the reasons I have summarised below, I find there was an error of law
in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal sufficient to
require it to be set aside and to be made again by remitting this case to
the First-tier Tribunal.

The application as made was refused because the marriage, alleged to have
taken place in Pakistan on 8 April 2015, was deemed to be one of
convenience.  Three previous applications for entry clearance were refused
on the same basis and in July 2017 the appeal was dismissed with the judge
finding the marriage was indeed one of convenience.  The appellant
subsequently entered the UK illegally via Ireland, circumventing the
refusal of entry clearance.  The refusal of the latest application relies
on the failure of the appellant to address the concerns about the
genuineness of the marriage raised in previous refusals, in the application
that gives rise to this appeal, and in the previous appeal decision of the
First-tier Tribunal.

Relying on the previous Tribunal decision as a starting point, Judge Moxon
considered the available evidence and the submissions on behalf of the
unrepresented appellant, concluding that she had "failed to show upon the
balance of probabilities that the marriage is genuine and subsisting".
That causes alarm bells to ring because it indicates the judge has
misunderstood or misapplied the relevant burden and standard of proof.  In
an otherwise careful decision, it appears that Judge Moxon erred upon this
fundamental issue.  Without needing to recite the authorities of Papajorgji
and Sadovska, it is beyond argument that the respondent bears throughout
the legal burden of proof on an allegation of a marriage of convenience.
There is no burden on an appellant to show the marriage is genuine and
subsisting within the ambit of the Immigration Rules.  Whilst, with
evidence giving rise to a reasonable suspicion, the respondent may
discharge and thereby shift the evidential burden to the appellant, the
legal burden remains throughout with the respondent.

At paragraph 4 of the decision the judge stated:

"The appellant bears the burden of proving satisfaction of the Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.  She must therefore prove upon
the balance of probabilities that her relationship with the sponsor is
genuine and subsisting.  It is for the respondent to prove upon the balance
of probabilities that the marriage is one of convenience."

It appears the judge lost sight of the relevant burden and standard of
proof and also the issue in the appeal.

At paragraph 18 of the decision the judge said:

"I independently reach the decision that the appellant has failed to show
upon the balance of probabilities that the marriage is genuine and
subsisting and in fact, in light of the adverse credibility findings found
above, I share Judge Dearden's conclusions in that I am satisfied upon the
balance of probabilities that the marriage is one of convenience entered
into circumvent immigration laws to secure entry and leave to remain into
the United Kingdom."

Unfortunately, the judge has failed to appreciate the relevant test under
the Regulations is not whether the marriage is genuine and subsisting but
whether at the time of entering the marriage it was one of convenience for
the primary purpose of obtaining right to reside in the UK.  The wrong
approach was applied and the wrong burden and standard of proof has been
applied.

In the circumstances, the decision is flawed for error of law and cannot
stand.

Remittal

Where a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside Section
12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions or it
must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The scheme of the 2007 Act does not
assign the function of primary fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal.  Where
the facts are left unclear as a result of the error in this case,
effectively there has not been a valid determination of those factual
issues.

In all the circumstances, the appropriate course is to relist this appeal
for a fresh hearing, with no findings preserved, in the First-tier Tribunal
on the basis that it falls within the Senior President's practice statement
at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law such that it should be set aside.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal in
accordance with the Directions below.




                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 September 2019

Consequential Directions

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford;

It is likely there will be four witnesses, so the appropriate length of
hearing is probably two hours;

An interpreter in Pashto will be required;

The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
exception of Judge Moxon and Judge Simpson.

Anonymity

I have considered whether any parties require protection of any anonymity
direction.  No submissions were made on this issue.  The First-tier
Tribunal made no such order.  In the circumstances, I make no order.


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award as the outcome of the appeal remains to be determined.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 27 September 2019
