
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07591/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 May 2019                       |On 23 July 2019                      |
|Extempore judgment                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                              Isaac Nsah Dobilah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant did not appear before me today.  He was given notice of the
hearing in accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 ("the Procedure Rules"). As far as I am aware, the appellant has not
contacted the Tribunal to say that for some reason he was unable to attend.
There is nothing to suggest that he has sought an adjournment.  I therefore
decided to proceed in his absence pursuant to rule 38 and the overriding
objective in rule 2 of the Procedure Rules.

The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born in 1973.  He appealed to the
First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision made on 30 October 2018 to
refuse a residence card on the basis of a retained right of residence.

His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry (The FtJ") who
dismissed the appeal.  She concluded that in order to acquire a retained
right of residence in the UK the appellant must show that he had resided in
accordance with the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016
("the EEA Regulations") for a continuous period of five years and that at
the end of that period he had a retained right of residence.  Further, that
he must show that his ex-wife, the relevant EEA national, was exercising
Treaty rights at the initiation of divorce proceedings.

The FtJ referred to the fact that this was the appellant's third
application of this nature.  She had regard to the decision in Devaseelan
[2002] UKIAT 00702 in view of the fact that there was an earlier appeal in
October 2017 which was dismissed because the appellant had failed to show
that the EEA national was exercising Treaty rights at the date of the
decree absolute and because there were significant gaps in the appellant's
employment history.

The FtJ in this case noted that the appellant and his ex-wife got married
on 27 November 2010 and that they have three children together.  Their
divorce was made absolute on 29 December 2014.  Considering reg 10(5) of
the EEA Regulations she accepted that the marriage had lasted for three
years and that they had lived in the UK for at least a period of one year.


However, she concluded that the appellant had not satisfied other necessary
requirements of the EEA Regulations.  She noted that the appellant was
granted a residence card valid between 30 July 2010 and 30 July 2015 and
that he claimed he was unable to work due to illness, yet claiming to have
retained his status as a jobseeker.  She referred to the appellant having
provided wage slips that covered two months in 2012, one month in 2013, two
months in 2017, seven months in 2018 and two months in 2019.  In the light
of that evidence she concluded that the appellant had failed to provide
sufficient evidence to show that he had worked for a continuous five-year
period.  Nor had he shown that he had retained his worker status as a
jobseeker when he was not in employment.

She went on to find that, in line with the findings of the FtT in October
2017, the appellant had failed to provide any evidence to show that his EEA
national ex-wife was exercising Treaty rights on the initiation of, or the
completion of, the divorce proceedings.  She disagreed with the appellant's
contention that his former spouse's permanent residence status precluded
her from the need to establish that last requirement.

In the grounds of appeal, the appellant, who was unrepresented before the
FtT and is unrepresented again before the Upper Tribunal, makes the
assertion that the FtJ failed to take into account his mental health
conditions and the recession which prevailed at that time, making the job
market difficult.  It is also contended that she misinterpreted the
evidence and 'exaggerated' the reasons for dismissing the appeal.  It is
argued that his ex-spouse had exercised Treaty rights for five years.

In her submissions, Ms Jones resisted the grounds, suggesting that even if
there was an error in the FtJ's assessment of the appellant's employment,
any such error was not material because, put simply, the appellant had not
established that his ex-spouse was exercising Treaty rights at the date of
divorce.

    Assessment

The FtJ referred to the appellant's claim that he was unable to work due to
illness. However, it appears that the only evidence of any illness in the
documents before the FtJ was firstly a Statement of Fitness for Work for
the purpose of Social Security and Statutory Sick Pay dated 8 September
2014 stating that the appellant was unfit for work for a period of 30 days
because of depression. Secondly, there was the first page of a two page
letter from the Charter House "Assessment & Single Point of Access" service
in Luton dated 2 September 2014 which refers to a diagnosis (unspecified)
that the appellant wanted changed and to the appellant having suffered from
depression in the past although he refused to give details. No diagnosis is
apparent from that part of the letter that has been provided.

Therefore, even if it could be said that the FtJ failed to make an
assessment of the issue of his health in terms of whether the appellant was
exercising Treaty rights, there was in fact little evidence before the
judge to assess in that respect.  Furthermore, I am satisfied that the FtJ
did properly appraise the evidence in terms of the appellant's employment
and she was entitled to conclude that he had not provided sufficient
evidence to show that he had worked for a continuous five-year period.

Similarly, and significantly, the appellant failed to establish that his ex-
wife was exercising Treaty rights at the time of the divorce.  That was a
finding that was made at the appeal in October 2017. The FtJ in the instant
appeal quite properly had regard to the findings in that earlier appeal and
used them as her starting point.

The FtJ rightly rejected the contention that his former spouse's permanent
residence status obviated the need for the appellant to establish that she
was exercising Treaty rights at the date of the divorce.  The mere fact
that she had permanent residence status does not mean that she was
exercising Treaty rights at the date of divorce.  That issue needed to have
been looked at as at the date of the hearing before the FtT.

In all those circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any error of
law in the FtJ's decision. Her decision to dismiss the appeal must
therefore stand.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/07/19
