
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07545/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 23rd August 2019                  |
|Extempore decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                               Mr Omar Saleem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik, Counsel, instructed on a Direct Access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 17 August 1988.  He appeals
against a decision of Judge Meah of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on
7 March 2019 dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent 16
June 2016 to refuse his application for a residence card as the durable
partner of an EEA citizen.



Procedural background

This matter was originally listed before Judge Samimi of the First-tier
Tribunal who, in a decision and reasons promulgated on 18 September 2017,
held that the tribunal did not enjoy the jurisdiction to hear the case.
This was in light of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC),
which held that there was no right of appeal against a decision under the
Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 against a decision of
the respondent to refuse an application for a residence card as an extended
family member or durable partner.  Pursuant to Khan v Secretary of State
for the Home Department (AIRE Centre intervening) [2017] EWCA Civ 1755,
endorsed by the Supreme Court in SM (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2018] UKSC 9, it is now established that there is a
statutory right of appeal against such decisions.  In a decision and
reasons promulgated on 27 April 2018, Judge Rintoul set aside Judge
Samimi's decision, in light of Khan and SM.  It was re-listed before Judge
Meah, and it is Judge Meah's decision which is under consideration in these
proceedings.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant did not attend the hearing before Judge Meah, which took
place on 19 February 2019.  At 4.58pm on 18 February, he sent a fax to the
Tribunal stating that he wished to apply for an adjournment.  That request
stated that, essentially, he was seeking to find alternative legal
representation as the solicitors he had previously instructed had not
provided him with the service that he wanted.  It is apparent from the
decision of Judge Meah that that adjournment request was not presented to
him by the Tribunal administration.  The appellant did not attend the
hearing to renew the application, despite having not received any form of
acknowledgement or response to it.  At [13] and [14] of his decision, Judge
Meah addressed the non-attendance of the appellant in these terms:

"13. There was no appearance by the appellant or any representatives and no
explanation has been received for the absence.  I waited until 1pm to allow
possible difficulties in arriving at court for 10am.  No-one turned up.

14.  I am nonetheless satisfied that all relevant notices had been properly
served on all parties concerned and there is sufficient information before
me to make a fair and just decision in this matter in the absence of the
appellant, hence I decided to proceed to hear the appeal.  Mr Reader
appeared for the respondent.  He relied on the RFRL [the reasons for
refusal letter], the contents of which I have duly taken note I my
consideration of this appeal."

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the failure of the Tribunal
administration to place the application before the judge was a material
error.  Mr Malik's submission is that the entire premise upon which the
judge assessed whether or not it was fair to proceed in the absence of the
appellant was flawed.  The provisions of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 ("the First-tier
Tribunal Procedure Rules") concerning proceeding the absence of a party
were not engaged, as there had been a procedural error in transmitting the
adjournment request to the judge.

The contention is that, had the judge considered the adjournment request
and the reasons that the appellant had provided, he may - indeed would
almost inevitably had to - have adjourned.  Mr Malik submits that it would
not have been fair for the judge to have proceeded in the absence of an
adjournment, even were the appellant present before him.  Permission to
appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts on that basis.

Discussion

The appellant faxed a notice of adjournment to the court very shortly
before the close of working hours the evening before the hearing.  The
question for my consideration is whether the apparent administrative error
which took place by virtue of the adjournment request not being placed
before the judge infected the foundation upon which the judge decided that
it was fair to proceed in the absence of the appellant.

There can be no question that the Judge correctly applied rule 28 of the
First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules, insofar as he considered that that was
the presenting issue. Rule 28 permits the tribunal to proceed with a
hearing in the absence of a party provided it is satisfied that two
criteria are met:

      a) First, that the party concerned has been notified of the hearing,
         or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify the party. It is
         common ground in the present matter at the appellant knew that the
         hearing was scheduled to take place, and have received the notice
         of hearing.

      b) Secondly, the tribunal may proceed in the absence of the party if
         it considers it to be in the interests of justice to proceed with
         the hearing.

Turning to the second limb, at [13] and [14], the judge gave reasons for
why he considered it to be "fair and just" for the proceedings to take
place in the absence of the appellant. I consider the judge to have been
entitled to reach the conclusion that it was in the interests of justice to
proceed; the matter had a long history and had been before the tribunal in
one form or another for a considerable period. The appellant had been
legally represented and had previously furnished a copy of the bundle upon
which he proposed to rely.  It featured a statement from the appellant and
other documentary evidence.  The judge waited until 1 PM on the day of the
hearing in order to give the appellant the maximum possible time to attend
the proceedings. Such a step was a hallmark of the fairness with which the
judge approached the non-attendance of the appellant. The judge would have
been able to use the case management tools at his disposal to conduct the
hearing in the absence of the appellant in a fair manner, taking into
account the matters the appellant would have been likely to raise, and he
attended. Indeed, so much is clear from the substantive analysis later in
the judge's decision, whereby he analysed the case advanced on behalf of
the appellant in meticulously fair terms.

This was a case where the appellant's success depended on him being able to
demonstrate and he was in a durable relationship with his Romanian sponsor,
who had to be a "qualified person" under the Immigration (European Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 at the relevant time. Against that background, the
judge later had regard to the appellant's own written witness statement, in
which he said that the relationship with his former partner had broken
down, and that she was now residing in Romania with their child. Those
developments in the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor
were, as the judge rightly found on the basis of the evidence before him,
fatal to the appellant being able to succeed. As such, having clearly have
regard to the evidence the appellant had provided with the benefit of legal
representation at an earlier point, the judge's decision that it would be
fair and just to proceed in the appellant's absence was sound.

The substantive complaint advanced by Mr Malik is that the rule 28
assessment was flawed, as the judge clearly did not know that the appellant
had made a last-minute adjournment request the night before. It was based
on a false premise, submits Mr Malik. Had the judge been seized of the
adjournment request, the analysis the judge had to perform would have taken
on a different dimension. The guiding principle for whether adjournment
should be granted is not whether reasons of cost or expedience mitigate
against adjourning the proceedings, but whether it would be possible for
the appellant to have a fair hearing: Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)
[2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

Mr Malik submits that the reasons given by the appellant for seeking an
adjournment, namely that his relationship with his previous legal
representatives had broken down, and he sought to secure new
representation, would have meant that the judge should have granted the
adjournment request.

In order for Mr Malik's submission to have force, it is necessary for the
adjournment request to have had some validity, such that it would not only
be necessary for a judge formally to consider it, but that by virtue of the
fact it had not been brought to his attention, there was some form of
procedural error infecting the fairness of the proceedings.

At the hearing, I invited Mr Malik to address me on which provisions of the
rules or relevant practice directions govern the making of adjournment
applications. Initially, Mr Malik highlighted rule 12 of the Tribunal
Procedure Rules, which provides that any document "to be provided to the
tribunal" may be sent by fax, as a committed method of service. Mr Malik
submitted that there is an unfettered right conferred by the rules on any
party to make an adjournment application at any point prior to the hearing
taking place. I invited Mr Malik to focus his submissions on part 9 of the
Senior President of Tribunal's Practice Direction for the Immigration and
Asylum Chamber, dated 18 December 2018. It provides:

         "9. Adjournments


         9.1. Applications for the adjournment of appeals (other  than  fast
         track appeals) listed for hearing before the Tribunal must be  made
         not later than 5.00p.m. one clear working day before  the  date  of
         the hearing.


         9.2. For the avoidance of doubt, where a case is listed for hearing
         on, for example, a Friday, the  application  must  be  received  by
         5.00p.m. on the Wednesday.


         9.3. The application for an adjournment must be supported  by  full
         reasons and must be made  in  accordance  with  relevant  Procedure
         Rules.


         9.4. Any  application  made  later  than  the  end  of  the  period
         mentioned in paragraph 9.1 must be made  to  the  Tribunal  at  the
         hearing and will  require  the  attendance  of  the  party  or  the
         representative of the party seeking the adjournment.


         9.5. It will be only in the most exceptional circumstances  that  a
         late application for an adjournment will be considered without  the
         attendance of a party or representative.


         9.6. Parties must not assume that an application, even if  made  in
         accordance with paragraph 9.1, will be  successful  and  they  must
         always  check  with  the  Tribunal  as  to  the  outcome   of   the
         application.


         9.7. Any application for the adjournment of  a  fast  track  appeal
         must be made to the Tribunal at the hearing and will be  considered
         by the Tribunal in accordance with relevant Procedure Rules.


         9.8. If an adjournment is not granted and the party fails to attend
         the hearing, the Tribunal may in certain circumstances proceed with
         the hearing in that party's absence."


Once he had had time to consider the practice direction at the hearing, Mr
Malik realistically accepted, as he was bound to, but the adjournment
request was in breach of the practice direction. He also realistically
accepted that it was "discourteous" of the appellant not to attend the
hearing in order to renew his adjournment application in person. The
appellant has never explained why he did not attend the tribunal, in
compliance with the notice he had received.  Nevertheless, submits Mr
Malik, the overriding criterion as to whether or not an adjournment should
have been granted was not one of whether the appellant had been
discourteous, nor whether he had complied with the practice direction, but
it was whether the requirements of fairness were such that an adjournment
was required.

I find no support in the practice direction or the procedure rules for Mr
Malik's submission that there is an unfettered right to make an application
for an adjournment at any stage in the process, no matter how late. There
were no "exceptional circumstances" for the purposes of paragraph 9.5 of
the practice direction permitting the appellant not to attend, and no
explanation has been provided to me as to why the appellant did not attend.

However, it is not necessary for me to reach a final view concerning
whether such an unfettered right exists. On the information included in the
adjournment request, it would not have been necessary for an adjournment to
be granted in order for the appellant to enjoy a fair hearing. Judges in
the First-tier Tribunal are well versed in taking unrepresented litigants
through the key elements of their case, explaining to them what they must
satisfy in order to succeed, in a language they are able to understand.
This appellant would have been attending the substantive hearing before the
First-tier Tribunal unrepresented at the hearing but having had the benefit
of legal representation during the earlier stages for the preparation of
his case.

Addressing the appellant's evidence in written form is also helpful.  The
judge noted at [19] of his decision, that [4] to [8] of the witness
statement that had already been provided by the appellant confirmed that
the appellant was separated from his partner as she was living in Romania.
The judge ascribed significance to those developments in the relationship
for the purposes of finding that the relationship was no longer durable and
indeed, the judge could have gone on to find, although did not need to,
that because the appellant's sponsor was no longer a "qualified person" in
this country, that the whole issue of whether or not he was a family member
of a Union citizen fell away in any event.  In any event, the judge was
right to analyse the appellant's evidence in that way, which was of course
fatal to the appellant's ability to succeed in the appeal.

Mr Malik contends that the evidence that was before the judge in the form
of that witness statement was over a year old.  The statement should not
have been treated as determinative of the factual issues the tribunal
needed to resolve, he submits.  The issue for the consideration of the
First-tier Tribunal relates to whether, at the date of hearing, there was a
durable relationship with the sponsor exercising treaty rights in this
country.  Mr Malik submits that it is possible that there could have been
developments in the relationship such that it had revived to such an extent
that the appeal could have been allowed.  Mr Malik said his instructions
were that the appellant's relationship with the sponsor had been "on and
off" in the year leading to the hearing.

I consider those submissions to be flawed.  On the face of it, the
appellant, had he renewed his application in person, the principles of
Nwaigwe would have been relevant.  The question is therefore could he have
received a fair hearing.  The reason that the appellant sought the
adjournment was to obtain legal representation.  It would have been
possible for the judge to have elicited from the appellant what the latest
status of his relationship was.  It would not be necessary for the
appellant to have secured the benefit of legal representation in order for
the judge to hold a fair hearing.  The primary issue of whether the
relationship was continuing was a straightforward factual issue which the
judge would have been able to determine fairly even in the absence of legal
representation.

Secondly, it is necessary to recall the information that the appellant
himself had been provided by the Tribunal ahead of the hearing.  He was
given a notice in writing of the fact he was to attend before the Tribunal
on 19 February.  It was not only discourteous, to adopt the words of Mr
Malik, not to attend but it was also fatal to his ability to succeed in
this argument.  The notice of hearing in addition requires those who are to
participate in proceedings before the Tribunal to provide an updated set of
evidence and documents in order for their case to be presented in its best
possible light.

Again, it is not necessary for the appellant to have been legally
represented in order to have produced a statement or some other document
outlining the fact that his relationship had evolved or may have evolved
since his original statement was drafted.  So much is clear from the fact
that the appellant was able to produce a statement dated 19 February
[sic.], which states in clear terms why he sought the adjournment request
he had.  There is no reason why the appellant could not have set out in
similarly eloquent terms what the latest status of his relationship was.

The submission on the part of Mr Malik is also speculative; it relies on an
assumption that the appellant would have been able to provide materially
different evidence to that which he had already provided in written form,
with the benefit of legal representation, the contents of which were fatal
to his appeal succeeding.  There was no application under rule 15(2A) of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 for the this Tribunal to
consider evidence that was not before the First-tier, for example
specifically relating to the status of the appellant's relationship, and
the location and employment (or otherwise) status of the sponsor.  Mr Malik
was only able to make the rather unsatisfactory submission that his
instructions were that the relationship between the two was "on and off",
which is hardly supportive of the presence of a durable relationship, taken
at its highest.

In my view, there is no reason why such a document could not have been
prepared by the appellant acting without the benefit of legal
representation, stating that he still is in a relationship with the sponsor
and that she would have returned to the United Kingdom.  Or he could have
attended the tribunal to provide an oral update, which the judge could have
helped him to provide.  The requirements of fairness would not have
necessitated the granting of an adjournment.  Put simply, there would have
been no reason for the adjournment request to be granted in order for the
appellant to have received a fair hearing.  I consider that the judge
applied the correct legal framework when deciding to proceed in the absence
of the appellant and that, even though he was not seized of the adjournment
application, there was no error of law which infected the decision, for the
reasons I have just outlined.

Although Mr Malik made no reference to it during his submissions, on 6
March 2019, the appellant had emailed the Taylor House Hearing Centre
complaining that the matter had proceeded in his absence.  In the email,
the appellant attributed his non-attendance to his "crippling depression",
adding that he would provide evidence to support those health-based claims
in due course.  No such evidence has been provided.  First-tier Tribunal
Judge Pickup (as he then was) referred to the changing contours of the
appellant's claimed reasons for his non-attendance when refusing permission
to appeal at the First-tier Tribunal level, noting that no medical evidence
had been provided.  Given this point was not pursued at the hearing, it is
not necessary for me to say more about it, other than to observe that I
endorse Judge Pickup's observations that no evidence had been provided to
support the appellant's claimed illness.  Indeed, by his silence on the
point, Mr Malik appears to have abandoned reliance on this former strand of
the appellant's case.

Conclusion

In summary, the appellant made a woefully late and inadequate request for
an adjournment and failed to attend his own hearing before the tribunal in
order to renew the application, or otherwise participate in the
proceedings. It was hardly surprising that the First-tier judge was not
seized of the adjournment application, given the circumstances of its
admission. The evidence the appellant had previously submitted with the
benefit of formal legal representation demonstrated that, taking his case
at its highest, it was bound to fail. Had the adjournment request been
before the judge, in contrast to the submissions advanced by Mr Malik, it
would have been eminently possible for the appellant to enjoy a fair
hearing. The overriding objective, the interests of justice, and the
requirements of fairness, do not permit appellants simply to fail to turn
up to their own hearings, and complain to this Tribunal that it was unfair
for the judge to proceed in their absence in circumstances where, as here,
had they attended a fair hearing would have been eminently possible. The
appellant waived his right to attend the hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal and cannot complain of any unfairness as a result.


Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Meah stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed    [pic]   Date 20 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
