
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08774/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                            |Promulgated                  |
|On 16 October 2018                          |On 5 November 2018           |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                        Mrs Hanifa Abdul Hamid Gandhi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobowale, Counsel, instructed by Kingswell
Watts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mrs Gandhi against the decision of a First-tier
Judge on 1 August 2017 refusing her application for a residence card on the
basis that her sponsor is an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  The
sponsor is her son-in-law, who is, as is common ground, a British national
and also a Portuguese national, and the reason why the application was
refused was because the Immigration (EEA) Regulations precluded a person
being able to provide the means of obtaining a residence card as a relative
where they were also a British citizen, so in other words, the fact that
the son-in-law was a British citizen as well as a Portuguese citizen
precluded him being the route for the appellant being able to obtain a
residence card and it was common ground before the judge that that was the
case.

2.   The judge was asked to adjourn on the basis that there had been a
reference by the Administrative Court in the case of Lounes to the Court of
Justice in March 2016 and there was produced to the judge a copy of the
Advocate General's opinion, which, I think, made it clear that although the
matter could not succeed, under Directive 2004/38 under broader principles
of European Union law it could.  The judge was asked to adjourn and
declined to do so on the basis that the Advocate General's opinion was no
more than an opinion.  There was no guarantee that it would be accepted or
followed but even if it were correct it would not necessarily mean that
Regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations would be amended.  There was no
definitive date for the outcome to the questions raised in Lounes as well,
and so the judge's reasoning is essentially set out at paragraphs 14 and
15.

3.   Events have moved on since then and since the grant of permission in
this case.  The Court of Justice produced a judgment in the case of Lounes
sometime toward the end of last year, which essentially, as I understand
it, adopted the Advocate General's reasoning, and this has subsequently
led, as Mr Sobowale pointed out, to an amendment of the EEA Regulations
which in the material part says that a national of an EEA state who is also
a British citizen and who prior to acquiring British citizenship exercised
a right to reside as such a national in accordance with Regulation 14 or 15
can now come within the definition of an EEA national.

4.   The question I have to decide is whether there is an error of law in
the judge's decision and I do not think that can simply be determined on an
ex post facto basis and reading back from what has happened to what the
judge could or should reasonably have anticipated at the time when the
decision to refuse the adjournment was made.  Obviously, I have every
sympathy for the appellant since, certainly on the instructions that Mr
Sobowale has and what was said in the grounds of appeal and the original
letter, the timing of Mr Rashid, the sponsor's, obtaining British
citizenship would appear to accord with Regulation 2(1)(b) of the amended
Regulations.  The difficulty is that there was no evidence of that and the
Secretary of State has not had an opportunity to consider any evidence that
might be put forward in that regard.

5.   On the face of it, it looks clear that the requirements of the
Regulations are likely to be made out but it does not seem to me that I can
exercise a degree of pragmatism which would allow me to say that the judge
erred as a matter of law because the law has now changed in what appears to
be in favour of the appellant.  The question must solely be whether the
judge erred as a matter of law in refusing an adjournment in this case and
it seems to me that the reasons given at paragraphs 14 and 15 are perfectly
sound.

6.   The Advocate General's opinion binds nobody.  There was no date to the
outcome in Lounes.  It was not clear what would happen and as a consequence
the court might have agreed with the Advocate General or might have
disagreed and even if it agreed it would not mean that the law would be
changed in the manner in which it has been.  Thankfully, in relation to the
fresh application that, I imagine, will be made the law, or the legal
structure at least, is clear and if the evidence as asserted can fit within
that then there is no reason why a fresh application should not succeed.

7.   So, as I said, I have sympathy for the situation in which the
appellant finds herself.  It is, as it seems, a matter of making a fresh
application only but on the law as it was at the time in relation to the
basis upon which the judge's decision was challenged it seems to me there
was no error of law by the judge in refusing an adjournment in this case.
The reasons given are perfectly sensible and legally sound ones and
accordingly, since that is essentially the basis upon which the judge's
decision is challenged, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 25 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
