
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 1 May 2019                         |On 21 May 2019                         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           LOVEPREET SINGH DHILLON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This is the  re-making  of  the  decision  in  the  Appellant's  appeal
    following the error of law decision  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede
    promulgated on 1 March 2019[1].  Judge Kebede concluded that the First-
    tier Tribunal had materially erred in law by impermissibly going behind
    a concession made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing.  The
    concession was to the effect that the Appellant's  ex-spouse  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights as  at  date  of  the  initiation  of  divorce
    proceedings on 19 December 2014.

 2. Having found the error of law and setting the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal aside, Judge Kebede  issued  directions.   The  first  of
    these was for the Respondent  to  state  whether  the  concession  made
    before the First-tier Tribunal was maintained or withdrawn  in  respect
    of the re-making of the decision.  The second direction  related  to  a
    potential issue of the nature of the Appellant's relationship with  his
    ex-spouse given what was said in para. 2 on  the  second  page  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter.

 3. In advance of the hearing before me Ms  Isherwood  accepted,  with  her
    usual candour, that these directions had not been complied with (I make
    it clear that this was no fault of hers).  She did her  level  best  to
    provide some further information by way of an email dated 30 April 2019
    (now on the Tribunal's file).

Discussion, findings, and conclusions

 4.  After  a  discussion  at  the   hearing   between   myself   and   the
    representatives, the following matters were  clarified.   Although  the
    minute  of  the  relevant  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal produced by Ms Isherwood was not perhaps in  the  clearest  of
    terms, its contents, together with what  was  said  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings, what was clearly the basis of the error  of  law  decision
    (para. 9 of Judge Kebede's decision),  and  the  nature  of  her  first
    direction, all combine to satisfy me that a  properly  made  concession
    had in fact been made before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms  Isherwood
    confirmed that that concession was not being withdrawn and therefore  I
    proceed on the basis that it is maintained in respect of the  re-making
    of the decision in this appeal.

 5. As to the potential issue with the Appellant's relationship with his ex-
    spouse, despite directions and notwithstanding what is said in para.  2
    of the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent has not  stated  that
    the marriage was one of convenience only.  I proceed on the basis  that
    it was not.

 6. The acceptance in the reasons for refusal  letter  that  the  Appellant
    satisfies Regulation 10(6) of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006[2] ("the Regulations") was maintained before me.

 7. In light of the above I reach the following  findings.   The  Appellant
    married his ex-spouse, a Czech national, on 22  September  2010.   That
    marriage was not one of convenience.  The Appellant's ex-spouse was, as
    at 19 December 2014 (that being the commencement of divorce proceedings
    and the relevant date, see Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088), exercising
    her Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's  marriage  to
    his ex-spouse had lasted for in excess of  three  years  prior  to  the
    commencement of the divorce proceedings  and  it  is  clear  that  both
    parties had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  in  excess  of  a  year.
    Whether or not the Appellant was living with his  ex-spouse  throughout
    the period is immaterial in light of  PM  (EEA  -  spouse  -  "residing
    with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC) and the guidance stated  therein  as
    to the meaning of the phrase "residing with".[3]

 8. As mentioned previously, the  Appellant's  satisfaction  of  Regulation
    10(6) has been accepted throughout and I find that  this  remained  the
    case as at the termination of the marriage on 30 June 2015 and to date.



 9. Therefore, the Appellant had a retained right of residence  as  at  the
    termination of his marriage to the relevant EEA national, that being on
    30 June 2015.

10. I conclude that it follows from  this  set  of  circumstances  and  the
    unchallenged evidence from HMRC contained in  the  Respondent's  bundle
    that the Appellant has also acquired a permanent right of residence  in
    the United Kingdom, pursuant to Regulation 15(1)(f) of the Regulations.
     The relevant historical five-year block ran  from  22  September  2010
    (that being the  date  of  his  marriage)  to  22  September  2015,  or
    alternatively any five-year period beginning after September  2010  and
    ending on the date of the hearing before me.  In the period leading  up
    to the termination of the marriage the Appellant was the family  member
    of the EEA national and following that event he was able to rely on his
    retained right of residence to "clock-up" the remaining required time.

11. In light of these conclusions the Appellant is entitled  to  be  issued
    with a document confirming his permanent right  of  residence  in  this
    country.

12. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of  18  July
    2016 is accordingly allowed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and has been set aside.

I remake the decision and allow the Appellant's appeal

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  a  full  fee
award of ï¿½140.00. There is no sound reason  to  reduce  the  award  in  this
case.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 18 February 2019                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           lovepreet singh dhillon
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, instructed by Sangat Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of India born on  3  August  1983,  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), on the basis of having  retained  a  right  of
residence as the former spouse of an EEA national.

The appellant entered the UK on 28 October 2009. On  22  September  2010  he
married an EEA national, Anna Szitaiova. On 17 February 2011 he applied  for
a residence card as the family member of an  EEA  national  and  was  issued
with a residence card on 12 May 2011. He divorced his wife on 30  June  2015
and on 28 August 2015 he applied for a residence card  on  the  basis  of  a
retained right of residence.

The respondent, in his decision of 18 July 2016  refusing  the  application,
considered that the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence  that  he
had retained a right of residence following his divorce. In the reasons  for
refusal  letter  of  20  July  2016  the  respondent  accepted,   from   the
appellant's decree absolute issued on 30 June 2015,  that  his  marriage  to
the EEA national was dissolved. The respondent accepted that  the  appellant
had been married for over  four  years  but  considered  that  the  evidence
raised the question of whether he and the sponsor had ever  lived  together.
The respondent considered  that  the  evidence  showed  that  the  sponsor's
employment had ceased on 3 May 2015, confirming that she was not  exercising
treaty rights on the date of the divorce. There was  no  evidence  that  the
sponsor was a qualified person at the time of the  divorce.  The  respondent
considered that the requirements of regulation 10(5) were not met  and  that
the appellant had not retained a right of residence following divorce.

The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard in the  First-
tier Tribunal by Judge Smith on  5  July  2018,  together  with  the  linked
appeal HU/17027/2017 of his  partner  Amandeep  Kaur  Baath,  a  citizen  of
India, with whom he had twin daughters born on 25 May 2015.

Ms Baath was appealing the respondent's decision to refuse  her  application
for leave to remain on the basis of her family life with the  appellant  and
their children. Ms Baath's appeal had previously been adjourned due  to  her
mental health problems, but a further adjournment request had  been  refused
in writing and no further adjournment request was made before  Judge  Smith.
Judge Smith noted that Ms Baath was represented by the same  representatives
as the  appellant,  but  Counsel  attending  had  been  instructed  only  in
relation to the appellant's appeal. The  instructing  representatives,  when
contacted, confirmed that they were not instructed to appear at  the  appeal
hearing. Judge Smith decided to proceed in Ms Baath's absence. He  dismissed
her appeal, concluding that  there  was  genuine  family  life  between  the
appellant and Ms Baath but that she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration  rules  and  that  her
removal would not breach her Article 8 rights outside the rules.

There has been challenge to the judge's decision on Ms Baath's appeal.

With regard to the appellant, the judge noted that, further to the  decision
in Baigazieva v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ
1088, the relevant date was the date of initiation of  divorce  proceedings,
19 December 2014. The judge did  not  accept  that  there  was  satisfactory
evidence to show that the  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty  rights  at  the
relevant time. Although he accepted that the HMRC tax returns produced  were
genuine, he did not accept that they were  determinative  of  the  sponsor's
income. He noted discrepancies in the evidence and, although the  presenting
officer accepted that the appellant had demonstrated that  the  sponsor  was
exercising treaty rights at the relevant time, he did not consider that  the
Tribunal were bound by that acceptance and did not accept that  the  sponsor
was exercising treaty rights in December 2014 when the  divorce  proceedings
were initiated. The judge accordingly found that  the  appellant  could  not
meet the requirements of regulation 10(5) and had not demonstrated  that  he
was a family member who had retained a right of residence. He dismissed  the
appellant's appeal.

Permission to  appeal  that  decision  was  sought  by  the  appellant,  and
granted, on the grounds that the judge had arguably erred by going behind  a
concession made by the respondent and by failing to assess the  evidence  in
the round and that the decision was arguably procedurally unfair.

At the hearing it was agreed by all parties that  the  judge  had  erred  by
going behind a concession without raising the matter with  the  parties  and
giving the appellant  an  opportunity  to  address  the  issue.  Mr  Sowerby
helpfully confirmed that  it  was  not  asserted  that  the  judge  was  not
permitted to  go  behind  the  concession  in  any  circumstances,  but  the
assertion was that he had erred by doing so without putting  the  matter  to
the parties and inviting them to respond. Accordingly the  judge's  decision
had to be set aside and the matter had to be reconsidered with  the  benefit
of submissions from both  parties,  and  a  statement  from  the  Presenting
Officer Mr Hunt-Jackson, as to the status of the concession.

I pointed out to the parties that there was a further matter which  had  not
been  addressed,  namely  that  there  had  been  no  consideration  of  the
respondent's concerns at paragraph 2 of page 2  of  the  refusal  letter  in
regard to the appellant and the EEA national having ever lived together.  It
appeared that the respondent had  concerns  about  the  genuineness  of  the
relationship but no clear decision had been made in that regard.

There was  some  discussion  as  to  the  disposal  of  the  appeal  and  an
understanding that the matter would be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal.
However, upon reflection it seems to  me  that  the  matter  would  best  be
resolved in the Upper Tribunal, given the issues arising and given that  the
appeal was linked with another appeal which has been finally  determined  in
the First-tier Tribunal.

Accordingly I set aside Judge Smith's decision in  the  appellant's  appeal.
The matter will be listed for a resumed hearing at a date to be notified  to
the parties, for the decision to be re-made in the appellant's appeal.

I make the following directions for the resumed hearing:

    Directions

       Not later than 14 days before the resumed hearing:

          a. The respondent is to file with the Upper Tribunal and serve  on
             the appellant written submissions addressing:


             - the nature of  the  concession  made  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal, including whether the  concession  is  maintained  or
             withdrawn and including a statement from Mr  Hunt-Jackson,  the
             presenting officer who appeared in the First-tier  Tribunal  in
             relation to the concession.


             - the respondent's position on the matters raised at  paragraph
             2, page 2 of the refusal  letter  and  whether  the  respondent
             challenges the relationship between the appellant and  the  EEA
             national, particularly given the evidence in the linked  appeal
             of Ms Baath in regard to her relationship with the appellant.

          b. The appellant is to file with the Upper Tribunal and  serve  on
             the respondent  information  about  his  relationship  with  Ms
             Baath, including the date he entered into a  relationship  with
             her and when he commenced cohabitation with her.


          c. Any further evidence relied upon by either party is to be filed
             with the Upper Tribunal and served upon the other  party  in  a
             consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle.




Signed:[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 19
February 2019




-----------------------
[1] The error of law decision is annexed to this remake decision, below.
[2] The 2006 Regulations applied because of the date of the Appellant's
application, that being 28 August 2015.
[3] Although PM concerned Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Regulations, Ms
Isherwood expressly acknowledged that the underlying principle would apply
to Regulation 10(5)(d)(i).

