
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09432/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th December 2018                         |On 25th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               Mr Sofiane Adi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Paraskos of Counsel, instructed by Kamberley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rai
promulgated on 19 March 2018 with permission from Upper Tribunal Judge
Coker granted on all grounds.  The respondent's original decision was to
refuse his application for an EEA residence card on the basis of permanent
residence following the issue previously of a residence card as the spouse
of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  That
was following his marriage in 2012 to the EEA national.

The respondent's reasons for refusal primarily relied on a visit to the
appellant's address on 24 October 2017, in which the respondent concluded
that there was no evidence at all of the appellant's spouse having ever
lived there and no evidence of any contact with her.  The assertion by the
appellant that she was in Morocco visiting her sick father was not
accepted, given the lack of any evidence of her having lived at the address
at all.  Also, at the time, it was considered that the appellant's brother-
in-law, sister and child were living in a one bedroom flat with him.
Essentially, it was not accepted that there had been a genuine
relationship.

Based on those findings, the respondent concluded that the Secretary of
State had sufficient evidence to believe that the marriage undertaken in
2012 was one of convenience for the sole purpose of the appellant remaining
in the United Kingdom and the application was refused on that basis.  There
are a number of other details in relation to the visit contained in the
Reasons for Refusal Letter.

The appellant duly appealed, and the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier
Tribunal following consideration of the appellant's history and the basis
of the somewhat limited evidence before it.  The Judge sets out the law,
including the cases of Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)
Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 and Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54 in paragraph 10 and
correctly identifies that the burden of proof is on the appellant to
establish that he meets the requirements of the Immigration (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2016, but in relation to whether there is a
marriage of convenience, that there is a legal burden on the respondent to
demonstrate that an otherwise valid marriage is in fact a marriage of
convenience, with the standard of proof being the balance of probabilities
and the evidential burden then shifting between the parties if there is
reasonable suspicion of a marriage of convenience.  The burden is again re-
iterated in paragraph 12 although in less clear terms than it was in
paragraph 10.

The Judge then goes through the evidence before her in the First-tier
Tribunal, which includes what was recorded by the respondent from the visit
to the appellant's home, the lack of any clothing, paperwork or
documentation for her, the appellant's inability to produce a telephone
number for his wife, a lack of any evidence of communication on his phone
and the respondent's conclusion of a reasonable suspicion that it was a
marriage of convenience.  In response, the appellant produced his marriage
certificate, photographs of the marriage, joint British Gas bills, bank
statements and employment documents including payslips and P60s.

The Judge finds in paragraph 15 that there was a marriage but the
difficulty in concluding that that marriage was genuine and once a happy
one but now going through a period of difficulty, is the lack of
documentary evidence of the sort that one would normally expect of a
relationship that had been subsisting for six years as the appellant
claimed and the fact that there was no evidence at all from the appellant's
spouse.  The documents are then considered in detail, including bank
statements, payslips and signs of activity from the appellant's spouse in
the United Kingdom during a period that she claimed to be in Morocco.
There is also reference to a landlord also being an employer.

The conclusion then comes at paragraph 20:

"Having considered the totality of the evidence and in particular the lack
of communication evidenced between them throughout the period of five
years, a lack of financial support between them, a lack of evidence of
cohabitation, the lack of supporting evidence from friends or family about
the relationship, on a balance of probabilities I am satisfied not only
that the appellant's spouse has never lived at the address listed with the
appellant despite correspondence in her name being sent there but also that
the appellant and Mrs Delli are not in a genuine and subsisting marriage
together.  They are not in a genuine, subsisting and durable relationship
either and the marriage undertaken was one of convenience.  Therefore, the
appellant is not entitled to a permanent residence card under Regulation 15
of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016."

The grounds of appeal are threefold, although there are points of detail
contained therein.  In summary, the first ground of appeal is that the
Judge has confused earlier in the decision, in a part that I have not
expressly referred to, that there were two separate applications by the
appellant, one for an initial right of residence card and one for a
permanent right of residence.  Although the language is not particularly
precise in paragraph 13 of the decision it is clear that there was an
original residence card issued and that the judge is looking at the issue
of permanent residence five years later on in a separate application.  I
find no error of law on that point and it is clear that the judge has not
proceeded on the wrong basis or following any confusion between the
applications actually made.

The other two grounds of appeal have more substance.  The second is that
there is a reliance on a particular lack of documents which is too narrow
in the context of this appellant from a particular background, culture, age
or religion and fails to allow for differences in relationships.  The third
ground of appeal is that the findings at paragraph 17 are speculative, in
particular the bank statements and so on do not support the findings
reached.  Although not expressly in the written grounds of appeal, orally
today, the appellant has also challenged whether the correct legal tests
had been applied in this case and in particular whether the judge has
correctly assessed the evidence as the correct point in time, which is when
the marriage was entered into in April 2012, and not whether there was any
continuing and subsisting relationship in 2017.

Individually, the reference to a lack of documents in the circumstances of
this case is one which was reasonably open to the Judge to observe.  The
findings are perhaps somewhat speculative in terms of the deductions drawn
from the bank statements but not necessarily unreasonable in the scheme of
things.  I would have found no error of law on those grounds if the Judge
had clearly set out and distinguished whether she was looking at a marriage
of convenience or a genuine and subsisting relationship thereafter.

What the Judge appears to do by inference, and not expressly, is consider
that the paucity of evidence before her, of which there can be little doubt
in the circumstances of this case, leads to the inevitable conclusion that
it was a marriage of convenience from the outset.  The same inference is
essentially drawn by the respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter,
primarily based on the visit five years after the marriage and on even less
evidence than there was before the First-tier Tribunal.

In this case, I find that the First-tier has erred in law in considering
the evidence as a whole without specifically considering what the position
was at the date of marriage in 2012.  Although the legal test is set out
and the shifting burden is set out, it is not, I find, sufficiently
expressed nor are the two different questions that the First-tier Tribunal
sufficiently distinguished, such that it appears that they are being dealt
with together.  The simple conclusion in paragraph 20 listing the evidence
for and against in very broad terms with a conclusion that there was a
marriage of convenience does not properly explain how that conclusion was
reached based on the situation in 2017 but looking at the genuineness of
the relationship and marriage significantly before that date.  There is no
express question posed or consideration of the intention of the parties for
entering into the marriage at that relative date.  The findings therefore
in relation to the evidence and the documents may have been sustainable had
the correct test been looked at but that is far from certain, given that
the marriage was over five years before the date of the visit and the
appeal hearing.

For these reasons, there is a material error of law in the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal and I set it aside.

This is a case that is most appropriately remitted to go back for a de novo
hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  There needs to be further findings of
fact in relation to the right date in April 2012.  On the paucity of
evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, that same conclusion
might well be reached, but it needs to be expressly addressed as to the
correct date.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) to be heard by any judge except Judge Rai.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed        [pic]        Date     14th January 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
