
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00398/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |On 2 August 2021                     |
|On 1 July 2021                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Omninder Pal
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mian, instructed by Bhavsar Patel Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
will refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal:
Omninder Pal (appellant), Secretary of State for the Home Department
(respondent).

Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 2 May 1990.

The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 April 2012 with entry
clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 15 August 2013.  His
leave as a Tier 4 Student was subsequently extended until 29 December 2014.
 However, on 15 October 2014, his leave was curtailed to 19 December 2014
because his college had lost its sponsor status.

On 12 December 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain as a
spouse.  That leave was granted on 5 May 2015 valid until 5 November 2014.
On 17 October 2017, the appellant applied for an extension of that leave
which was initially refused on 3 May 2018 with an out of country right of
appeal.  That decision was reconsidered and on 11 January 2019, a new
decision refusing him leave as a spouse was made with an in-country right
of appeal.  On 24 January 2019, the appellant appealed to the First-tier
Tribunal.  Following a hearing, at which the appellant did not attend, his
appeal was dismissed on 10 July 2019 and an application for permission to
appeal was refused on 18 October 2019.  He became appeal rights exhausted
on 4 November 2019.

On 13 November 2019, the appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis
of Art 8 of the ECHR. On 9 December 2019, that application was refused by
the Secretary of State.

The appellant again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision
sent on 31 March 2020, Judge J W H Law allowed the appellant's appeal under
Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
the basis that the judge had failed properly to carry out the balancing
exercise under Art 8, in particular had failed properly to take into
account the public interest.  Further, the judge had been wrong to apply
the "Chikwamba principle" (Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40) and concluded
that it was disproportionate to require the appellant to return to India to
seek entry clearance when the appellant could not establish that entry
clearance would be granted on the basis that he met all the requirements of
the spouse Rules.

Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal
(Judge Bulpitt) on 13 August 2020.

On renewal, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Rimington) granted the Secretary of
State permission to appeal on the basis that the judge had arguably failed
to take into account the public interest factors having regard to the fact
that he had found that there were not insurmountable obstacles to the
appellant and his spouse continuing family life in India and that an
application for entry clearance was not bound to succeed.

Subsequently, the Secretary of State filed what is described as a rule 24
response, but which is in substance (as the Secretary of State is the
appellant in the Upper Tribunal) an application to amend the grounds of
appeal to add a further ground.  That contends that the judge was wrong not
to permit the Presenting Officer at the First-tier hearing to withdraw the
concession that the appellant and spouse had a "genuine and subsisting"
relationship.

The appeal was listed for a remote hearing by Microsoft Teams at the
Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 1 July 2021.  I was based at the Cardiff
CJC and Mr McVeety, who represented the Secretary of State, and Mr Mian,
who represented the appellant, joined the hearing remotely by Microsoft
Teams.

The Judge's Decision

Before Judge Law, the Presenting Officer sought to withdraw the concession
in the decision letter that the appellant and his wife had a "genuine and
subsisting relationship".

Initially, the Presenting Officer sought an adjournment of six weeks in
order that the decision could be reconsidered in the light of the fact that
the decision under appeal failed to take account of the earlier appeal
decision in which it had been accepted that the marriage between the
appellant and sponsor was a marriage of convenience and not genuine.  That
application was opposed by the appellant's representative and the judge,
applying the overriding objective of dealing with the case fairly and
justly, concluded that it would not be fair to adjourn the hearing for a
lengthy period when it would have been open to the Presenting Officer to
withdraw the decision under appeal if he thought it was incorrect (see
paras 5 - 7 of the decision).

In the light of that decision, and that the appeal hearing should proceed,
the judge declined to allow the Presenting Officer to cross-examine the
appellant and sponsor on the basis that the marriage was not genuine as
that was incompatible with the respondent's decision letter (see para 7 of
the decision).  The judge went on to conclude that the concession made by
the respondent in the decision letter could not properly be withdrawn.

Having done so, and having heard the appellant and sponsor give oral
evidence, the judge made a number of findings.

First, he concluded that, applying para EX.1 of Appendix FM, it had not
been established that there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the
appellant and his wife continuing their family life in India (see para 20
of the decision).

Having reached that conclusion, the judge also went on to conclude that he
was not satisfied that there were "very significant obstacles" to the
appellant's integration in India under para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

Having, therefore, concluded that the appellant could not succeed under the
Immigration Rules, the judge went on to consider whether the appellant
could succeed under Art 8 outside the Rules.  The judge accepted, on the
basis of the concession, that the appellant and his wife had a "genuine and
subsisting relationship" and therefore had "family life" for the purposes
of Art 8.1 of the ECHR and that the appellant's removal would interfere
with that family life.

The judge then went on to consider whether the interference was
proportionate having regard to the public interest.  At para 30, the judge
said this about s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

"With regard to the amended Sections 117B of the 2002 Act, I do not know
whether the appellant is able to speak English and he is not financially
independent, being supported by friends: Section 117B(2) and (3).  With
regard to Section 117B(4), their relationship was established while the
appellant had leave to remain.  With regard to Section 117B(5), I am
required to give little weight to the appellant's private life in the UK."

Then at para 31, the judge cited and summarised the House of Lords'
decision in Chikwamba that it would not generally be proportionate to
require an individual to leave the UK in order to seek entry clearance
which would be granted.

At paras 34 - 38, the judge gave his reasons for allowing the appeal on the
basis that the decision to remove the appellant was disproportionate:

"34. I have found that there would not be insurmountable obstacles to the
family life of this appellant and his wife continuing in India.  However,
the question at the heart of this appeal is whether it would be
proportionate to expect the appellant to go there either with his wife or
on his own solely for the purpose of making an entry clearance application.

35.  The Supreme Court indicated in Agyarko (page 51) that there may be no
public interest in the removal of an appellant who is certain to be granted
leave to enter leave to enter if an application was made outside the UK.
In this case, I have no information about the accommodation or maintenance
arrangements so it cannot be said that an application by the appellant for
entry clearance from India would be bound to succeed.  Considerations
relating the best interests of children are not relevant in this case.

36.  Miss Brankovic submitted that there would be 'unjustifiably harsh
consequences', as referred to in paragraph GEN.3.2. of Appendix FM, due to
the limited accommodation and lack of job prospects, coupled with the fact
that the appellant had lived in the UK for a number of years and had been
granted leave to remain as a spouse in 2015.  As referred to in the grounds
of appeal, she submitted that there was an element of perverseness in the
respondent's decision-making process, since it was no longer being claimed
that the marriage was one of convenience.

37.  If the appellant returned to India without his wife, there will be a
period of interference with his family life of uncertain duration.  It is
not clear whether he will be granted entry clearance, particularly since he
has been in the UK in breach of immigration law; regardless of whether
paragraph 39E might apply to him, it would not alter the fact that he had
been in the UK without leave since his appeal rights became exhausted.
Bearing in mind that the appellant was on a path to settlement in the UK
and the respondent has now accepted, and I have found, that they are a
genuine couple, it is hard to see what public interest would be served by
requiring the appellant to return; on the one hand, it would send a
deterrent message to others, but it would also risk undermining public
confidence in the immigration system in a sense that his removal would
solely be the result of the respondent having once decided that the
appellant's marriage was not genuine, even though it was subsequently
decided otherwise.

38.  Having considered all the submissions and balancing the public
interest if the appellant should return against his right to respect of
family and private life, I find that the respondent has not satisfied me
that the decision under appeal is proportionate."

As a result, at para 39, the judge allowed the appeal under Art 8 of the
ECHR.

Discussion

    The 'Concession' Argument

Before turning to the grounds of appeal which, in substance, challenge the
judge's reasoning at paras 34 - 38, I should deal first with the additional
ground raised by the Secretary of State in her "rule 24" response dated 21
October 2020.

Mr McVeety, on behalf of the Secretary of State invited me to consider this
additional ground which challenges the judge's refusal to permit the
Presenting Officer to withdraw the concession in the decision letter that
the appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting.  He submitted that the
judge had failed properly to consider that issue which was relevant both to
the Rules and whether family life was established for the purposes of Art
8.  He was unable to explain why this ground was not in the Secretary of
State's original grounds of appeal but he submitted it was a somewhat
obvious point that Judge Law had only considered the impact of withdrawing
the concession from the point of view of the appellant whilst fairness
required that both parties' circumstances and any prejudice to them should
be considered.  He submitted that it had been clear before the judge that
the Presenting Officer accepted that there would have to be an adjournment
in order that the appellant, if he so wished, could prepare in order to
deal with the additional issue of whether his marriage was "genuine and
subsisting".

Mr Mian on behalf of the appellant invited me not to allow the amendment.
He submitted that no judge had granted permission on this ground and that
it was now too late to raise this point at this stage of the proceedings
before the Upper Tribunal.

Having heard the submissions, I indicated that, subject to any requirement
of fairness to the appellant, I granted the Secretary of State permission
to add this additional ground of appeal.

The grounds of appeal are contained in the application for permission to
appeal which stands as the notice of appeal in the Upper Tribunal (see rule
22(2)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI
2008/2698 as amended)).  The UT may, however, permit a party to amend any
document, including the notice of appeal under its case management powers
in rule 5(3)(c).  That is a discretionary power that has to take into
account the overriding objective of dealing with a case "fairly and justly"
under rule 2.  Here, the history of the appellant's applications for leave
as a spouse indicates that the Secretary of State, and on appeal the First-
tier Tribunal in 2019, considered that the appellant's marriage was not a
"genuine and subsisting" one.  The issue was not taken in the decision
letter dated 9 December 2019 which is the subject of this appeal.  In that
decision, it is stated:

         "You have a genuine and subsisting relationship with your British
         partner."

Mr McVeety was unclear why this point had been accepted in the decision
letter.  Mr Mian submitted that it might well be that, as a result of
further supporting material submitted with the most recent application, the
Secretary of State had decided that the position was otherwise than the one
reached on appeal in 2019.  That is, of course, speculation.  The important
point is, however, that the appellant whilst not expecting this to be an
issue at the First-tier Tribunal hearing was, at least, aware of the fact
that the point had previously been raised and a judicial decision had been
made against him.  Mr Mian pointed out that that hearing took place in the
absence of the appellant and sponsor due to a confusion over attendance at
the hearing.  Nevertheless, it was a judicial finding and it was
unsuccessfully challenged when permission to appeal was refused by the
First-tier Tribunal.  Of course, given that the appellant was not expecting
the issue to be a live one at the First-tier Tribunal, it may well have
been necessary, as a matter of fairness, to adjourn that hearing if this
issue was again to be a live one in order to allow the appellant to have an
opportunity to present the best possible case, in terms of evidence and
otherwise in order to seek to establish that his relationship was indeed a
"genuine and subsisting" one.  That could have been done, and the
Presenting Officer in effect accepted that as did Mr McVeety before me, if
the judge had allowed the concession to be withdrawn. Mr Mian did not
suggest that he was not in a position to deal with the concession issue and
whether the judge erred by preventing the Presenting Officer from
withdrawing that concession.

In these circumstances, applying the overriding objective, I considered it
just and fair to permit the Secretary of State to raise this additional
ground of appeal.

Turning now to the substance of that ground, Mr Mian submitted that the
judge was properly entitled, on the basis of the case law, not to allow the
concession to be withdrawn.  He submitted that there was clear prejudice to
the appellant of a delay in the Tribunal proceedings and a cost of a
subsequent hearing also had to be considered.  Mr Mian submitted that the
judge had been correct not to conclude that the decision in R v IAT and
another ex parte Kwok On Tong [1981] Imm AR 214 required the judge to be
satisfied that the appellant met all the requirements of the Immigration
Rules insofar as that was relevant to concluding whether he could succeed
under Art 8 of the ECHR.  Mr Mian submitted that that case was properly
distinguishable as, unlike in Kwok On Tong, the respondent had specifically
conceded that one part of the Rules had been met.

I begin first with the approach to withdrawal of a concession made by the
respondent.  The case law is helpfully summarised in the Court of Appeal's
decision in AK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 999 (Jackson and Black
LJJ) at [31]-[38] as follows:

         31.....I shall begin by reviewing the law concerning the making and
         withdrawal of concessions.


         32. Carcabuk, appeal number 00/TH/01426 dated 18 July  2000  was  a
         decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  comprising  Collins  J
         and  Mr  Ockelton  dealing  with  two  cases  where  issues   arose
         concerning  concessions  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
         concessions concerned the credibility of the Claimants in two cases
         at  hearings  before  the  adjudicator.  In  paragraph  11  of  his
         judgment, Collins J, delivering the  judgment  of  the  Immigration
         Appeal Tribunal, held that concessions  of  fact  made  by  a  Home
         Office Presenting Officer may be queried by a adjudicator,  but  if
         the Home Office Presenting Officer maintained the concessions, they
         bound the adjudicator. Nevertheless, the Secretary of State may  be
         able to withdraw the concessions on appeal.


         33. In Opacic, appeal number 01/TH/00850 dated 15  May  2001,  the
         Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  reviewed  the  application  of   the
         principles stated  in Carcabuk to  different  circumstances.  The
         Immigration Appeal Tribunal noted that in Carcabuk the concessions
         under consideration related to credibility, whereas in the  matters
         before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, the concessions were  in  a
         different context. At paragraph 22, the tribunal said:


              "Where an appeal has been conceded in  its  entirety,  as  in
              these cases, we do not consider that such a concession can be
              withdrawn and we see nothing in Carcabuk and Bla that leads
              us to any contrary view."


         34.  In Secretary  of   State   for   the   Home   Department   v
         Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA Civ 106 an issue arose about a concession
         made by the Secretary of State. Kennedy LJ, with whom Clarke LJ and
         Jacob LJ agreed, said that  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  had
         power to allow withdrawal  of  a  concession.  The  tribunal  would
         exercise that power in order to do justice in the circumstances  of
         the case.


         35.  In NR  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
         Department [2009] EWCA Civ 856 the Home Office Presenting Officer
         made two different concessions  at  separate  hearings.  The  first
         concession was that if the appellant was a lesbian, she would be at
         real risk on return. The  second  concession  made  at  a  separate
         hearing was that the appellant  was  indeed  a  lesbian  and  in  a
         relationship with a woman called Ms S in 2006 and 2007. The  Asylum
         and Immigration Tribunal allowed the Secretary of State to withdraw
         both the concessions. The Court of  Appeal  upheld  that  decision.
         Goldring LJ, with whom Lloyd LJ and Mummery LJ  agreed,  stated  at
         paragraph 12:


              "As  Kennedy  LJ  makes  clear,  the  Tribunal  may  in   its
              discretion permit a concession to be withdrawn if in its view
              there is good reason in all the circumstances for that course
              to be taken. Its discretion is wide. Its exercise will depend
              on the  particular  circumstances  of  the  case  before  it.
              Prejudice to the applicant is a significant  feature.  So  is
              its absence. Its  absence  does  not  however  mean  that  an
              application to  withdraw  a  concession  will  invariably  be
              granted..."


         36. The Court of Appeal applied those principles in CD (Jamaica) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 768, but
         that judgment does not call for any further discussion.


         37. Similar issues arose  in  a  case  in  this  court  last  week,
         namely Koori v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
         EWCA Civ 552. The appellants in that case contended that they could
         benefit from rule 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration  Rules.  That  rule
         provided that the requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  were  that  the
         applicant was under the age of 18 years and had lived  continuously
         in the UK for at least  seven  years,  discounting  any  period  of
         imprisonment, and that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         applicant to leave the UK.


         38. Mr Malik  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  contended  that  the
         Secretary of State had  conceded  that  the  seven  year  rule  was
         satisfied. Mr Malik failed in that  submission  on  the  facts.  In
         relation to the issue of principle, however, Elias  LJ,  with  whom
         Underhill LJ and Peter Jackson J agreed, said this at paragraph 31:


              "I would accept that if  there  had  been  a  considered  and
              lawful decision to deem the seven year rule to be  satisfied,
              the Secretary of State should not be allowed to  resile  from
              that decision. An administrative body cannot keep  revisiting
              decisions which  affect  individual  rights:  there  must  be
              finality, at least unless there is a powerful public interest
              to the contrary."


At [48]-[49], Jackson LJ added this:

         "48. It follows that  the  concessions  made  by  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer were such as to determine the entire appeal. The
         First-tier Tribunal Judge, as he was entitled to do, accepted those
         concessions. That was the end of the case.


         49. I do not need to go so far as to say that in such circumstances
         the Secretary of State could never appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
         but on the facts of this particular appeal, it seems  to  me  quite
         unjust that the Secretary of State, having conceded on all  points,
         should  be  entitled  to  resurrect  her  case  and  withdraw   the
         concessions which she had made. As Mr Fortt rightly  concedes,  the
         Upper Tribunal gave no good reason for allowing  the  Secretary  of
         State to take that course."


I would made two points.  First, the case law recognises that a concession
may be withdrawn if it is in the interest of justice to do so, having
regard to all the circumstances including any prejudice to the parties and
the nature of the concession whether it is to fact or law.  Secondly,
however, as can be seen from the summary of the case law, the concessions
that were being considered were ones either made in the First-tier Tribunal
and sought to be withdrawn in the Upper Tribunal (or its equivalent at the
time) or were made in the Upper Tribunal (or its equivalent at the time)
and were sought to be withdrawn in the Court of Appeal.  An example of the
latter, in which the Court of Appeal declined to allow a concession to be
withdrawn that had been made in the Upper Tribunal before it, is AM (Iran)
v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2706.  At [44], Simon LJ (with whom Thirlwall and
Sharp LJJ agreed) said this:

         In my view the Secretary of State's  application  to  withdraw  the
         concession made before the UT cannot easily rely on  principles  of
         justice and fairness, particularly when it is sought to do so in  a
         belated and informal way.  One  would  expect  those  who  seek  to
         withdraw a concession to explain both promptly and frankly why  the
         concession was made, why it was mistaken and why it is now just and
         fair that they be allowed to withdraw it. It is striking that  when
         the application for permission to appeal to  the  UT  from  the  UT
         decision was made, the Secretary of State's  newly  instructed  and
         experienced counsel (who was not the counsel instructed before this
         court) did not seek assert that there was a mistake or  seek  leave
         to withdraw the concession.


Consequently, none of the concessions being considered in the cases were
ones made solely in the decision letter.  They had been made during the
judicial process and it was sought to resile from them on appeal.  That is
important as it results in a change of stance by the respondent after, at
least, the initial appeal hearing has been completed and, in all
likelihood, the appellant was successful.  There may be a greater
reluctance to permit withdrawal in the interest of justice at a later stage
of the judicial process which has previously proceeded on the basis of a
concession.

In this case, the judge treated the Presenting Officer's request to re-open
the issue of whether the relationship was a "genuine and subsisting" one as
withdrawing a concession.  It had, of course, only been made in the
decision letter.  At paras 9-10 the judge said this:

"9.  Although he did not put it in that way, Mr Aigbokie may have been
seeking to withdraw a concession made by the respondent.  In SSHD v
Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA Civ 106 the Court said that the Tribunal can allow
a concession made by either party to be withdrawn if it considers there is
a good reason in all the circumstances to do so.  The Tribunal must try to
obtain a fair and just result and consider each case on its own merits.  It
may be relevant to consider the nature of the concession, the timing and
whether there will be prejudice to one of the parties if the withdrawal is
allowed.  It is not essential to demonstrate prejudice before an
application to withdraw a concession can be refused.  In the absence of
prejudice, if a party has made a concession which appears in retrospect to
be a concession which should not have been made, then probably justice will
require that the party be allowed to withdraw that concession.

10.  I consider that to allow the concession to have been withdrawn in this
case would have caused prejudice to the appellant.  Furthermore, it was not
an obvious error by the decision-maker, since the decision letter refers to
the previous appeal having been dismissed by the Tribunal and it follows
that the decision-maker had that unsuccessful appeal in mind.  It is
perfectly possible that he or she reviewed the answers given during the
marriage interviews and decided that it was not in fact realistic for the
respondent to argue that it was not a genuine marriage, especially in the
light of the fact that the appellant failed to attend the hearing in July
2019, due to what is said in the current grounds of appeal to have been
miscommunication between him and his previous solicitors."

Mr McVeety, rightly in my judgment, pointed out that the judge only looked
at the impact upon the appellant of withdrawing the concession.  What the
judge did not do was looked to consider whether any prejudice to the
appellant could be overcome.  It could, of course, be overcome by allowing
an adjournment to the appellant if that was necessary in order to allow the
appellant to prepare his case to deal with the issue of whether his
marriage was a "genuine and subsisting" one.  Unlike the case law, this
concession was one that was made in the decision letter and the respondent
sought to withdraw it at the outset of the Tribunal proceedings.  It was
not a concession that had been made at one level within the Tribunal
structure and which was then sought to be withdrawn subsequently, after the
appeal was completed either in the Upper Tribunal or above that in the
Court of Appeal.  It seems to me that the withdrawal of the concession at
such an early stage of the proceedings is less problematic than a
subsequent or, as the Court of Appeal described it in AM (Iran), a
"belated" withdrawal of a concession.  This was not a case where the
Secretary of State, having lost an appeal, in the sense that the
appellant's appeal had been allowed, and then on further appeal seeks to re-
open a matter previously conceded.

The importance of the point that the concession was withdrawn at the first
opportunity in the appeal hearing, is perhaps reflected in case law
beginning with Kwok On Tong.  In that case, it was held that before a judge
could allow an appeal on the basis that a decision was not in accordance
with the Immigration Rules (as the grounds of appeal then permitted) the
judge must be satisfied that the individual meets all the requirements of
the Immigration Rules.

In RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039, the AIT
summarised the effect of Kwok On Tong as follows at [10]:

         "In Kwok On Tong (and also in R v IAT ex parte Hubbard [1985] Imm
         AR 110) the Court had to consider what the position was if a
         refusal of entry clearance was based on one element of the Rules,
         but by the time of the hearing it became apparent that there was
         some other requirement of the Rules which the appellant could not
         meet. Both those cases decide that the notice of refusal is not
         equivalent to a pleading; if new elements of the Immigration Rules
         come into play they are to be dealt with on the appeal, and the
         parties must be allowed any appropriate adjournment in order to
         avoid the injustice of being taken by surprise. The reason is the
         wording of s19. Even if the appellant shows that he met a
         particular requirement of the Immigration Rules that had been in
         issue at the appeal, the decision to refuse him is not a decision
         that was "not in accordance with the law including any applicable
         Immigration Rules" unless, at the time of the decision, he met the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules applicable to his case. To
         put it another way, an appellant can lose his appeal by failing to
         meet just one requirement of the Rules (whether specified or not in
         the notice of refusal), but he can win only by meeting all the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules (whether specified or not in
         the notice of refusal)."

    (See also CP (Section 86(3) and (5); wrong rule) Dominica [2006] UKAIT
    00040 at [18] and [23].)

Of course, the present permitted grounds of appeal in s.84 of the 2002 Act
as amended by the Immigration Act 2014 no longer allow the First-tier
Tribunal to allow an appeal on the basis that a decision is "not in
accordance with the Immigration Rules" but, for these purposes, only on the
basis that the decision is a breach of s.6 of the Human Rights Act 2000, in
particular, for the purposes of this appeal, a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.
 However, the reasoning in Kwok On Tong, approved in RM, applies with equal
force in a case where an individual is seeking to establish that a decision
of the Secretary of State or an ECO is a breach of Art 8 because the
individual meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules and, as such,
there is no public interest in their removal or preventing their entry to
the UK (see TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34] and Begum
(employment income; Rules/Article 8) [2021] UKUT 115 (IAC)).

The point was made by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Blundell and DUTJ Thomas) in
the unreported decision of Bajaj (HU/12628/2019) 2 December 2020 at [21]-
[22] as follows:

         "21. Whether the respondent failed to turn her mind to S-LTR 1.6 or
         whether she considered that provision and decided not to  apply  it
         to the appellant, Mr Tufan submitted that  we  were  in  any  event
         bound to  consider  its  application.  He  cited  the  decision  of
         Glidewell J in Kwok on Tong and that of the Asylum and Immigration
         Tribunal in CP (Dominica) in support of his submission. These are
         decisions of some antiquity in the sphere of immigration law and we
         note that the statutory regime -  and  the  appellate  jurisdiction
         under Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in
         particular -  has  changed  markedly  since  those  decisions  were
         issued. The essential point remains valid, however,  despite  those
         changes. Where it is submitted to a judge of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber that an appeal falls to be allowed on  human  rights
         grounds  because  an  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of   the
         Immigration Rules, the judge must be  satisfied  that all of  the
         requirements of the Rules are met. He or she is  not  confined,  in
         undertaking that assessment, to the points specifically  identified
         in the notice of refusal. Under the old statutory regime,  a  judge
         (whether Immigration Judge  or  Adjudicator)  could  not  allow  an
         appeal under the Immigration Rules unless  those  Rules  were  met.
         Under the current statutory regime, a judge cannot allow an  appeal
         on human rights grounds  because  the  Immigration  Rules  are  met
         unless those Rules are indeed satisfied.

         22.  In some circumstances, it will be apparent to a judge that  an
         appellant is unable to meet the  Rules  for  a  reason  not  stated
         expressly in the  respondent's  decision.  In Kwok  On  Tong,  for
         example, it was apparent to the IAT that the appellant was not,  as
         had been claimed in his application, a partner in his uncle's  food
         shop; the relationship was one of disguised employment, contrary to
         the requirements of the Rules. The critical word  in  each  of  the
         preceding  sentences,  however,  is  'apparent'.  It  was  apparent
         in Kwok On Tong that the relationship was not one of equals but of
         master and servant. It might become apparent to  a  judge  that  an
         appeal cannot succeed on the  basis  contemplated  at  [34]  of TZ
         (Pakistan) if, for example, an  appellant  is  the  subject  of  a
         deportation order [2]. Even where that point is  not  taken  by  a
         decision maker, it operates as an absolute and incontrovertible bar
         to an appellant satisfying the Immigration Rules."

I agree with this statement of principle which accords with my own view
expressed above.

It was, at least in part, the appellant's case that he met the requirements
of the Immigration Rules and so, on that basis, should succeed under Art 8.
 The judge was wrong in para 8 of his decision to distinguish Kwok On Tong
on the basis that it was no longer relevant under the new scheme of appeal
rights in the 2002 Act.  It was, for the reasons I have set out above.

Further the judge was wrong to distinguish Kwok On Tong on the basis that
it did not apply because a "concession" had been made in the decision
letter rather than the matter not being raised at all.  The logic, that the
appellant had to establish before the judge all the requirements of the
partner rule were met, applies whether or not the matter was conceded or
simply not disputed in the decision letter.

Given that the need for fairness if the concession was withdrawn could have
been dealt with by an adjournment if required, it was, in my judgment,
wrong for the judge not to permit the Secretary of State to withdraw the
"concession" made in the decision letter not least because the judge had to
be satisfied, if the appellant's argument was to succeed, that he met all
the requirements of the Immigration Rules including that his marriage was a
"genuine and subsisting" one.  The fact that the judge was not satisfied
that the other requirements of the Rules were met did not detract from the
importance of the Secretary of State at the outset of the hearing being
able to present her case on each part of the Immigration Rules which, in
her view, the appellant could not establish.

In my judgment, the Judge erred in law in not permitting the respondent to
withdraw her concession made in the decision letter and by not permitting
the Presenting Officer to address in the evidence and submissions the issue
of whether the appellant's relationship was a "genuine and subsisting" one.


    The Public Interest Argument

Turning now to the Secretary of State's other grounds of appeal, the judge
found that there were no "insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant and
his wife continuing their family life in India and that, therefore, para
EX.1 of Appendix FM was not satisfied.

The judge's approach to whether or not the appellant could nevertheless
succeed under Art 8 outside the Rules was, to say the least, confusing.

At para 34, the judge appeared to treat the case as being one to which the
Chikwamba principle was to be applied, namely whether it was
disproportionate to require the appellant to leave the UK temporarily to
seek entry clearance.  The judge said this was the "question at the heart
of this appeal".  At para 35, he referred to [51] of the Supreme Court's
decision in Agyarko (R (Agyarko and another) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11) which
recognised that principle.  Lord Reed summarised the principle as follows:

         "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance of
         this consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration
         control might otherwise be. For example, if an applicant would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made from outside
         the UK, then there might be no public interest in his or her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department."

    (See also Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT
    129 (IAC) - but emphasising that the relevant public interest
    considerations in s.117B must still be considered.)

However, at para 35, the judge found that it was not established that the
appellant's entry clearance application in India would "be bound to
succeed" because there was no information about accommodation or
maintenance arrangements.  It would seem, therefore, that the "question at
the heart of this appeal" should have been resolved against the appellant
since he could not fall within the Chikwamba principle.

At paras 36-37, the judge went on to consider, apparently under the rubric
of "unjustifiably harsh consequences" (which mirrors the approach set out
by the Supreme Court in Agyarko (e.g. at [60]) to determining whether the
public interest would be outweighed by the individual's circumstances), as
if the appellant was being required to return to India alone and without
any prospect of obtaining entry clearance.  That approach would, of course,
fly in the face of the judge's finding that there were not "insurmountable
obstacles" to both the appellant and his wife continuing their family life
in India.  At para 37, the judge appeared to return to the scenario that
the appellant would return to India without his wife for an "uncertain
duration", namely because he would return alone without obtaining entry
clearance.  That would appear to be an assessment based upon the premise,
despite his earlier finding, that there were no "insurmountable obstacles"
to them living in India together.

In reaching his assessment of proportionality, I accept Mr McVeety's
submission that the judge failed properly to consider the public interest
in assessing the proportionality of the appellant's removal.  There was
undoubtedly a public interest in the appellant's removal given that he had
no basis to remain in the UK under the Immigration Rules (see s.117B(1) of
the 2002 Act).  Further, the judge found in para 30, that the appellant was
not "financially independent" and so the public interest was again engaged
by s.117B(3).  However, that finding, given that he was financially
supported by friends, may not survive the view of the Supreme Court in
Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at [53]-[56] that credible and reliable
third party support equates with financial independence under s.117B(3).

In paras 36 and 37, particularly the latter, the judge concluded that the
public interest was diminished by the fact that the respondent was no
longer claiming that the appellant's marriage was not a genuine and
subsisting one, having once decided that it was.  The difficulty with that
reasoning is that, as I have already found, the judge was not entitled to
prevent the Secretary of State raising the issue that it remained to be
established whether the relationship was "genuine and subsisting".
Further, in any event, even if the marriage was now to be taken as genuine,
when previously it had not, the fact that it was now to be taken as genuine
did not cast doubt upon the earlier judicial finding that that it had not
been established.  Indeed, Mr Mian's submissions were that the concession
in the decision letter may have been based upon the additional and new
evidence submitted with the current application to establish the
genuineness of the relationship.  Even if the relationship was therefore
taken as being genuine, the public interest was not diminished by the
notion that therefore the public confidence in the immigration system was
somehow undermined by the Secretary of State's earlier "mistake".

Given the judge's finding in relation to para EX.1. and that the appellant
could not establish that his entry clearance application would necessarily
succeed, the task for the judge was to assess whether there were
"unjustifiably harsh consequences" sufficient to outweigh the public
interest engaged by, at least, s.117B(1) of the 2002 Act.  The judge's
reasoning at paras 34 - 38 fails properly to engage with that assessment
and the reasons given cannot properly sustain his finding that the
appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

For those reasons, therefore, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of a material
error of law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.  That decision cannot
stand and is set aside.

The decision must be remade, including, to the extent that the Secretary of
State no longer accepts that the relationship was a genuine and subsisting
one, that issue under the Rules and in order to establish "family life"
under Art 8 of the ECHR.

Given the nature of the fact-finding required, and that the evidence is
likely to include oral evidence from the appellant and sponsor, the
appropriate disposal of the appeal is to remit it to the First-tier
Tribunal for a rehearing in order to remake the decision under Art 8.
However, the judge's finding in relation to para EX.1, namely that there
are not insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in India (at
para 20 of his decision), was not challenged and I see no basis to set it
aside and it is preserved.  Of course, it may be open to the judge on
rehearing the appeal to reconsider that issue if sufficiently compelling up-
to-date evidence requires that.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision
under Art 8 on that basis to be heard by a judge other than Judge Law.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                19 July 2021
