
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00989/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2019                           |On 2 December 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                              Mrs Thelma Gordon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adophy, Counsel instructed by Archbold solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Shiner promulgated on 18 June 2019 refusing her human rights
(Article 8 ECHR) claim.

The appellant was born on 17 May 1970.  On 10 July 1992 she married her
husband ("the sponsor"), who, like her, is a citizen of Jamaica.  They have
two children, born in Jamaica in 1987 and 1990.

In 1998 the sponsor moved to the UK. He now has indefinite leave to remain.

The appellant entered the UK on 27 November 1999 and has lived continuously
in the UK since.

The children of the sponsor and appellant moved to the UK in 2001.

The marriage between the appellant and the sponsor is genuine and
subsisting.  There children (and grandchildren) reside in the UK.

The appellant's immigration history is a matter of contention between the
parties.  It is common ground that she entered the UK on 27 November 1999
as a visitor and she was subsequently granted leave to remain as a student,
which was extended until 31 August 2002.  It is from this date that there
is a disagreement between the parties.

The respondent's position is that the appellant's leave expired on 31
August 2002 and thereafter she became an overstayer.  She then made an
application on 20 April 2003 for further leave to remain as a student,
which was refused on 19 August 2003. On 13 June 2016, a letter from
Immigration Enforcement was sent to the appellant stating that she had no
permission to be in the UK.  Thereafter, submissions were made by the
appellant to regularise a position.

The appellant's claim, in contrast, is that the following occurred:

      a) On 20 April 2003 she made a human rights application, receipt of
         which was confirmed by the respondent on 15 May 2003.

      b) On 16 July 2003 the respondent contacted her solicitors asking them
         for further documents, which were provided on 9 August 2003.

      c) On 19 August 2003 a notice of refusal was sent to the appellant on
         the sole basis that she had failed to supply the requested
         documents.

      d) On 21 August 2003 the appellant's solicitors wrote to the
         respondent explaining that the documents had, in fact, been
         provided.

      e) She then received no further correspondence from the respondent
         until 15 March 2011, when she received a letter stating that her
         case was part of a backlog of older cases, and further information
         was requested from her.

      f) On 6 April 2011 the requested information was provided.

      g) On 5 September 2012 the appellant requested an update.

      h) On 18 October 2012 the respondent responded by stating that a
         timeframe could not be given.

      i) On 13 June 2016, a letter from Immigration Enforcement was sent to
         the appellant stating that she had no permission to be in the UK.

      j) Her solicitors wrote to the Home Office on 22 June 2016, and again
         on 13 October 2016.  In the 13 October 2016 letter, reference was
         made to an application pending since 2011.

      k) Further submissions were made in 2017.

The appellant claims that she has had a human rights application
outstanding since 2003 and that by operation of Section 3C of the
Immigration Act 1971 she has been in the UK lawfully.

The Respondent's Decision

On 8 December 2017 the respondent notified the appellant that her human
rights claim had been refused.  It was accepted that she is in a genuine
and subsisting relationship with the sponsor, who is settled in the UK, but
not that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the relationship
continuing in Jamaica.  The respondent noted that the appellant's partner
had travelled to Jamaica on several occasions, most recently on 25 November
2016.

The respondent did not accept that there would be "very significant
obstacles" under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) to the appellant's integration
into Jamaica, given that she had lived most of her life there and would be
familiar with its customs, language and social norms.

The respondent did not accept that there were exceptional circumstances
which would render refusal of leave a breach of Article 8 ECHR because it
would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for her or her family.
The respondent noted that her children were aged 30 and 27 and lived
separately to her; and that although she is a part of her grandchildren's
lives (seeing them on most weekends) she could continue to play a part in
their lives from Jamaica.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

The appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent was heard by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Shiner.

The judge found that the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting
relationship with the sponsor, and that she has regular contact with her
children and grandchildren, assisting with childcare from time to time.

The judge also found that the appellant has no adverse criminal history and
that she has lived in the UK since November 1999.

The judge did not accept that the appellant has had a human rights
application pending since 2003. She found that in 2003 the appellant
applied for further leave to remain in the UK as a student, and that this
application was refused on 19 August 2003.

The judge acknowledged the correspondence in 2011 referring to a backlog of
older cases, and found, on the basis of this, that the appellant had made a
human rights application at some point between 2003 and 2011, despite
neither party producing a copy of the application.  The judge found that
she was unable to determine, based on the evidence that was before her,
when the application referred to in the 2011 letter had been made.  At
paragraph 48 the judge stated:

"I remind myself that it is for the appellant to prove her case, and she
has not proved to me that a human rights application or claim was made much
before 2011.  Upon the evidence I have I am unable to say when, with any
precision, this might have been.  It seems to me that the SSHD following
intervention from the appellant's solicitors did eventually consider that
application resulting in the refusal letter of 7 January 2017 (page 32 of
the appellant's bundle).  I note the delay between 2011 and 2017 in respect
of this claim."

The judge then considered whether there would be insurmountable obstacles
to the appellant's relationship with her partner continuing in Jamaica for
the purposes of EX.1(b) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The judge
found that even though the appellant had been in the UK for a long period
of time, there would not be such obstacles given the frequency with which
the sponsor has travelled to Jamaica and that the appellant had not shown
why she or the sponsor would be unable to work in Jamaica or why they would
face any practical or other difficulties in that country.

The judge also commented at paragraph 52 of the decision that the sponsor
had not provided financial information that would show that the financial
eligibility requirements under Appendix FM could be satisfied.  The judge
noted that the refusal letter was drafted on the basis that the financial
requirements would not be met, as the financial position of the appellant
and sponsor were not considered.

The judge found that there would not be very significant obstacles pursuant
to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the
appellant had spent most of her life in Jamaica; was familiar with its
customs, culture and language; is married to a person who frequently
travels to Jamaica and who, if he decides not to return with her, would be
able to visit and support her; and would be able to maintain contact with
her children and grandchildren through modern communication.

The judge then considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. She
noted an argument had been advanced that it would be disproportionate to
expect the appellant to leave the UK in order to make an application from
Jamaica that would be bound to succeed.  The judge stated that the
appellant has not demonstrated she would meet the financial requirements of
the Immigration Rules and therefore that an application from Jamaica would
be likely to succeed.

The judge considered the factors identified in Part 5A of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). She noted that Section
117B(4)(a) of the 2002 Act did not apply since the appellant and the
sponsor established their family life in Jamaica.  However, applying
Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act, she gave little weight to the appellant's
private life in the UK.

The judge stressed, on several occasions, that the appellant had been in
the UK for a long time.  At paragraph 72 he stated: "I consider the
nineteen years the appellant has been in the UK as significant in her
favour in this respect."

The judge explicitly took into account the delay in dealing with the
appellant's human rights application, which the judge assumed was made in
or around 2011.  At paragraph 73 the judge referred to there having been a
seven year delay but stated that there was "little evidence upon which to
make findings that that delay has caused consequences to the appellant
other than a greater sense of likelihood to remain".

The judge concluded at paragraph 75:

"In determining my proportionality assessment I conclude that the public
interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration control does
outweigh this appellant's and the sponsor's Article 8 rights.  I do so for
all of the reasons that I have set out above.  I have found that other than
the matters to which I refer the appellant has not provided other than the
barest of detail of her life, both private and family in the UK and I
cannot upon the evidence that I have and findings made conclude that my
proportionality assessment falls in the appellant's favour.  I so conclude
notwithstanding the delay in the decision-making process by the SSHD and
the matters to which I have referred."

Grounds of Appeal

The grounds argue that the judge fell into error by finding that there had
only been a delay between 2011 and 2017 in dealing with the appellant's
outstanding human rights application when in fact there had been a delay
between 2003 and 2017.  The grounds assert that the judge failed to have
regard to the substantial prejudice to the appellant from this delay and
that by operation of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 the appellant
has been in the UK lawfully.

The grounds also argue that the judge erred by finding that the financial
eligibility requirements under Section E-LTRP of Appendix FM were not
satisfied when the respondent did not have concerns in respect of this.

Analysis

The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal does not support the
appellant's submission that she has had an outstanding human rights
application since 2003.

Included within the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal is a
Notice of Immigration Decision made under Section 105 of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 dated 19 August 2003 which states that the
appellant's application for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom
as a student has been refused.  The notice states that the application was
made on 20 April 2003, that her leave to enter expired on 31 August 2002
and that she did not have valid leave to remain at the time of her
application.

Based on this evidence, the judge was entitled to find that (a) the
application made on 20 April 2003 was an application for leave to remain as
a student, not a human rights application; and (b) at the time the
application was made the appellant did not have leave to remain and
therefore her leave was not extended by operation of Section 3C of the
Immigration Act 1971.

The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal included a letter from the
respondent dated 15 March 2011 stating that her case was in a backlog of
older cases. There was no other documentary evidence in relation to an
application between 2003 and 2011.  The judge was entitled, based on this
evidence, to infer that at some date prior to 15 March 2011 the appellant
had made a human rights application and also to find, as she did at
paragraph 48, that in the absence of any evidence as to when this
application was made, given that the burden lies on the appellant to
establish her case, the application could be presumed to have been made in
2011. Therefore I reject the submissions of the appellant that are based on
the assertion that the appellant made a human rights application in 2003
(or on a date substantially before 2011).

Even if the judge's analysis of the 2003 application was wrong, and the
application in April 2003 was, as claimed by the appellant, a human rights
application that had not been addressed by the respondent until 2017, this
would not have changed the outcome of the appeal. I reach this conclusion
for two reasons.

Firstly, it would not have changed the fact that the appellant did not have
leave at the time the 2003 application was made and therefore the
application would not, in any event, have resulted in the appellant having
leave to remain under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

Secondly, whether the delay was between 2011 and 2017 as found by the
judge, or between 2003 and 2017 as claimed by the appellant, the assessment
of the appeal under the immigration rules would have resulted in the same
outcome. The issues for the judge to determine under the Immigration Rules
were (a) whether there would be insurmountable obstacles to the
relationship between the appellant and the sponsor continuing in Jamaica
(paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules) and (b) whether
there would be "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration
into Jamaica (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules). The judge
has given clear reasons why she did not accept there would be either
insurmountable or very significant obstacles given, in particular, that the
appellant had spent most of her life in, and was familiar with the culture
of, Jamaica; and that her husband travels to Jamaica frequently. The length
of delay in responding to an outstanding human rights appeal would not have
any material bearing on this assessment.

With respect to article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules, I am also
satisfied that the same conclusion would have been reached whether the
delay was thought to be 7 years or 14 years given that either way the
appellant would not have had lawful leave and the only material consequence
of the delay is that the appellant has been in the UK (without leave) for a
substantially longer period.

The submission in the grounds that the judge failed to appreciate that the
respondent accepted that the financial eligibility requirements under
Appendix FM were satisfied is misconceived.  In the respondent's decision,
it is stated that the appellant met the eligibility requirements of Section
E-LTRP under paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(ii).  R-LTRP.1.1(d)(ii) is the route
to eligibility for applicants who do not meet the financial eligibility
requirements and therefore need to satisfy the requirements of paragraph
EX.1.  The appellant had not submitted evidence to show that the financial
eligibility requirements under Appendix FM were satisfied and the judge was
clearly entitled to have regard to this when assessing, in accordance with
Chikwamba v Secretary of State [2008] UKHL 40, whether temporary separation
in order for the appellant to make an application from Jamaica would be
disproportionate.  As is clear from Chikwamba and subsequent cases
addressing this issue (see R (on the application of Agyarko) v Secretary of
State [2017] UKSC at [51]) it is necessary, in order to succeed with such
an argument, that the appellant is able to show that she would satisfy the
financial eligibility requirements upon making an application from outside
the UK.  The judge was clearly entitled to find that the necessary evidence
had not been submitted for her to be in a position to find that the
application from outside the UK would be certain to succeed.

Notice of Decision

a. The appeal is dismissed.

b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
error of law and stands.

c. No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 28 November 2019              |

