
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00829/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 August 2019                             |On 6 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                            Muhammad Nadeem Anwer
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel instructed by LRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Groves, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the appeal of the appellant, a national of Pakistan, against the
decision of the respondent refusing him indefinite leave to remain  in  the
United Kingdom.  The appeal was brought on human rights grounds.

2. For the purposes of introduction the appellant had been identified  as  a
person to whom paragraph 322(5) of HC 395 applies and against that  finding
refusing him leave to remain was proportionate  on  human  rights  grounds.
Paragraph 322(5) is described in the Rules as one of the "grounds on  which
leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom should normally be refused" and is in the following terms:

  "The undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain  in  the
  United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including  convictions  which
  do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)), character or associations  or  the
  fact that he represents a threat to national security."

3. The short point is that the appellant is  one  of  many  people  who  was
thought to have been dishonest because  of  a  discrepancy  between  income
declared to HMRC for the purposes of assessing  tax  liability  and  income
declared to the respondent for the purpose of  satisfying  the  Immigration
Rules.

4. I begin by considering very carefully the First-tier Tribunal's  approach
to this appeal.

5. The judge began by summarising the respondent's reasons for refusing  the
application.  As the judge explained when the appellant applied  for  leave
to remain on 1 April 2011  he  said  in  his  application  that  he  earned
�38,867.25 made up of salaried employment  with  the  Ministry  of  Justice
paying �12,021.25 and earnings from self-employment under  the  trade  name
"MNA Logistics and Consultants" in the sum of �26,846.00.

6.  On  27  September  2017  the  respondent  wrote   to   the   appellant's
representatives asking for details about his tax.  Details were provided on
20 October 2017 and this showed that the taxable income originally declared
to HMRC for the year ending in April 2011 was �13,551.00 which  is  clearly
very different from the �38,867.25 declared to the respondent.  However  it
is also right to say that the records show that the appellant  had  amended
the tax return for 2011 on 7 July 2015 to show an income that  agreed  with
the sum declared to the respondent. He attributed the error to poor  advice
from a friend who was not a qualified advisor and the correction  was  made
sometime before the application leading to the decision complained of which
was made on 14 March  2017.   It  was  not  obviously  to  the  appellant's
advantage to change his tax returns in 2015. The change had not  been  made
shortly before an application for indefinite leave to remain

7. Nevertheless, as the judge noted, the  respondent  did  not  accept  that
this was a genuine error.

8. The respondent found that the appellant had either failed to declare  his
full income to HMRC to reduce his tax liability or inflated his  income  to
bolster his immigration application and the  respondent  decided  that  the
appellant was not a suitable person.

9. The judge then summarised the appellant's case.  The appellant said  that
he satisfied the requirements of the Rules  and  therefore  his  appeal  on
human rights grounds should succeed.

10. He further argued that even if he did not  satisfy  the  Rules  removing
him would be disproportionate.  It was the appellant's case that it was for
the respondent to prove that the appellant had behaved  dishonestly  either
with HMRC or with the respondent and, given that dishonesty,  his  presence
was undesirable when other factors were considered.

11. The judge directed himself at paragraph 12 in the following terms:

  "I am reminded that it  is  for  the  respondent  to  advance  sufficient
  evidence to discharge the evidential burden.  If I find  that  there  is,
  then I must go on to consider whether paragraph  322(5)  applies,  having
  regard to all the relevant evidence."

12. The judge then summarised seven points made on the  appellant's  behalf.
I set them out below:
  (i)         The appellant has given a detailed, consistent and  plausible
  account as to how the discrepancy arose;
  (ii)        the amended 2010/2011 tax return was  prepared  by  reputable
  accountants who support for the appellant's case, and who have  confirmed
  that no penalty was imposed because the error was the result of a genuine
  mistake, and that it was voluntarily amended;
  (iii)  the appellant provided the requisite evidence in  support  of  his
  claimed income when he made the application in 2011, and  the  respondent
  has not provided evidence that the documents were false;
  (iv)   the 2010/2011 application was corrected, and the  tax  paid,  long
  before the current application  was  made,  that  was  done  for  reasons
  unconnected with his immigration status in  the  context  of  a  mortgage
  application, and this was inconsistent with the allegation  made  against
  him that he had evaded tax and/or  lied  to  the  respondent  as  to  his
  income;
  (v)         the appellant voluntarily disclosed the information  when  he
  made his application for indefinite leave to remain;
  (vi)   HMRC accepted the  amendment,  and  accepted  that  there  was  no
  dishonesty involved; and
  (vii) there was evidence of good character, including numerous  character
  witnesses.

13. The judge then reviewed the evidence at the hearing and the  submissions
and analysed the evidence that he had heard.  In  his  analysis  the  judge
summarised the key points particularly noting that  the  appellant  amended
the tax return on 7 July 2015.  It was his case that the error came to  his
attention when he had to make a mortgage application and that  he  notified
HMRC promptly and then paid the relevant tax.

14. The judge then addressed his  mind  to  the  guidance  given  by  Martin
Spencer J in R (On the application of Khan) v SSHD (Dishonesty, tax return,
paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC)  and  he  has  set  out  the  eight
guiding propositions identified by Martin Spencer J in that case.

15. The judge said at paragraph 32 that:

  "The starting point in applying that guidance to the facts of  this  case
  is to acknowledge that the difference between the income claimed  in  the
  appellant's 2011 application and the income declared to HMRC for the same
  year is �25,316.25.  The level of discrepancy  is  such  that,  absent  a
  plausible explanation for it, the Secretary of State is entitled to  draw
  an inference that the appellant has been deceitful or dishonest,  and  so
  that he should be refused indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  that
  paragraph 322(5) of the Rules applied."

16. The judge then looked at  the  explanation  offered  noting,  correctly,
that it was the appellant's case that it was an innocent mistake  and  that
he was guilty of nothing  worse  than  carelessness.   The  judge  directed
himself at paragraph 33: "I must,  therefore,  undertake  the  fact-finding
task needed to decide whether the explanation and evidence is sufficient to
displace the prima facie inference of deceit/dishonesty."

17. The judge then worked his way through the seven points identified by  Mr
Biggs in his skeleton argument.  The judge accepted that the explanation of
innocent  mistake  compounded  by  the  intervention  of   a   friend   was
"superficially  reasonable".   He  acknowledged  that  the  alleged  friend
claimed to have some knowledge of accountancy and that the  appellant  then
appeared unfamiliar with the tax system.  The judge noted  the  appellant's
evidence that he did not check or sign his tax return but the  judge  could
make  no  sense  of  this  claim  because  he  would  have  expected   some
acknowledgement to be required.  The judge noted that a mistake  is  always
possible and therefore some method of checking was necessary  even  if  not
strictly required as a matter of law.  It  is  what  a  responsible  person
would do.  He acknowledged the appellant's  apparent  inexperience  at  the
material time but he also considered the sums involved.  The judge said  at
paragraph 39:

  "The tax liability on an income of �13,551 is very different from that on
  an income of �38,867.25.  I would not expect the appellant to have  known
  the precise amount of tax that he was liable to pay.  I would expect  him
  to have known that he would have to pay a larger  amount  of  tax  on  an
  income of �38,867.25 than  on  an  income  of  �13,551.   The  difference
  between the two is not trivial, but a substantial sum  of  over  �25,000.
  The one figure is almost three times bigger than the other.  It  follows,
  that, had there been a genuine mistake, I  would  have  expected  him  to
  notice that something was amiss when he received his tax  bill  for  that
  financial year, and found it to be very much lower than his income  might
  have led him to expect."

18. The judge noted it was the appellant's second  point  that  the  amended
return was prepared by reputable accountants who were said to "support  the
appellant's case".  The judge considered that submission very carefully and
looked at the supporting letter from the tax accountants.  The judge said:

  "It merely reports factually that the tax return was not correctly filed,
  and that there were errors.  It does not say how those errors came about.
   Indeed, it could not.  The accountants who wrote the letter were not  in
  a position to know whether the errors were  the  result  of  an  innocent
  mistake, or otherwise.  They were not involved in the preparation of  the
  tax return in question.  It was not their role to carry out an enquiry as
  to the cause of the error, but only to identify that it was there, and to
  give appropriate advice as to how it should be resolved."

19. The judge also noted the accountants act on instructions.  There was  no
reason for them to query the instructions that the appellant had  acted  on
an innocent mistake but neither does their conduct in correcting the  error
somehow add weight to the claim that it was innocent.

20. The judge found it significant that there was no  direct  evidence  from
the friend who is said to have caused the error.

21. The third point raised by the appellant is that the respondent  has  not
provided evidence that the "documents were  false".   The  judge  described
this argument as "flawed".  It had never been the  respondent's  case  that
the appellant had relied on false documents.  The respondent was  concerned
either  that  the  appellant  had  overstated  his  income  to  bolster  an
application for leave or understated it to avoid tax.  There was no  reason
to assume the respondent had kept documents provided by the appellant  when
he made his 2011 application.

22. The fourth point was that  the  erroneous  declaration  was  identified,
corrected and tax liability discharged well before the application  leading
to the decision complained of and that it was done for reasons  unconnected
with his immigration status.  The judge regarded this as a point  that  had
"some initial appeal" and on reflection decided it  was  entitled  to  some
weight in the appellant's favour.  However the judge also  recognised  that
if the appellant was telling the truth and it was an innocent mistake  that
came to his attention and he is an honest person he would have done exactly
as he appears to have done, that is to have acted promptly to  declare  the
error and made good the payment due promptly on it coming to his attention.
 However the judge did not regard this as a telling point.  He said:

  "Equally, however, if there had been past dishonesty, it would have  been
  a sensible response on the part of the appellant to pass  it  off  as  an
  innocent mistake when it was raised with him in 2015,  and  to  take  the
  same steps to rectify  it.   At  that  time,  he  would  have  had  every
  incentive to deal with past misconduct  in  such  a  way:  his  job,  his
  immigration status, and his mortgage application were all at stake.   His
  actions were, in my view, equally consistent with his having learnt of an
  innocent mistake, or with his past misconduct having come to light.  This
  is a neutral point."

23. The fifth point was described as the  appellant  voluntarily  disclosing
the information when he  made  his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
remain.  The judge regarded this as a neutral  point.   The  Revenue  would
have been told.  There was every chance of it coming to light and  no  need
to suppress the information.

24. The sixth point is that HMRC accepted the amendment and  accepted  there
was no dishonesty involved.  It is quite clear that no penalty  charge  was
made and indeed the appellant has gone on to find work with HMRC.  However,
as the judge rightly noted, there was no evidence of the policy approach of
HMRC when faced with a taxpayer who voluntarily declares  unpaid  tax.   It
may well be that penalising people who bring to the attention  of  HMRC  an
underpayment which may very well have gone undetected otherwise  is  not  a
priority.  There was no evidence on the point.

25. Finally the appellant relied on evidence of good character and  referred
to there being "numerous character  witnesses".   However  the  judge  also
found that evidence of good character is not normally  "directly  probative
of the matter, one way or the other".  He  said  that  the  good  character
evidence was something to which he should have regard and did  have  regard
but he did not regard this as a case that was finely balanced so one  where
evidence of good character might be  thought  to  tip  the  matter  in  the
appellant's favour.  The judge made it plain that he had had regard to  all
of the evidence in the round and said at paragraph 50:

  "I find that there is a strong  prima  facie  case  which  the  arguments
  advanced by the appellant have  not  dispelled.   I  find  the  character
  evidence insufficient to outweigh the other evidence."

26. He also reminded himself  of  the  seriousness  of  the  allegation  but
correctly applied the standard of proof of the  balance  of  probabilities.
He went on to say that he found the "allegation of dishonesty is  made  out
to the requisite standard".

27. He had no difficulty concluding that the appellant's dishonesty was  bad
conduct within the scope of paragraph 322(5).  The judge did  not  rush  to
condemn.  He reminded himself expressly that the  appellant  had  not  been
convicted of an offence and was not subject, yet, to removal.  Nevertheless
the judge found that the appellant's dishonesty was  of  a  kind  that  was
commonplace describing the behaviour as "widespread" and "serious"  because
it "undermines the integrity of the system put in place for the  management
of immigration and taxation, and it also undermines  public  confidence  in
those systems".

28. These are the main  reasons  found  by  the  judge  for  justifying  the
conclusion that the conduct was disreputable  and  was  proper  reason  for
interfering with the private and family  life  the  appellant  had  clearly
established during his stay in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  did  not
accept that there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant  re-
establishing himself in his country of nationality.  He then dismissed  the
appeal.

29. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  main
reasons for granting  permission  was  at  point  2  where  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge granting permission stated:

  "The lengthy grounds assert that the Judge erred in the approach [by]  to
  an Immigration Rule 322(5) tax case by adopting the  starting  point  set
  out in R (Khan) v SSHD (Dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5))  [2018]
  UKUT 384 (IAC) as opposed to the approach in the Court of Appeal decision
  of Balajigari and Ors v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673."

30. Mr Biggs had prepared the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
headed  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  "Grounds  of   Appeal   and   Written
Submissions".  There is no obligation to prepare the case in that  way  but
it is sensible and appreciated.  Mr  Biggs  adopted  and  supplemented  the
arguments in his submissions to me.

31. The keystone of his submissions is the emphasis in  Balajigari  and  Ors
on Martin Spencer J describing the discrepancy as the "starting point".  At
paragraph 42 of the Court of Appeal's  judgment,  Underhill  LJ  said  that
"there is on our view a danger that  his  "starting  point"  misstates  the
position". The distinction drawn out by the Court of Appeal was between  an
unexplained discrepancy creating the suspicion of dishonesty, which it can,
and being positive evidence of dishonesty, which it is not. The  First-tier
Tribunal should not have started from the assumption that the appellant had
been dishonest but the assumption that his conduct was suspicious.

32. I was satisfied at the hearing that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred
as Mr Biggs contended and I announced that I would set aside  the  decision
and hear evidence to redetermine the appeal.

33. The "prima facie case" is clearly established.

34. Before the First-tier Tribunal the  Presenting  Officer  indicated  that
there was no need to cross-examine certain witnesses.  That concession  was
not withdrawn in notice before the hearing and I found it was too  late  at
the hearing before me to  allow  the  Secretary  of  State  to  change  her
position on that.

35. The appellant gave evidence before me.  He  had  made  a  statement  and
supplementary statement dealing with his personal  circumstances.   I  have
read them.  I note particularly the appellant's education.  He had  an  MBA
from the University of Wales and graduated in 2010.  I accept that  he  had
secured employment with  the  Ministry  of  Justice  as  an  administrative
officer and that he now works for HMRC.

36. The important  part  of  the  evidence  concerns  the  tax  return.   He
emphasises in his statement that it was his first tax return  and  that  he
claims to have acted promptly to correct an error when it was found.

37. He told me in his oral evidence that he did not check  the  tax  return.
He was sorry he had not done that.  He accepted it was  his  responsibility
but he insisted he did not know that the return was in a wrong form when it
was made.

38. He was cross-examined.  It did not occur to him that his  tax  liability
was very low.

39. I returned to this point at the end of questioning and he insisted  that
he did not think it was too low at that time.  He relied on his  friend  to
do his job.  He hinted that  he  thought  the  tax  years  might  have  had
something to do with it and that he would be faced with a later tax bill on
the next year but he was vague about that.

40. I have reflected very hard on this.  The high spot of  the  Home  Office
case is the discrepancy in the sums.  It is a great deal of money and it is
very difficult to believe the appellant did not think  that  something  was
wrong.

41. Against that there is a lot of evidence that he is a  man  well  thought
of by his peers and there is evidence that he works for  HMRC  and  I  have
seen some evidence to confirm to confirm his extremely plausible claim that
HMRC would have checked his records and known that he had amended a  return
before offering him a job.

42. Unlike the First-tier Tribunal Judge I do not regard this as  a  neutral
point. There is something profoundly unattractive in finding  a  person  to
have been dishonest in his tax affairs on evidence that did not  stop  HMRC
giving him a job.

43. I also asked myself what that appellant would have done if,  as  claims,
he made an honest mistake that was brought to his attention? The answer  to
that is that he would have declared the correct  position  as  soon  as  he
could and paid his bills and that is exactly what he did.   This  does  not
make him innocent but it is as consistent with an honest man as it is  with
a guilty man who wanted to correct a false return.

44. This is not the kind of case that we all see from time to time  in  this
Tribunal of  a  person  amending  tax  records  shortly  before  making  an
application for Indefinite Leave to Remain and realising that  tax  records
will be scrutinised. That is a  sometimes  telling  and  always  suspicious
element that is not present in this case.

45. I reflected hard and too long on this case.  Certainly  I  am  satisfied
that there is something to explain.  The prima facie case is made  out.   I
have to decide if the evidence is capable of being believed and it  clearly
is and I have to satisfy if the Home Office has satisfied me that it should
not be believed.

46. By the narrowest of margins I have come to the conclusion that I am  not
persuaded that the appellant has told lies.

47. I give some weight to  the  support  of  his  colleagues  and  the  many
character references that are before me.  Character references are easy  to
give and it is an obvious fact that a person with a  very  high  reputation
for honesty and good behaviour can behave in a contrary way.  As  is  often
said in the criminal courts if good character were a defence  nobody  would
ever get convicted of anything.

48. I do give some weight to his being employed  by  HMRC.  I  have  seen  a
letter from Mr Peter Wrangling the line manager  at  HMRC  confirming  that
checks are made before a person is employed.

49. I have also considered the evidence of  Mr  Ibrahim  Mahmood  confirming
that he had helped with the troublesome tax return  but  could  not  really
remember what had happened.  This is rather thin evidence.   Oral  evidence
and cross-examination would have been better but it assists  the  appellant
rather than frustrates his case.

50. For all the heat and paperwork that has been generated it  is  a  simple
point.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred by  giving  too  much
weight to the prima facie case and not recognising  the  difficulties  that
the Court of Appeal identified in Balajigari.  I do not wish  to  make  the
same mistake.  By the narrowest of margins I am persuaded that this man was
not dishonest.

51. That of course is not the end of the matter but a careless error in  tax
returns that is  corrected  without  problem  to  the  Revenue  should  not
ordinarily be a reason to disqualify a person making them not suitable  for
living in the United Kingdom and it does  not  do  so  here.  There  is  no
sensible reason to find  that  the  corrected  tax  record  was  false  and
invented to support an "immigration" application.

52.  I  find  that  the  appellant  satisfies  the  rules.  Clearly  he  has
established private and family life during his stay in the  United  Kingdom
and clearly the decision interferes with that disproportionately.

53. With that finding the case is made out under the Rules and  the  Article
8 claim makes itself.

Notice of Decision

54. The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and  I  set  aside  its  decision
substituting the decision allowing the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 March 2020                   |




