
                                                        [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/00632/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 November 2017                  |      On 19 December 2017               |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                           Ms esther dwini kariuki
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Shilliday, instructed by Rotherham & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
Kenya, born on 21.6.62. She arrived in the United Kingdom on 11.7.09 as a
visitor, with a visa valid to 16.9.09. On 14.9.09 the Claimant applied for
further leave to remain on compassionate grounds, outside the Rules, but
this application was refused. On 20.9.10 the Claimant applied for a
certificate of approval to marry, which application was also refused. On
9.5.12 the Claimant was served with a notice of liability to removal as an
overstayer.

2. The Claimant made an application for leave to remain pursuant to Article
8 and, following an appeal, which was allowed on Article 8 grounds in a
decision of FtTJ Scott Baker on 17.7.12, she was granted a form of leave
until 15.9.15. On 4.9.15 the Claimant made an (in-time) application for
leave to remain outside the Rules on compassionate grounds (FLR)(O). This
application was refused in a decision dated 21.12.15. The SSHD considered
the application with reference to the Claimant's private and family life in
the UK, under the 10 year partner and private life routes contained in
Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. The basis for the refusal
was that the Claimant had provided insufficient evidence of cohabitation
with her partner ie. that he was living at the same address, thus the
application was refused on the basis that that it was not accepted that the
relationship was genuine and subsisting.

3. The Claimant appealed this decision and her appeal came before FtTJ
Bircher for hearing on 4.1.17. The Judge heard evidence from the Claimant
and her partner, Louis Okey Aloma. The Home Office Presenting Office did
not cross-examine either witness [15] and in her closing submissions,
simply asked that the Judge uphold the SSHD's decision [16]. The Claimant's
representative sought to rely upon the decision of FtTJ Scott-Baker, who
had held at [23]:

      "I find that the appellant and Mr Aloma have been living together
since 2009.      I find that the relationship is genuine and subsisting.
The appellant has      therefore been in a genuine relationship for 3
years."

4. At [20] of the decision, FtTJ held as follows:

            "Judge Scott-Baker therefore found that  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Aloma had a      genuine subsisting relationship. 4 years have elapsed
      since that determination     was produced and there is nothing in  the
      papers before me to suggest that the    couple  are  not  still  in  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship. There  are      numerous  utility
      bills and  correspondence  to  the  appellant  and  Mr  Aloma    which
      continue  to  demonstrate  that  they  share  a  home  together.   The
      Presenting Office did not seek to cross-examine the appellant  and  Mr
      Aloma       on any of the documents contained with the bundle. I  have
      found that in    accordance with E-LTRP  1.7  the  relationship  which
      exists  between  the      appellant  and  Mr  Aloma  is  genuine   and
      subsisting."

5. FtTJ Bircher went on to consider the provisions of section 117B of the
NIAA 2002 and, in a decision and reasons promulgated on 14.2.17, allowed
the appeal [21]-[22].

6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
that it was unclear on what basis the appeal had been allowed, the Claimant
having won her previous appeal in 2012 and was granted 3 years
discretionary leave. It was asserted that the FtTJ failed to give adequate
reasons for allowing the appeal, given that the refusal decision had set
out in detail why EX1 required the Claimant to show insurmountable
obstacles to the relationship continuing in Kenya. It was asserted that
there had to be compelling circumstances that warrant consideration of an
appeal outside the Rules and it was not sufficient for the Judge in 2017 to
rely on the previous decision of the Judge in 2012.

7. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Martin in a decision dated
1.9.17 on the basis that it was arguable that the FtTJ had made errors of
law for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.

Hearing

8. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from Mr Shilliday on
behalf of the Claimant and Mr Bramble on behalf of the SSHD. Mr Shilliday
drew my attention to the Home Office guidance "Family Members under Part 8
and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules" at 3.3.1 which provides that if
an applicant was granted leave under the Discretionary Leave policy before
9.7.12 they will continue to be considered under that policy through to
settlement, provided they continue to qualify for leave and their
circumstances have not changed. He also drew my attention to 6.2.1 of the
policy, which provides that where an application is made before 9.7.12
which was refused and the appeal against the refusal allowed on Article 8
grounds on or after 9.7.12 leave to remain of 30 months duration should be
granted. It was Mr Shilliday's case that the Claimant had been granted
discretionary leave under the old Rules and thus the new Rules were not in
issue cf. Edgehill and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74. He submitted that even if
there was an error of law in the decision of FtTJ Bircher for not
addressing EX1 in terms, it was not a material error in light of the
findings of the previous Judge

9. Mr Bramble informed me that there were no GCID notes on the Claimant's
Home Office file but simply 4 minutes which were very limited on what they
addressed and did not shed light on what was decided and why. He submitted
that it was clear that the FtTJ had failed to provide adequate reasons for
her decision and had failed to set out why she had allowed the appeal.

My findings

10. Whilst the Claimant was granted a form of leave following the decision
of FtTJ Scott-Baker allowing her appeal, the length and type of that leave
is unclear. In her refusal decision of 21.12.15 the Respondent omits to
make any reference to the previous grant of leave except for a reference to
the Claimant's application, which states that she was granted leave to
remain in 2013. Mr Bramble informed me that there are no GCID notes on the
Claimant's Home Office file and the minutes do not shed any light of the
exact nature of the leave granted to the Claimant. There is no copy of the
Claimant's BRP.

11. However, I note that section 3, page 13 of the application form has
been written "DLR Grant 2." I further note that the Home Office guidance
"Family Members under Part 8 and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules"
provides at pages 5-6 that, following the judgment in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ
74 "In non-criminal cases that made a Rules-based application prior to 9
July 2012, with a decision made in the period from 9 July 2012 to 5
September 2012, the transitional provisions allowing specified applicants
to continue to rely on the pre-9 July 2012 Rules apply." Moreover, the
SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal expressly state that the
Claimant had been granted 3 years discretionary leave. Thus I conclude that
the Claimant was granted 3 years discretionary leave under the policy in
force prior to 9 July 2012 and by virtue of the transitional provisions and
the judgment in Singh, she was granted this leave because her appeal was
allowed in a decision dated 17.7.12.

12. If I am correct in this deduction, the new Rules and Appendix FM had no
part to play in the SSHD's consideration of the Claimant's application for
further leave to remain. It follows that there is no material error of law
in the decision of First tier Tribunal Bircher, who having found that the
relationship between the Claimant and her partner was genuine and
subsisting, could simply allow the appeal on this basis. I find it was open
to the Judge to make this finding, in light of the oral and documentary
evidence before her and the Presenting Officer's decision not to cross-
examine the Claimant or her partner or make substantive submissions. There
was simply no need for the Judge to go on to consider whether the Claimant
met the requirements of the current Immigration Rules.

13. In the alternative, if in fact the Claimant was granted 30 months
limited leave outside the Rules, on a 10 year route to settlement and was
required to meet the requirements of Appendix FM, the only substantive
reason put forward by the SSHD for refusing the application for further
leave was with reference to E-LTRP 1.7 of Appendix FM viz there was
insufficient evidence to show that the relationship between the Claimant
and her partner was genuine and subsisting. Given that the SSHD expressly
accepted that the suitability requirements of the Rules were met, the
effect of the finding of Judge Bircher that the relationship between the
Claimant and her partner was genuine and subsisting is that the Claimant
fulfilled the requirements of R-LTRP 1.1 of Appendix FM of the Rules in
that (a) the applicant and their partner must be in the UK; (b) the
applicant must have made a valid application for limited or indefinite
leave to remain as a partner; and (c)(i) the applicant must not fall for
refusal under Section S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and (ii) the
applicant meets all of the requirements of Section E-LTRP: Eligibility for
leave to remain as a partner. The requirement that the provisions of EX1
are met is in the alternative and thus it was not simply incumbent upon the
First tier Tribunal Judge to consider these.

14. Moreover, in neither case was it necessary for the Judge to go on to
consider whether there were compelling circumstances justifying
consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules so the challenge to this
aspect of her decision is otiose.

15. In light of my reasons above, I find that First tier Tribunal Judge
Bircher gave clear and adequate reasons for her findings and conclusions.
In light of the Devaseelan principle she was further entitled to place
reliance on the decision of Judge Scott-Baker as the starting point for her
consideration.





Decision

16. I find no material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
Judge Bircher and that decision is upheld. It follows that the fee award
made by the First tier Tribunal Judge is also upheld.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

18 December 2017

