
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00199/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 November 2020                           |On 17 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               Valbona Valteri
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Foot, Counsel instructed by Oliver & Hasani
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a female citizen of Albania against a decision of
the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision of the
respondent on 3 December 2019 refusing her application for leave to remain
in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a man who is her husband and a
naturalised British citizen.

2. The appellant's husband entered the United Kingdom in 1999 when he was
16 years old.  He claimed, untruthfully, that he was from Kosovo and sought
asylum.  In fact he was from Albania and clearly did not need asylum for
the reasons relied upon.  On the basis of his false claim to be from Kosovo
he was given exceptional leave to remain and in due course, in his case on
5 July 2005, became a naturalised British citizen.  He was given a British
passport recording his place of birth as Prizren in Kosovo.

3. The appellant and her husband have had a close relationship for some
time.  The appellant first applied for entry clearance as a fiancï¿½e in 2011
but the application was refused.  The Secretary of State decided that the
appellant had relied on a "false document", namely her husband's passport.
It was a genuine document but had been obtained improperly and gave false
information about his place of birth.  That decision was not appealed.

4. The appellant married her husband in Albania in July 2012 and again
applied for entry clearance.  She was found unsuitable and the application
was refused.  She appealed on Article 8 grounds and the First-tier Tribunal
found there were no obstacles to family life being enjoyed in Albania.

5. The appellant applied again for entry clearance.  This application was
refused on 1 April 2014 on suitability grounds.  There was an appeal and
the appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal but the decision was set
aside by the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal dismissed the
appeal when it was reheard.

6. The appellant gave birth to a son, who I identify as "A", in October
2015 in Albania.

7. The appellant and A arrived in the United Kingdom in April 2019.  They
each had visas permitting their entry into the United States of America and
they were given transit leave to enter the United Kingdom for one day.
However they did not continue their journey to the United States but met up
with the appellant's husband and the child's father and on 15 October 2019
the appellant applied for leave to remain as the wife of her husband
relying particularly on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
Rights.  The application was refused as indicated on 3 December 2019 and
the appellant appealed that decision.

8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the Secretary of State accepted
that it was a genuine and subsisting relationship and that the financial
requirements were met but not the suitability requirements.  The material
factor relied on was the appellant's false representation that she intended
to transit through the United Kingdom on her way to the United States of
America.  Her "English language certificate" was out of date and she was an
overstayer.  The Secretary of State considered the Rules and found there
were no obstacles to family life continuing in Albania where there was a
large extended family and that it would not be unreasonable for the son to
leave the United Kingdom with his mother because he had spent his entire
life in Albania until April 2019.  The Secretary of State did not accept
there were very substantial obstacles to integration on return.

9. The case came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

10. The appellant gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal.  Much of the
evidence was uncontroversial.  It was accepted that the appellant and her
husband have large families in Albania and the appellant and the child A
had lived with the appellant's mother-in-law.  The sponsor would visit them
as often as he was able.  The appellant is a university graduate and has a
good work record.  At the time of the hearing she was pregnant (I am told
that the child was born safely and is now about 5 months old) and the
sponsor had lived mainly in the United Kingdom for over twenty years.  He
was in stable employment in the building trade.  They wanted to live
together as a family in the United Kingdom where they would have a better
life and in Albania.

11. The judge noted that much was made of the fact that the child A is a
British citizen and entitled to reside in the United Kingdom and the
appellant is his carer.  His father is in full-time work and could not look
after a small child without making drastic changes in his lifestyle.  It
was argued the child cannot reasonably be expected to leave the United
Kingdom and it would be disproportionate to expect the appellant's husband
to relocate in Albania having built a life for himself in the United
Kingdom.

12. The judge then recorded the submissions in outline referring directly
to Ms Foot's skeleton argument which he said were "annexed to the record".

13. The skeleton argument is indeed with the papers.  It is dated 16 March
2020 and runs to 32 paragraphs.  Several points are outlined there
contesting that the application should not have been refused under the
Rules.  Section 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
is set out in full and the word "reasonableness" is emboldened and there is
reference to the decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD
[2018] UKSC 53.  The point is made very firmly that, according to statute,
where a person is not liable to deportation the public interest does not
require that person's removal where there is a genuine and subsisting
parental relationship with a qualifying child and "it would not be
reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom" and a reference
to KO refers to paragraph 15 of the judgment of Lord Carnwath which
emphasises that reasonableness is to be determined in accordance with the
best interests of the child and not with regard to the dubious or worse
behaviour of the child's parents.

14. The skeleton argument then makes the point that the reasonableness test
is echoed under Appendix FM of HC 395 at EX.1.

15. There is then a section under the heading "submissions" and this begins
with the subheading "unreasonable to require Appellant's son to leave the
UK".  It refers to the child being a British citizen and that it would not,
in the contention of the appellant, be reasonable to expect A to leave the
UK.

16. Having referred to the skeleton argument, although not expressly to
much of its contents, the judge gave his findings and reasons.  The judge
was satisfied the appellant had made a false representation when she
obtained a transit visa and the appellant clearly failed to disclose a
material fact in an earlier application, namely that her husband's
nationality had been obtained by a false representation.

17. The judge found that the appellant's circumstances did not meet the
requirements of the Rules and then looked at Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights.  Again the terms of Section 117B(6) were set
out.  The judge found that the appellant and her husband would obtain work
in Albania if they return there to live and would be able to "maintain
themselves and their child (soon to be children) to a satisfactory
standard."

18. At paragraph 37 the judge directed himself that the "focus" in Ms
Foot's submissions were on Section 117B(6) and the judge accepted that
there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with A who is a
British citizen and therefore a qualifying child.  The judge found that the
best interest of children is a primary consideration but not determinative
in all cases.  I set out below the last three paragraphs of the Decision
and Reasons.  The judge said:

  "40.   The reality here is that he was born in Albania and raised with
  his extended Albanian family.  All of his cultural connection is with
  Albania.  He has been in the UK for only a very short time.  Whilst the
  decision in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i) (f)) Democratic Republic of
  Congo [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC) is an entry clearance case reference is
  made to the importance to be attributed to continuity of residence.

  41.    There was no suggestion that he would not have access to education
  or healthcare provision in Albania.  He is only 4 years old.  His
  relationship with his father has hitherto been conducted remotely.  His
  focus is on his mother who has always been his primary carer.  If she is
  to be removed then I find it is in his best interests to go with her.

  42.    Looking at the evidence before me in the round and having regard
  to those matters to which I am directed by primary legislation to have
  regard I find the refusal decision to be proportionate to the legitimate
  aim already identified.  I therefore dismiss the appeal with reference on
  human rights grounds."

19. What the judge did not do is decide unequivocally and expressly if it
would not be reasonable to expect the child A to leave the United Kingdom.
As might be expected, Ms Foot spotted that and had rather a lot to say on
the subject.

20. The point is set out in the grounds.  Ground 2 complains that the judge
was unduly concerned with the "suitability requirements" where the statute
makes it plain that if the removal of a qualifying child is unreasonable
there is no public interest in removing the mother.

21. Ground 3 said there was a misdirection on the suitability requirements.
 The refusal related to a previous application and finally EX.1(a) under
the Rules was not considered.

22. Setting aside the rights of the child (and I appreciate this is really
what the case is all about) this is an appeal which must be dismissed on
human rights grounds.  Even if there were any merit in the contention that
the appellant's conduct had not been correctly defined for the purposes of
the Rules she was clearly involved in a cynical attempt to evade
immigration control and the discretionary and broad-based balancing of
rights in a human rights exercise would satisfy me beyond any shadow of
doubt that there is a strong public interest in refusing her application
because of her misbehaviour and any disappointment and inconvenience to her
is proportionate to the need to enforce the Rules.  It is proportionate to
the need to give proper effect to immigration control.

23. I agree with Mr Melvin that the finding that the conduct of the
appellant was not in accordance with the suitability requirements in her
manipulative attempt to gain entry by misusing a transit visa pretending to
be on her way to the United States of America was clearly open to the First-
tier Tribunal.

24. Ms Foot's main point is that one thing the judge had to decide, which
is whether a child's removal would be reasonable, was not decided.

25. The Judge got slightly close with a finding about the child's best
interests but that is a different test.  The decision was that the best
interests of the child lay in returning with the mother but that does not
mean it would not be unreasonable for the child to go with the mother.

26. Mr Melvin argued that when the determination is read with care,
although there is plainly not a finding specifically on the point, the
judge must have had reasonableness in mind.  That was clearly what the
appellant's case was about and the judge clearly appreciated this because
there were two references to the relevant Rule. Although the Decision and
Reasons would have been enhanced hugely by a direct answer to the point, I
should infer that the judge, in reaching the conclusion that he did and
making general reference to being "directed by primary legislation" which
he had set out twice, the judge had decided that removal was reasonable and
the decision should be considered accordingly.

27. This is an unattractive argument.  This case concerning the welfare of
the child was about reasonableness and it should have been decided overtly
but on reflection I find Mr Melvin is actually right.  Where the decision
can only make sense if removal is "reasonable" and the judge had set out
the necessary legal test and has decided that in terms the decision is in
accordance with the necessary legal test and has indicated the evidence
that the child has only been in the United Kingdom for a short time and has
been looked after properly in Albania I am satisfied the judge did in fact
apply the right test and there is no error in this decision.

28. I also note that I confirmed with Ms Foot that there is nothing in the
evidence from the appellant that was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge
to suggest that life in Albania was going to be particularly arduous or the
child had any particular needs that were not going to be met there.  The
thrust of the evidence was all about how they wanted to be in the United
Kingdom and together there which is, at one level perfectly laudable and
understandable, it is not possible for everyone who wants to do that to be
able to and there has been disregard for the Rules in this case.

29. There was no application to adduce further evidence before me and,
although it was not necessary, the Notice of Hearing reminded the
appellant, and indeed the respondent, of the importance of doing that.  If
I had had to remake the decision I would have had no hesitation in saying
that the removal is reasonable but for the reasons I have given I have
decided that the Decision and Reasons is sound.  To decide otherwise I
would have to conclude that when the judge had identified the statutory
test with some care he had ignored in making his decision. I am not
persuaded that is the case.

30. It follows that I find no material error of law and I dismiss this
appeal.



Notice of Decision



The appeal is dismissed.





                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 March 2021                  |



