

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/01970/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 25 October 2017                    |           On 5 March 2018            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    m a b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He appeals with  the  permission
of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nightingale  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State on 18 January 2017 refusing him  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
grounds.

2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in October 2009  as  a  student.
His leave was extended until August 2014 but curtailed until 20 July  2014.
He applied for further leave to remain as an unmarried partner.   That  was
refused in September 2014 and on 24 December 2015 he applied for  leave  to
remain on the basis  of  his  relationship  with  his  two  children.   The
application was refused and it was that refusal  that  led  to  the  appeal
before the First-tier Tribunal which was unsuccessful.

3. Genies are not easily rebottled but  before  I  can  interfere  with  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal I must be satisfied that  it  erred  in
law on the material that was before it.  I have tried to put out of my mind
the fact that I know more than was known to the First-tier Tribunal because
there was additional material before me, which I found to be  credible  and
persuasive and pertinent.

4. When the case came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  there  was  evidence
that the appellant and his wife were estranged.  There  was  evidence  that
there had been court proceedings.  There was no  supporting  evidence  from
the appellant's wife or other family members.

5. The judge, correctly, had his mind firmly  fixed  on  the  provisions  of
paragraph 117B(6) which provides that in the case of a person  who  is  not
liable to deportation  (this  is  not  a  deportation  appeal)  the  public
interest does not require removal  where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and
subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and it  would  not
be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

6. The case  was  built  on  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  twin
daughters.  They were born in April  2015.   Sadly  one  of  his  daughters
suffers from a very serious condition which is analogous to a brain tumour.

7. The First-tier Tribunal, unremarkably, was satisfied that  it  would  not
be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom but  was  not
satisfied that there was a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship.
The judge accepted there was a genuine parental relationship but  not  that
it was subsisting.

8. He based that conclusion on  the  absence  of  supporting  evidence  from
family members and the fact that there had been family court proceedings in
relation to the children that "were withdrawn".

9. I have seen the court order dated 12  May  2017.   The  proceedings  were
indeed withdrawn as the First-tier Tribunal Judge found but the  Judge  did
not  acknowledge  that  amongst  the  reasons  given  for  permitting   the
proceedings to be  withdrawn  were  that  both  parents  had  been  working
together to meet the needs of the children and, most importantly, that  the
appellant "provides ongoing day to  day  assistance  in  the  care  of  the
children".  When the Court made its  order,  before  giving  permission  to
withdraw the proceedings, it was satisfied that  there  had  been  progress
regarding the parents' attitudes towards domestic conflict, and recognition
that the appellant would continue to work on his attitude to it,  and  upon
the CAFCASS confirming that both parents were effectively working  together
to meet the children's needs.

10. The order is not a highly illuminating document.  It is not  written  to
assist an Immigration  Judge  but  it  is  far  more  consistent  with  the
appellant's case, namely that he was closely involved in the lives  of  the
children and reconciled to his wife, than it is with  the  judge's  finding
that the parental relationship was not subsisting.

11. I find the judge's finding on that point was wrong.  It did not  show  a
proper  appraisal  of  the  evidence.   In  particular  it  did  not   show
acknowledgment of  the  contents  of  the  Family  Court  Order  and,  less
importantly, did not show consideration of  photographic  evidence  of  the
family members functioning together.  That evidence is of  less  importance
because a photograph is no more than an image of a moment in time but it is
relevant because the photograph showing the appellant  with  his  wife  and
children was a photograph of a woman who before me  identified  herself  as
the appellant's wife.  It follows that I am  entirely  satisfied  that  the
judge in fact erred in law by not considering the evidence properly.

12. I also record that Mrs NA addressed me.  She was  not  giving  evidence.
She was speaking to support her husband and acting as  his  representative.
She drew to my attention documentation  proving  that  there  was  a  civil
marriage ceremony on 19 July 2017 slightly less  than  a  month  after  the
First-tier Tribunal's hearing when she married the appellant.

13. I found her to be articulate, moving  and  honest.   Understandably  and
without losing her dignity she became a little emotional  when  she  talked
about the needs of the children and her husband's role  in  supporting  her
and their daughters.  She said that they had been through a difficult  time
but had addressed problems in their marriage and she  recognised  that  the
children needed the warmth  of  their  father.   She  explained  that  both
children were suffering.  Of course there was particular concern about  the
little girl who was very ill but the twin was finding it hard to understand
and asking questions that were difficult to answer and both children needed
their daddy.

14. She explained why she had not attended the  hearing  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  She said that she had not appreciated how important her presence
might be.  She was working and although her employers were being supportive
she had had a lot of time off to take care of the children and particularly
to make hospital and similar visits.  She did  not  feel  it  justified  in
taking further time off.  This is not what a lawyer would have advised  her
but from her point of view I can  understand  that  and  regard  it  as  an
entirely reasonable if ill-advised decision.

15. Mr Melvin contended that the judge had made a  proper  decision  on  the
evidence before him.  For the reasons I have given above  I  do  not  agree
with that submission.

16. Clearly the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

17. I now have to decide how to address the remedy.   As  I  have  explained
Mrs NA's address was not given as a witness. It follows that  she  was  not
cross-examined.

18. Mr Melvin said that he wanted documentary evidence to support  the  case
and wanted to know more about the financial aspects.

19. Mr Melvin did not indicate that he wanted  to  ask  any  questions  that
would go to the genuineness of the claim that they had reconciled.  That is
not something about which documentary evidence  can  be  expected  although
there is the finding in the  Court  Order  and  there  is  now  a  marriage
certificate which shows the appellant and his wife  residing  at  the  same
address.  Those things have already been produced.

20. I decided on that  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  subsisting
relationship  with  his  children  as  well  as  the  genuine  and   loving
relationship which the First-tier Tribunal identified.  I  note  the  clear
finding at paragraph 11 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision that it would
not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom  and  O
expressed myself satisfied that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
parental relationship with a qualifying child and that following the  terms
of Section 117B(6) the public interest does not require removal  and  I  am
going to allow the appeal.

21. If Mr Melvin takes the view that he has  been  materially  disadvantaged
by a procedure that I recognise was procedurally  irregular  then  he  must
look for remedies elsewhere.

22. For the reasons given I find the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.   I
set aside its decision and I  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision.








|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 1 March 2018                  |
|Judge                                |                                     |








