
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01439/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On October 8, 2018                           |On October 16, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  Jubli [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


On December 18, 2007 the appellant entered the United Kingdom with entry
clearance as a visitor and she had leave to remain in this country until
May 27, 2008.  On May 28, 2008 she applied for indefinite leave to remain
but this was refused on February 11, 2009 with no right of appeal.

On January 8, 2015 the appellant lodged an application for leave to remain
on human rights grounds but the respondent refused this on March 16, 2015
with no right of appeal.  The pre-action Protocol to challenge that
decision was served but the original decision was upheld and the appellant
was subsequently served with various removal notices on August 19, 2016.
Following the submission of further evidence the respondent reviewed the
appellant's application for leave to remain and issued a fresh decision on
October 6, 2016.

The appellant lodged an appeal on January 19, 2017 under section 82 of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but this appeal was lodged out
of time.  Tribunal Caseworker Early extended time on March 9, 2017 and the
appellant's appeal subsequently came before Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Khan on April 16, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on May 21,
2018 the Judge rejected the appellant's appeal.

The decision recorded that the appellant had not attended the hearing and
that she had an appointment to see her doctor later that day.  The Judge
noted there was a medical note stating that she suffered from depression
and anxiety and that she was not fit for work and "might not be able to
attend the court hearing due to severe anxiety".  The Judge also had a
further letter from her surgery confirming she suffered from depression and
anxiety resulting in panic attacks.  There had previously been a request
for an adjournment which was dealt with administratively but this request
was refused.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-
Hutchison on August 20, 2017 as she found it arguable that as the appellant
was unwell on the day of hearing the Judge was wrong to proceed.

The matter came before me on the above date and at the beginning of the
hearing Mr Tarlow confirmed that he had discussed the matter with Mr
Bellara and they agreed that the Judge had materially erred by not
adjourning the case in circumstances where there was adequate evidence that
the appellant was unfit to attend that hearing.

As the findings were based on her absence and her failure to address issues
at the hearing both parties agreed that this was a case that would have to
be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

Section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 sets out
the procedure where a case is to be remitted back to the First-tier
Tribunal.  I am satisfied that as there was a procedural unfairness that
this is a case that will have to be remitted back to the First-tier
Tribunal to be heard by a Judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
M A Khan.


decision

THERE IS AN ERROR OF LAW.  I SET ASIDE THE ORIGINAL DECISION AND I REMIT
THE MATTER BACK TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 12(1) OF THE
TRIBUNALS, COURTS AND ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date     10/10/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

