
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01689/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |                              |
|at Field House                               |                              |
|On 8th October 2020                          |On 22nd October 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Nassim Bibi Atterkhan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Deepchand, Solicitor, Lambeth Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.



1.   This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Brewer, promulgated on 27th September 2019, in which the judge
allowed the appeal of Nassim Bibi Atterkhan, the respondent, but dismissed
the appeal of her husband, Muhammad Asif.

Background

2.   The respondent is a national of Mauritius born on 3rd November 1965.
Her husband is a Pakistani national who was born on 23rd April 1980.  They
married on 30th August 2016. The respondent has a child who tragically died
in 2005. The child is buried in this country and the evidence before the
First-tier Tribunal was that the respondent regularly visits the child's
grave.

3.   The respondent entered the United Kingdom on 29th November 1997 as a
visitor.  She thereafter made various applications for leave to remain, all
of which were refused.  The respondent and her husband made human rights
applications on 26th September 2019 based on the private lives they had
established in this country.  These applications were refused on 11th
January 2019.

4.   The appellant, in brief, found that neither the respondent nor her
husband met the Immigration Rules relating to family life, which are
contained in Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. The appellant found that
the respondent did not meet any of the requirements of paragraph
276ADE(1)(iii) to (vi). At the time of her application the respondent had
been in the UK for eighteen years. The appellant was not satisfied that the
respondent's husband met the Suitability requirements of the Immigration
Rules because he used deception in a TOEIC English language test. The
appellant was not satisfied there were any exceptional circumstances such
that the refusals of the applications would lead to breaches of Article 8
ECHR. The respondent and her husband appealed those decisions to the First-
tier Tribunal pursuant to Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002.

The judge's decision

5.   At paragraph 12 of his decision the judge stated that the respondent's
appeal was on the basis that she had accumulated twenty years' residence in
the UK, and that her husband's appeal was on the basis that he did not
commit fraud in his TOEIC test.  The judge considered several documents
that had been provided to him including a bundle of documents provided by
the respondent and her husband.  The judge considered written statements
from the respondent and her husband and heard oral evidence from them.

6.   Under the heading 'Findings of fact' at paragraph 16 the judge stated:
"Having heard evidence from the first and second appellant I make the
following findings of fact."  At paragraph 17 the judge stated:

"The first appellant was born in Mauritius in 1965.  She came to the UK in
1997.  It is fair to say that she has a chequered immigration history.
However at the date of the hearing she had been in the UK for over twenty
years.  I find as a fact that the first appellant meets the requirements of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) - (iii)."

The judge then set out an extract of paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) to (iii).
Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) requires an applicant to have lived continuously
in the UK for at least twenty years (discounting any period of
imprisonment).  The judge gave no other consideration to any of the other
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1).

7.   The judge then considered the evidence relating to the husband's TOEIC
test and considered the possibility of the husband and the respondent
relocating to Pakistan or of continuing their relationship in Mauritius.
The judge found that the evidential burden was met by the appellant in
producing prima facie evidence of fraud. The judge found that no
satisfactory innocent explanation had been provided and concluded that the
legal burden on the appellant had been discharged. The judge supported his
findings with adequate reasoning.

8.   The judge concluded that the respondent's husband could not meet the
Immigration Rules relating to private life, that is 276ADE(1), including
his claimed risk of harm from his family in Pakistan for marrying out of
the community as he claimed.  The judge concluded that even though the
respondent's appeal was allowed the respondent could not meet the
requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules because of her
immigration status and because of the suitability requirements in relation
to her husband.

9.   The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR.  At paragraph 33 the judge
set out the five questions in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge
referred to relevant authorities such as Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  The judge
found that whilst there was clearly family life between the respondent and
her husband, the decisions did not breach that family life. The judge found
that, given the length of time that the husband had been in the UK, he had
established a private life.  The judge then considered case law relating to
the other requirements of Article 8(2) including interference, whether the
decision was in accordance with the law and whether the interference was
necessary in a democratic society.

10.  Finally, the judge considered the issue of proportionality.  At
paragraph 47 the judge stated:

"I have found that family life will not be interfered with the respondent's
decision.  However, even if I am wrong about that, given all of my findings
above and balancing the family's position against the public interest I
find that the respondent's decision is proportionate.  I also find that the
respondent's decision is proportionate in relation to the interference in
private life.  I have taken into account that I should give little weight
to private life formed when the appellant's stay in the UK is precarious."

The judge concluded by allowing the respondent's appeal but dismissing the
appeal of her husband.

The challenge to the judge's decision

11.  The appellant sought permission to appeal on what is accepted by both
sides as a narrow ground. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) requires that the
requisite twenty years is considered by reference to the date of
application.  The appellant's simple point is that the judge was wrong to
determine the respondent's appeal pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)
because at the date of the respondent's application she had resided in the
United Kingdom for eighteen years and not twenty years.  Whilst the
respondent had lived in the UK for over twenty years by the date of the
hearing, she could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
themselves. The appellant additionally noted that if an error of law was
identified by the Upper Tribunal then she would wish to provide evidence
indicating that the respondent may have re-entered the UK as a visitor in
2005.

12.  Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Appleyard
in a decision dated 20th January 2020. An error of law hearing was listed
for 27th March 2020 but had to be vacated due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Directions were issued in light of the pandemic on 13th May 2020.  The
respondent responded to the COVID directions on 15th May 2020 with a
skeleton argument which is essentially in the same terms as the grounds of
appeal.  Noting that the appellant requested an oral hearing and that the
COVID directions were sent to the respondent's solicitors but not to
herself, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch directed that an error of law hearing
be conducted via remote means.  Judge Finch's directions were dated 29th
July 2020 but were issued on 20th August 2020 by email to the appellant and
to the respondent's solicitors and by post to the respondent.

13.  I have heard via Skype submissions both from Mr Clarke, representing
the appellant, and from Mr Deepchand, representing the respondent.  At the
outset of the hearing Mr Deepchand stated that an application for
permission to appeal by the respondent's husband had been lodged with the
First-tier Tribunal.  Unfortunately it is unclear whether any decision has
been made by the First-tier Tribunal.  It remains the case that there is no
appeal by the husband before me, no decision by the Upper Tribunal granting
permission, and in these circumstances, I am confined to consideration of
the appeal by the Secretary of State in relation to Ms Atterkhan.

14.  Mr Clarke's submissions were focussed and concise and mirrored the
grounds of appeal and the appellant's skeleton argument.  Mr Deepchand drew
my attention to the skeleton argument that was before the judge, which
indicated that the respondent was relying on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and
to the covering letter that accompanied the application made by the
respondent to the Home Office in 2016, which also relied on paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi).  Mr Deepchand submitted that it was unclear whether the
judge made a decision under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). Mr Deepchand
maintained that the judge's decision was, in any event, consistent with a
lawful application of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  He submitted alternatively
that the outcome was not likely to be different, given the evidence that
was before the judge and the respondent's length of residence in the United
Kingdom.  I indicated that I did not need to hear from Mr Clarke in reply.

Discussion

15.  In my judgment the judge's concluded that the respondent met the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). In so doing the judge made a
material error in law.  Under the Immigration Rules the length of residence
required to fulfil paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) is measured by reference to the
date of application.  It is apparent from a holistic reading of the
decision that the judge proceeded on the basis that the respondent met the
formal requirements of long residence and that her appeal fell to be
allowed, presumably on the principles established in TZ (Pakistan) [2018]
EWCA Civ 1109.

16.  I wholly reject Mr Deepchand's submissions that the judge may have
applied paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  It is, with respect, entirely clear that
the judge was applying paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  This is apparent from a
combined reading of paragraph 12, paragraph 16 and paragraph 17.  The judge
did not set out the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  He focussed
his assessment purely on the respondent's length of residence and
explicitly referred to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  In any event, there was
simply no consideration of any other factors that one would reasonably
expect to find if the judge did in fact consider and apply paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi).

17.  Whilst the fact that the respondent has remained, or may have
remained, in the UK for twenty years at the date of the hearing is clearly
a relevant factor to take into account in any Article 8 assessment at
large, she did not meet the formal requirements of the Immigration Rules.
Mr Deepchand submitted that the judge engaged in an Article 8 assessment in
any event but it is clear from reading the judge's assessment, particularly
in relation to proportionality, that that focus was on the position of both
the respondent and her husband and no consideration was given to the
respondent's private life rights under Article 8. The judge simply failed
to engage in an Article 8 assessment relating to the respondent alone.
There has been no consideration, as one would expect in an assessment under
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) or an assessment under Article 8 outside the
Immigration Rules, of the respondent's chequered immigration history or
indeed other considerations that may have played in her favour, such as the
death of her child in 2005.  It is not the case that the error could have
made no material difference to the judge's outcome as submitted by Mr
Deepchand.

18.  I am without any doubt that this decision is unsafe and must be set
aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive  a  party  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

    (b)  the nature or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I have determined that  the  judge's  decision  is  unsafe  because  he
    misapplied the immigration rules and consequently failed  to  make  any
    necessary factual findings in respect of the respondent's private  life
    in the UK. Both Mr  Clarke  and  Mr  Deepchand  agreed  that  in  these
    circumstances it was appropriate for the case to be  remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for primary factual findings to  be  made.  The
    appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that a new  fact-
    finding exercise can be undertaken.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brewer.

No anonymity direction is made.


D.Blum   14 October 2020

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

