
                                    [pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01820/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 November 2018                       |On 14 November 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                         KAZI ZIBRIL MOSTAFA FARHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant had leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant
from 3 October 2013 until 30 January 2017. On 18 January 2017 he made a
human rights application as the partner of a person present and settled in
the UK, namely Ms Rabeya Bashori Begum. His application was refused on 18
January 2017 for reasons which can be summarised as follows. The appellant
had previously been granted leave to remain under paragraph 245ZY(c) of the
Immigration Rules, which imposed a restriction on employment. The appellant
had submitted six payslips suggesting he was in self-employment as a
director of Nice Lounge Ltd, t/a Curry Stop Restaurant. Paragraph 6 of the
Immigration Rules defined "self-employed" for the purposes of Part 6A of
the rules as meaning "registered as self-employed with HM Revenue &
Customs, or is employed by a company of which the applicant is a
controlling shareholder". The appellant was registered as a director of the
company until its dissolution. This placed him in breach of the conditions
of his leave and his application was therefore refused by reference to
paragraph E-LTR.2.2(b) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules[1].

The decision noted the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph
R-LTRP.1.1(c)(ii), which states that an applicant must not fall for refusal
under any of the suitability grounds. The respondent therefore considered
whether the appellant could succeed by reference to paragraph EX.1(b).
However, the appellant had not shown there were insurmountable obstacles to
family life with his partner continuing outside the UK. Nor had he shown
there were any significant obstacles to his reintegration in Bangladesh so
as to satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules. His application did not
give rise to any exceptional circumstances to warrant the grant of leave
outside the rules.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The grounds criticised
the respondent's finding about the appellant's self-employment. The
appellant would say that he had not knowingly undertaken any self-employed
work and he was never served with a notice containing a condition
explaining that he was not allowed to undertake self-employment.

The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie on 13
April 2018 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 23 May 2018. At the
hearing the appellant accepted that he was a director of the company but
denied having any financial interest in the business, having not invested
any money in it. His appointment as a director was essentially nominal. In
any event, he was not aware that he was prohibited from taking self-
employment.

In support of his arguments, the appellant relied on the decision in
Muhammad Haseeb Anwar v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2134. In that case, the court
considered the question of whether the appellant had breached a condition
of leave by studying at a college in addition to the one which had assigned
his CAS. The court noted the power contained in section 4(1) of the
Immigration Act 1971 to grant leave subject to conditions provided that
those powers shall be exercised by notice in writing. Such a condition must
be communicated clearly because of the serious consequences of a breach.
The Immigration Rules do not of themselves impose conditions. In the
circumstances of that case, the necessary notice had not been given and, as
a consequence, the appellant had not been made subject of the intended
condition. It followed there had been no breach of conditions.

Judge Devittie distinguished the facts of this appeal. In short, he
considered that it was administratively unduly onerous to expect the
respondent to include the full provisions of the Immigration Rules
restricting employment in the notice given to the appellant. He also
considered that the condition recorded on his Biometric Residence Permit,
expressed as "Work 20 hours maximum in term time", was sufficiently clear
to exclude self-employment. He considered this was "abundantly clear". He
found therefore that the appellant had breached the 20-hour limit on work
during term time and the appellant did not meet all the eligibility
requirements of Appendix FM. He noted in conclusion that the appellant had
not set out any basis in his evidence for challenging the decision that
there were no insurmountable obstacles to the continuance of married life
outside the UK. He purported to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration
Rules and on human rights grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds. Firstly, the
grounds argued that the judge had failed to take into account the
principles set out in Anwar. The court had rejected the notion that the
provisions of the Immigration Rules of themselves imposed a condition
restricting a person's place of study and held that a further
administrative act was required to give notice. In this appeal the judge
had failed to take into account the appellant's evidence that he was aware
that he was not allowed to work more than 20 hours per week and he denied
doing so. Secondly, the respondent had treated the relevant suitability
provision as if it were mandatory, whereas it is a discretionary provision.
Thirdly, the judge had purported to dismiss the appeal under the
Immigration Rules but he no longer had jurisdiction to do so.

Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal in respect of
the third ground only. The respondent lodged a rule 24 response to the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the third ground, opposing the
appeal. The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal on
the first and second grounds. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to
argue the first ground but not the second ground. In relation to the first
ground Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson said,

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law on the
         first ground in finding that there was an implied condition on the
         Appellant's leave, because to include the full provisions of the
         Immigration Rules being an unduly onerous administrative burden and
         that the condition 'Work 20 hours maximum in term time' was
         sufficiently clear to exclude self-employment. That is arguably
         contrary to the decision in Anwar."

I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether the decision of
Judge Devittie contains a material error of law.

Mr Nasim did not pursue the third ground after I indicated that I did not
think the judge's reference at the end of his decision to having dismissed
the appeal under the rules could give rise to a material error. He had also
made it clear that he had dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds. Mr
Nasim pointed out that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert had granted
permission in relation to the third ground in the following terms:

         "While he also dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds there
         is no reasoning in the decision under Article 8."

He suggested this would entitle the appellant to argue that the judge's
finding that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
continuing in Bangladesh was inadequately reasoned. However, I indicated
that was not the case. The third ground as argued in the application for
permission to appeal was to the effect that the judge had not had
jurisdiction to dismiss the appeal under the rules in a human rights
appeal. I noted in any event that the appellant said nothing at all in his
statement regarding the point about whether family life could be continued
in Bangladesh. His statement was solely concerned with the issue of self-
employment/employment.

This appeal turns on the first ground. If it is found that the appellant
did not breach a condition of his leave as a student, there are no further
challenges to his case that he satisfies the rules for leave to remain
under the five-year partner route.

I shall set out what Judge Devittie had to say about the Anwar point. He
wrote:

         "11. I recognise as binding the principle of law enunciated in the
         case of Anwar, namely, that for there to be an operative condition
         which restricts the terms of a residence permit, such a condition
         must be communicated clearly to the person affected in the
         individual case. Applying this principle to the facts of this case,
         in order to be compliant with the law the appellant's residence
         permit needed to make clear that self-employment was not permitted.
         In my opinion the biometric and residence permit issued to the
         appellant does with sufficient clarity, make it known to the
         appellant that self-employment is not permitted. I say so for the
         following reasons:

               1) It would in my opinion impose an unduly onerous
                  administrative burden on the respondent to apply a literal
                  interpretation of the requirements to communicate to the
                  individual concerned the conditions ... subject to which a
                  permit is granted. The efficient administration [of]
                  immigration controls would seem to require the respondent
                  to communicate with sufficient clarity the conditions of
                  the permit and not to spell out in the permit the detailed
                  provisions of the immigration rules.

               2) In the instant case the applicable immigration provisions
                  provide as follows: [the rules are set out].

               3) It surely cannot be the case that the respondent was
                  required in order to comply with the law to set out in
                  full in the biometric permit the above provisions? The
                  context is important - the application is initiated by an
                  applicant and/or his legal representatives in order to
                  meet the requirements of a specific.

               4) The restrictive condition imposed on employment in the
                  present case as inscribed on the biometric residence
                  permit reads: "WORK 20 HOURS MAXIMUM IN TERM TIME".

                  It is clearly to be implied in the above condition, that
                  what is contemplated is anything other than self-
                  employment and that self-employment is not permitted. I am
                  not certain what more was to be reasonably expected of the
                  respondent in order to inform the appellant that self-
                  employment was not permitted? It seems to me to be
                  abundantly clear, from the fact that work was restricted
                  to 20 hours in term time, that no other form [of]
                  employment was permitted. It seems pretty obvious too that
                  no such restriction applies during the vacation.

               5) Establishing a business venture in the way this appellant
                  has done, must of necessity contravene the 20 hour limit
                  on work during term time. In the case of an independent
                  employer, the respondent is able to verify the number of
                  hours worked by checking with an employer whether a breach
                  of the conditions of the permit has occurred. If the
                  appellant's argument that he did not breach the 20 hour
                  limit is to exonerate him then it would mean that
                  respondent would have to accept without question a
                  person's word that he has complied with the conditions of
                  his permit, in the course of running his business
                  enterprise. This underlines my point - it is clear from
                  the imposition of a 20 hour limit that self-employment is
                  prohibited. In the circumstances the appellant's claim
                  that he did not breach the 20 hour limit takes his case no
                  further. In any event he has no way of proving the hours
                  he devoted to his business, and what is more his evidence
                  on how he was distanced from any personal financial
                  interest in the business is highly improbable and he has
                  not called his brother-in-law to give evidence on this
                  point."

Mr Nasim relied on his written grounds. He took issue with the judge's
decision that the endorsement on the appellant's biometric residence permit
could be interpreted to mean that self-employment was prohibited, although
he acknowledged that paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules contains a
definition of 'employment' which includes self-employment. He said the
facts were that the appellant was an employee and not self-employed. He
worked as a waiter in his brother-in-law's restaurant and had no control
over the company. The respondent had only treated him as self-employed
because he was a director.

Mr Nasim also took issue with the judge's inference that the appellant had
worked more than 20 hours given that this had not been challenged by the
respondent. The appellant had produced his payslips and bank statements and
there was nothing in the evidence to suggest that he had worked more than
20 hours per week. He also took me to the application form in which the
appellant had set out details of his employment.

Mr Melvin argued that the judge was right to distinguish the current case
from the decision in Anwar. The court was looking at a requirement not to
study at another college in addition to the one which had assigned a CAS.
In any event, the judge had been right to find that the endorsement on the
biometric residence permit amounted to a sufficiently clear communication
of the condition attached to the appellant's leave. The appellant was
registered as a director and it had been open to the judge to decide that
the appellant was self-employed and therefore in breach of the condition.
He pointed out that the appellant's brother-in-law had not been called to
give evidence to clarify the circumstances.

I reserved my decision as to whether the judge made a material error of law
in approaching the matter as he did. Having considered the matter
carefully, I have concluded that the decision must be set aside because it
contains a material error of law. My reasons are as follows.

I start by noting that the appellant asserts that he was an employee, as
opposed to self-employed. In his FLR(M) application form the appellant
indicated that he met the financial requirement of the rules through his
income from salaried employment. He said he had been employed as a waiter
since January 2016 Nice Lounge Ltd, t/a Curry Stop Restaurant. He said his
annual income was �7488.24. He did not complete the section of the form
regarding self-employment. At the end of the form he mentioned that his
employer had paid him irregularly. He submitted his payslips from July
through to December 2016 which showed a monthly salary of �624. The payment
method is stated to be BACS. His Santander bank statements do not reflect
all these payments, although there are some transfers from Nice Lounge Ltd
for smaller sums.

The respondent's bundle contains a search result from Companies House
showing the appellant was a director of the company. The respondent
approached the matter in the following way. It was noted that paragraph
245ZY(c)(iii) restricted the employment which may be taken by a Tier 4
student. The only exception which could apply to this appellant was
permission to take employment during term time of no more than 20 hours per
week and employment during vacations. Reference was then made to the
definition of 'self-employed' applicable to Part 6A of the rules. Under
this definition it means "an applicant is registered as self-employed with
HM Revenue & Customs, or is employed by a company of which the applicant is
a controlling shareholder". The letter noted that the appellant registered
as a director of Nice Lounge Ltd and was therefore considered to be in
breach of the conditions of his leave.

When it came to the appeal, the appellant strenuously denied undertaking
any self-employed work and, in any event, maintained that he had never been
served with notice of any condition attached to his leave that prevented
him from undertaking self-employment. In his witness statement, he accepted
he was the director of the company but said this was in name only. He had
no financial interest in the business and had not invested any money in it.
He just did a favour to his brother-in-law. He was aware that, as a
student, he was only permitted to work 20 hours per week. He had observed
that condition.

I pause to note that the evidence before the respondent, and indeed before
the First-tier Tribunal, did not evidence either that the appellant was
recorded as being self-employed with HMRC or that he was a controlling
shareholder in the company. In my judgement, this is a significant
oversight. The respondent has purported to rely on the definition of 'self-
employed' contained in the rules but has not shown that the definition has
been met. Instead, the respondent inferred from the fact the appellant was
registered as a director that he was self-employed. Of course, most
directors would be self-employed but not necessarily. It is perfectly
plausible that, particularly within a family business such as this, that a
person could in reality work as an employee whilst his name appeared in the
register at Companies House as a director. Therefore, the factual premise
underlying the finding that the appellant breached a condition of his leave
has not been established. This point does not appear to have been argued
before the First-tier Tribunal and it was not argued before me.

The challenge to the judge's decision can be divided into two parts: (1)
was the judge right to distinguish Anwar?, and (2) was the judge right to
consider that the endorsement on the appellant's biometric residence card
was sufficiently clear to inform him that he was not permitted to become
self-employed?

I return to the Anwar decision and note the following. The court was
concerned with the interpretation of section 3(1)(c) of the Immigration Act
1971. Singh LJ emphasised the fundamental constitutional principle that a
state must accord to individuals the right to know of a decision before
their rights can be adversely affected. Fairness is the guiding principle
of public law and elementary fairness supports the principle that a
decision takes effect only upon communication. In interpreting section 4(1)
of the 1971 Act, Singh LJ considered that it was clear that notice in
writing must be given to the person affected. The mere publication of the
Immigration Rules does not constitute the giving of notice to the person
affected. He also considered that the requirement that the individual be
given notice in writing is not unduly onerous for the Secretary of State to
comply with. It could be easily done and would be consistent with good
administration. In a concurring judgment, Peter Jackson LJ said that it was
important that those who are subject to decisions regulating the grant of
leave to remain should be made unmistakably aware of what they can and
cannot do. This imposes no unreasonable demands upon the Secretary of
State.

The ratio of Anwar can be read narrowly as follows: for there to be an
operative condition restricting a person's study to one particular
institution, that condition must be communicated clearly to the person
affected. However, the principle relied on in that case clearly has broader
application and must be considered to apply to other conditions affecting a
person's leave. I can see no rational basis on which to distinguish the two
cases on the issue of the "unduly onerous administrative burden" on the
respondent, as the judge in this case put it. If it was a modest
requirement to require Secretary of State to inform a student that he or
she could not study at another institution, then it would similarly be no
more than a modest requirement to require him to communicate the
restriction on self-employment. I find the judge erred by departing from
Anwar.

However, for that error to be material, the judge must also have been wrong
to consider that the endorsement on the appellant's biometric residence
permit was insufficiently clear to communicate the restriction on self-
employment. The appellant accepts that he knew he was not permitted to work
more than 20 hours per week during term time and he asserts he consciously
complied with that condition. His point is that he was not to know he was
also not permitted to work on a self-employed basis, even though he denies
that he was anything more than a mere employee. The judge felt it was
"abundantly clear" that the endorsement restricted both employment and self-
employment.

I have some sympathy for the judge's position. It would be a curious
outcome for a student to understand, as a result of that endorsement, he
was not permitted to work more than 20 hours as an employee but he could do
so on a self-employed basis. However, the background to the court's
reasoning in Anwar was that clarity of communication is required, in part
because of the significant consequences of a breach. It follows that the
duty to provide clear communication of any condition affecting the
individual's leave would require the restriction on self-employment to be
expressly explained to students.

Even if I am wrong about that, I would find that the judge was not entitled
on the evidence to infer that the appellant had breached the condition by
working excessive hours. He seems to infer from the fact the appellant was
self-employed that he must have been devoting much more of his time to the
business. However, as explained above, there was nothing in the evidence
submitted with the application to suggest this was the case. There was no
evidence, for example, showing the appellant failed or abandoned his
course. The respondent's decision to regard the appellant as self-employed
was based solely on the fact he was registered as a director. The
respondent did not allege the appellant had worked more than 20 hours and
therefore the appellant was not on notice of the need to prove this.

The decision of Judge Devittie contains material errors of law and is set
aside. None of the substantive requirements of the rules for partners are
in dispute. The appellant has met the requirements of Appendix FM and
nothing has been raised to suggest there is public interest in refusing him
leave now that the suitability issue has been resolved in his favour. The
decision is disproportionate and I therefore substitute a decision allowing
the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and his
decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The following decision is
substituted:

    The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (article 8).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5 November 2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
-----------------------
[1] E-LTRP.2.2. The applicant must not be in the UK-
(a) ... or
(b) in breach of immigration laws (except that, where paragraph 39E of
these Rules applies, any current period of overstaying will be
disregarded), unless paragraph EX.1. applies.


