
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01403/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st May 2019                     |On 11th June 2019                    |


                                   Before


                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MURRAY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    RW in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision by Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Gaskell (the judge), who allowed the appeal of RW against the
decision by the Secretary of State dated 8th January 2018 refusing his
human rights claim. For the purposes of this decision we will refer to RW
as the claimant.

2.   The claimant is a national of Guyana, born on [~] 1975. He entered the
United Kingdom on 23rd April 2002 with entry clearance for the purposes of
marriage. He overstayed his entry clearance but married TH, a British
citizen. He made an out of time application for leave to remain on the
basis of his marriage, but this application was withdrawn and he
voluntarily left the United Kingdom. He then re-applied for entry
clearance, which was granted, and re-entered the United Kingdom on 20th
October 2005.  He was subsequently granted Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR)
on 15th October 2007 based on his relationship with TH.

3.   The claimant has a number of criminal convictions. In December 2016 he
was convicted of using threatening behaviour and racially aggravated common
assault, for which he received a community order of 150 hours.  On 28th
July 2017 he was convicted of possession of a Class A controlled drug, for
which he was fined ï¿½110.  On 31st August 2017 he was convicted of two
offences, the first in relation to possession of identity documents with
intent to defraud, and the second of making false representations to gain,
contrary to the Fraud Act 2006. He was sentenced in respect of the first
matter to twelve weeks' imprisonment, but this was concurrent with a
sentence of 32 weeks' imprisonment for the second offence. The claimant
was, however, in breach of the community order made in December 2016. That
order was subsequently revoked and replaced with a sentence of twenty
weeks' imprisonment to run consecutively. The total sentence was therefore
one of 52 weeks' imprisonment. It is important at this stage to note that
there was no single sentence imposed on the claimant of 52 weeks'
imprisonment.

4.   The Secretary of State made a deportation order against the claimant.
According to the judge, on 12th October 2017 the Secretary of State
notified the claimant that he was liable to deportation pursuant to Section
32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. This is not accurate. The decision on
12th October 2017 was a decision to make a deportation order under Section
5(1) and Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 on the basis that the
Secretary of State deemed the claimant's deportation to be conducive to the
public good. It was not an automatic deportation decision. The claimant
made representations as to why he should not be deported, which the
Secretary of State treated as a human rights claim, and refused the claim
in the decision under challenge in the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   In his decision the Secretary of State set out the claimant's
criminality and stated that his deportation was conducive to the public
good because he had been convicted of an offence which had caused 'serious
harm'. Other than setting out the bare basis of the offence, the Secretary
of State did not explain which offence(s) in particular caused serious harm
and did not explain how the serious harm manifested itself. The Secretary
of State noted that the claimant had two British children born in 2007 and
2011 who lived with their mother and in respect of whom the claimant
claimed to have a parental relationship. The parental relationship was not
accepted by the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State concluded that
it would be neither unduly harsh for the children to live in Guyana with
the appellant, nor for them to remain in the United Kingdom and be
separated from their father. The Secretary of State concluded that there
would be no breach of the claimant's private life rights and that there
were no very compelling circumstances outside of the Immigration Rules
sufficient to warrant a grant of leave to remain pursuant to Article 8.

6.   Although the claimant and TH have separated, and a decree nisi was
pronounced on 21st September 2018, he maintained that he did have a genuine
parental relationship with his children, that he played a prominent role in
their lives, that he saw them weekly, picked them up from school, provided
their evening meals on Tuesdays, that he would see them on Saturdays and
that they would occasionally stay the night with him.

7.   At his appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the claimant was
unrepresented, and he remained unrepresented before the Upper Tribunal. He
provided no witness statements from his ex-partner or his children, and,
save for a handwritten statement, there was no bundle prepared for his
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The claimant gave oral evidence and
was cross-examined before the First-tier Tribunal judge.

8.   The judge found the claimant to be a credible witness. At paragraph 23
of his decision the judge accepted that the claimant has a genuine parental
relationship with his children, although the judge did find that the
claimant sought to minimise his criminal activities.  Under the heading
'Findings of Fact', the judge found that the claimant played a meaningful
role in the lives of his children, that he saw them regularly, that he
spoke to them on the telephone and that, if he was deported to Guyana,
there was no prospect that the children could go with him as there was no
reason to suppose that TH would permit the children to relocate to Guyana.
The judge additionally found, at paragraph 27, that if the claimant were
deported and the children remained in the UK they would be deprived of
their relationship with their father and he of his relationship with them.

9.   Under the heading 'Discussion and Conclusions', the judge maintained
that the claimant was subject to automatic deportation.  For reasons we
have given, this is inaccurate. The judge then referred to paragraph 398(b)
of the Immigration Rules, which relates to the deportation of intermediate
offenders - where an individual has been sentenced to at least twelve
months but less than four years. The judge found that the claimant's
offending was at the very bottom of the scale of offending which would
render him liable for mandatory deportation.

10.  At paragraph 30 the judge stated:

"In my judgment, the exception provided for in paragraph 399(a) of the
Immigration Rules does apply to this case. Despite his offending behaviour
I am satisfied on the claimant's evidence that he is a conscientious and
caring father to two young children who, in my judgment, would suffer undue
hardship if they were deprived of their relationship with their father. For
the reasons I have found in paragraph 29 above, my judgment is that the
relationship could not continue in Guyana. It can only continue if the
claimant remains in the UK"

11.  At paragraph 31 the judge noted that he had to take account of the
    welfare and the interests of the children and found that their best
    interests would be served by being permitted to continue their
    relationship with the claimant in the UK. The judge concluded, at
    paragraph 32, that it would be disproportionate to interfere with his
    family life, notwithstanding the important public interest served by
    the deportation of foreign criminals.  The appeal was allowed.

12.  In seeking permission to appeal the judge's decision the Secretary of
State essentially contends that the judge failed to appreciate the high
threshold required for the 'undue harshness' test.  The Secretary of State
relied on the Supreme Court decision in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State
[2018] UKSC 53, which considered the meaning of unduly harsh. The grounds
point out that there was no objective evidence to suggest that the
claimant's children's physical or emotional needs would not be fully
catered for or taken into account if they were separated from their father.

13.  In granting permission, the First-tier Tribunal stated:

"The judge appears to have concluded that the effect of the claimant's
deportation on his children were unduly harsh merely because they would be
deprived of their relationship with him. This is little more than a
necessary consequence of the deportation of a parent. Therefore, the judge
arguably reached a finding without any basis and/or failed to give adequate
reasons for making that finding."

14.  We appreciate that RW does not have legal training and is without
representation, and we have borne this in mind when taking account of his
submissions.

15.  In KO (Nigeria), at [23], the Supreme Court stated:

"The expression unduly harsh seems clearly intended to introduce a higher
hurdle than that of reasonableness under Section 117B(6), taking account of
the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. Further, the
word unduly implies an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a
due level of harshness, that is a level which may be acceptable or
justifiable in the relevant context. Unduly implies something going beyond
that level. The relevant context is that set by Section 117C(1), that is
the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking
for a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved
for any child faced with the deportation of a parent. What it does not
require is a balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's
offence, other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the Section
itself by reference to the length of sentence."

16.  In KO the Supreme Court approved the assessment of undue harshness
made by the Upper Tribunal in the cases of MK and MAB.  In MK the Upper
Tribunal stated:

"By way of self-direction, we are mindful that unduly harsh does not equate
with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult. Rather,
it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.  Harsh in this context
denotes something severe or bleak. It is the antitheses of pleasant or
comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb unduly raises an
already elevated standard still higher."

What the judge in this particular appeal therefore had to do was to
identify a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be
involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent.

17.  It is not apparent from the judge's factual findings at paragraphs 25
and 27, or his application of the undue harshness test at paragraph 30 of
the determination, that he appreciated the high test involved, or indeed
that he was even rationally entitled to the findings reached on the basis
of the evidence before him. There is abundant authority relating to what
would necessarily be involved for a child facing the deportation of a
parent and the effects of deportation, see, for example, the Court of
Appeal in the case AD Lee v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2011] EWCA Civ 348, see in addition Secretary of State for the Home
Department v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012, which indicate that these
cases show that it will be rare for the best interests of the children to
outweigh the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals.
Something more than a lengthy separation from a parent is required even
though such separation is detrimental to the child's best interests.

18.  It is clear from the Supreme Court decision in KO, that the unduly
harsh test has a high threshold and that the separation of parent and
child, even where this results in emotional damage to the child, would not
ordinarily meet the test. In our judgment, the First-tier Judge failed to
give adequate reasons for concluding that the undue harshness test was met,
at least with respect to the separation of the claimant from his children.

19.  We additionally find that the judge impermissibly took account of the
nature of the claimant's offending at paragraph 29 of the determination,
where he noted that the offending was at the very bottom of the scale of
offending that would render him liable for mandatory deportation. This is
inconsistent with the conclusion of the Supreme Court in KO that the
particulars of the criminality and the length of sentence are not relevant
when assessing the question of undue harshness.

20.  We consequently find that the decision is vitiated by errors of
questions of law and must be set aside. We additionally raise, however, the
issue of whether the claimant committed offences that have led to 'serious
harm'. The definition of a foreign criminal in Section 117D does not
include someone who has not been sentenced to a single sentence of twelve
months, and the only other ways in which an individual can be defined as a
foreign criminal is if they are a persistent offender or if their offences
have caused 'serious harm'. It is not immediately apparent to us that the
claimant's offending has caused 'serious harm'. We appreciate that he is
unrepresented, and we appreciate that this is a point that may not
therefore have been apparent to him. We consider this to be an obvious
point of law. If any authority is needed, we refer to R v Secretary of
State for the Home Department ex parte Robinson [1998] QB 929.

21.  Having found that the decision contains material errors of law and
having set aside the decision, we are minded to remit the appeal back to
the First-tier Tribunal for a full assessment, not only of the claimant's
relationship with his children and the impact on that relationship of the
deportation decision, but also for the First-tier to consider whether the
claimant's offending has caused 'serious harm', the only reason
underpinning the Secretary of State's view that the claimant's presence is
not conducive to the public good.

22.  We set aside the First-tier's decision and remit it back to the First-
tier, to be decided by a judge other than Judge Gaskell.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing,
to be decided by a judge other than Judge Gaskell.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               3 June 2019
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
