
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01356/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 6 July 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                      |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  I--- S---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by Hounslow Legal
Services
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public  to  identify  the  Respondent.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the Respondent has shown that he risk ill treatment by member
of her family and publication of this finding might enhance the risk.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the Respondent, hereinafter "the
Claimant" against the decision of the Secretary of State on 18 June 2015 to
refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom on private and family life
grounds.

3. There are several untypical features in this case.  One of them  is  that
the grounds of appeal might not encompass all the criticisms that could  be
made of the decision but, in fairness  to  the  Claimant,  I  have  limited
myself to the grounds raised. She is entitled to assume that the  Secretary
of State's case is contained in the grounds that she has seen.

4. I begin by considering exactly what the First-tier Tribunal decided.

5. It was the Claimant's case that she could not  be  returned  to  Pakistan
because she would not be safe there.  In simple terms she said that she had
had a relationship with her present sponsor, Mr M N B, which  had  offended
members of her family so that in the event of her returning to Pakistan and
coming to their attention she would risk serious ill-treatment.  The  judge
also found that her partner Mr  B,  who  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
indefinite leave to remain, would not return to Pakistan  because  his  own
safety was at risk there.  He claims that there are court summonses against
him and he was not prepared to face legal processes in Pakistan.

6. The judge found that the Claimant is "not a well-educated woman  and,  to
my mind, has a relatively simple outlook on matters".  He made this finding
in the context of excusing lies she had told about  her  relationship  with
her cousin and landlord in the United Kingdom who, the judge accepted,  was
now on tolerably good terms with her partner even though he is a member  of
the family some of whose members are intent on punishing the Claimant.

7. If I may say so respectfully some of the judge's findings  might  seem  a
little surprising but he had the benefit of hearing the  evidence  and  the
findings have not been challenged by the Secretary  of  State.  I  have  no
basis for going behind them. They are certainly not obviously perverse.

8. The judge went on to find, assisted in part by the decision in  SM  (Lone
women - ostracism - Pakistan) [2016] UKUT 00067  (SM)  that  the  Claimant,
being a lone woman with little education and no support from family members
would be at risk in Pakistan so that there were very significant  obstacles
to her reintegration into society in Pakistan and he therefore allowed  the
appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Like the findings of fact there  are  aspects
of that approach that  might  have  been  expected  to  attract  criticism.
However the grounds supporting the application are rather precise and I set
them out below:

  "The [claimant]  seeks  to  remain  as  a  partner.   The  focus  of  the
  consideration of the  Judge  appears  to  have  been  the  Insurmountable
  obstacles test in EX2 although the determination  is  rather  vague.   In
  para 36 the Judge accepts the sponsor's evidence that he would not return
  to Pakistan due to 'outstanding court summonses'.  That appears to be the
  only basis on which the Judge concludes that  the  [claimant]  could  not
  return with the sponsor.  The Secretary of State considers that this  was
  inadequate.  The fact that the sponsor may have these outstanding  issues
  in Pakistan is not a basis for finding that the  test  of  insurmountable
  obstacles is met.  While the sponsor may not want to deal with them  that
  is a matter of choice for him.  At no point does the  Judge  address  the
  implications of the outstanding court  summonses  or  in  what  way  they
  amount to insurmountable obstacles.  The rest of the Judge's findings are
  based on the assumption  that  the  sponsor  will  not  return  with  the
  [claimant] but since that finding is flawed they are not sustainable."

9. I say immediately that there is some mixed  thinking  in  these  grounds.
The finding that the claimant could not return to Pakistan is based on  her
returning as a lone woman in her  particular  circumstances.   One  of  the
reasons she would be a lone woman is that her friend in the United  Kingdom
would not travel with her.  It might be thought surprising  that  he  would
not return if, in fact, she would be at risk if she returned on her own and
he was fond of her.  However it must  be  remembered  that  his  basis  for
coming to the United Kingdom was to claim asylum and  although  that  claim
was unsuccessful he  has  never  resiled  from  his  claim  that  he  needs
international protection even though he has been allowed  to  remain  on  a
different basis.  The fact that the sponsor was not given asylum is  not  a
finding that he would not have any kind of difficulty in the event  of  his
return to Pakistan and the judge clearly concluded that the  sponsor  would
not return and therefore that the Claimant would return as a lone woman.

10. Before me Ms Ahmad argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should
have considered Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
2002 as amended and should have engaged with the reasons in the Reasons for
Refusal Letter.  The difficulty is that these points were not raised in the
grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Further, it is clear to  me  that
consideration of Section 117B of the 2002 Act would not particularly assist
the Secretary of State.  That Section  identifies  points  that  should  be
considered when it is suggested that a decision breaches a  person's  right
to respect for private and family life.  It  does  not  purport  to  be  an
exclusive list of considerations.  The judge has  not  allowed  the  appeal
because of the relationship the Claimant has  developed  with  Mr  B.   The
judge has allowed the appeal because he has believed the evidence that  the
Claimant could not cope on  her  own  in  Pakistan.   It  would  have  been
altogether tidier if the Claimant had asked for asylum or some  other  form
of international protection for precisely this reason.  She did not and the
grounds make out no case that the judge was not entitled to conclude as  he
did that in the event of being returned as a lone woman the claimant  would
be at risk.

11. The challenge in the grounds is the judge should not have  reached  that
conclusion when there is no good reason in the Secretary of State's mind to
conclude that the Claimant's  partner  would  not  travel  with  her.   The
problem with that argument is the partner has said that he will not go.  It
was said in reply that it was found in his asylum case that he would not be
at risk.  That might be right but it is a point that should have been  made
before the reply and if it was to feature in the reasoning it  should  have
been part of the grounds or at the very least an application made to  amend
the grounds.

12. Another way of looking at the decision is that the judge  was  persuaded
that the Claimant would be at risk on return.  The only thing identified in
the grounds as undermining that finding is the decision of the sponsor  not
to return.  However the fact that Mr Butt will not return is the fact  that
matters.  He may be behaving  irrationally,  he  may  have  an  honest  but
misconceived belief that he is at risk, he may be  considerably  less  than
heroic in his refusal to stand by his partner but if he is, he is  not  the
first man to fail in that way.  The simple reason for allowing  the  appeal
is the judge was satisfied that the Claimant would be unsafe and has  given
permissible reasons for that which have not been challenged.

13. Not  only  have  they  not  been  challenged  but  it  is  by  no  means
unbelievable that a woman on her own with little education  and  no  family
support would face a very difficult time in Pakistan.

14. It is right to record that Ms Ahmad did  not  settle  the  Secretary  of
State's grounds.  She did the best she could with what she had got but  for
the reasons  given  I  am  unpersuaded  that  an  error  of  law  has  been
established and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 September 2017               |





