
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01158/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th July 2019                    |On 14th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                        Mrs Victoria Adesola Olanubi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Corben, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
(Merton Rd)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Nigeria who was born on 1st October 1960.
She appeals against a decision which was issued by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Plumptre on 14th March 2019.  Permission to appeal was initially
refused by Judge Saffer in the First-tier Tribunal but was granted by Upper
Tribunal Judge Eshun in light of the unusual history of this case about
which it is necessary to say a little at this stage.

The application which was made to the Entry Clearance Officer was an
application under paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules; that is, an
application for entry clearance as the spouse of a recognised refugee.  The
application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer and the decision was
maintained by an Entry Clearance Manager on the basis that a valid TB
certificate had not been produced and on the basis that the sponsor was not
in fact a recognised refugee in the United Kingdom.

An appeal was lodged and efforts were made to clarify the status of the
sponsor, Mr Olanubi.  It transpired as a result of a response which was
received to a Pre-Action Protocol letter lodged by the appellant's
solicitors that Mr Olanubi was not in fact a recognised refugee in the
United Kingdom.  Instead, Mr Olanubi had been granted indefinite leave to
remain many years ago, seemingly on compassionate grounds and potentially,
although this is not entirely clear, under the Regularisation of
Overstayers Scheme, which was in operation from around 1997.  That
clarification of his status was, I am told by Mr Corben, only made clear
shortly before the first listing of this appeal before the First-tier
Tribunal.  That listing was on 7th December 2018 at Hatton Cross before
Judge Gandhi.  No application was made to adjourn that hearing and Mr
Corben appeared before Judge Gandhi on that date, when the respondent was
represented by a Presenting Officer called Miss Madhovi.

Mr Corben explained to Judge Gandhi that it was his intention to pursue the
appeal on the basis that the appellant in fact met the requirements of
Appendix FM for entry clearance as the spouse of a settled person because,
although Mr Olanubi was not a recognised refugee, it was common ground
between the parties at that stage that he did have indefinite leave to
remain in the United Kingdom.

An argument was then erected by Miss Madhovi that the appellant's
entitlement under Appendix FM was a new matter as defined in Section 85A of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the Record of
Proceedings before Judge Gandhi shows that extensive argument was directed
towards that question, both on the part of Miss Madhovi and on the part of
Mr Corben.  Having heard the competing submissions, Judge Gandhi came to
the conclusion that the Upper Tribunal's decision in Mahmud [2018] Imm AR
264 did not prevent the appellant relying upon his entitlement under
Appendix FM in support of his application on human rights grounds before
the First-tier Tribunal.

An application was made at that point by Mr Corben for an adjournment so
that the appellant could obtain an English language certificate to show
that she satisfied the English language requirement under Appendix FM.  I
should record also that following Judge Gandhi's ruling it was confirmed by
Miss Madhovi, the Presenting Officer, that as far as she could see the only
remaining issue which needed to be satisfied under Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules was that to which Mr Corben directed his application for
an adjournment.  In other words, the Presenting Officer's stance was that
the outstanding requirement under the Rules was English language, and
English language only.

So it was that the appeal was adjourned and on 8th February 2019 an English
language certificate obtained from the British Council in Nigeria was filed
with the Tribunal in preparation for the appeal, which was due to resume on
20th February 2019.  The appeal did indeed resume on that date, when it
came before Judge Plumptre.  Before Judge Plumptre, Mr Corben appeared for
the appellant and no Home Office Presenting Officer appeared for the
respondent.  Matters appear at this stage to have gone somewhat awry.
That, to my mind, is because the ex tempore ruling which was given by Judge
Gandhi was not recorded in writing and was not the subject of any
directions which were issued by the Tribunal thereafter.

The difficulty which arose at the start of the hearing before Judge
Plumptre was that there was no consideration of the issues which arose
under Appendix FM although it appears to have been understood by Judge
Plumptre that Appendix FM was indeed to be her focus.  In what is on any
view a comprehensively reasoned decision Judge Plumptre made findings which
were favourable to the appellant in all but one respect.  That respect was
that she was not satisfied, having considered the oral and documentary
evidence before her, that the relationship between the appellant and the
sponsor was a genuine and subsisting relationship such as to qualify under
Appendix FM.

As contended in the grounds of appeal which were filed before the First-
tier and renewed before the Upper Tribunal, the clear difficulty with that
finding is, as Mr Bramble now accepts, that Judge Plumptre did not put Mr
Corben or the sponsor on notice in any way that she was to explore the
question of whether or not the relationship was genuine and subsisting.  As
Mr Corben has quite properly noted before me today in submissions, there
was no opportunity for either oral or documentary evidence to be directed
towards addressing that concern on the part of the judge.  As a result, it
is accepted by Mr Bramble, and rightly so, that the finding that the
relationship was not genuine and subsisting was a finding which was reached
in a procedurally improper way by Judge Plumptre.  I agree with that
concession although in light of the history of this appeal Judge Plumptre's
error was potentially understandable, particularly where the respondent was
unrepresented before her so as to clarify the issues which remained in
dispute.

As a result of that conclusion the proper course is for Judge Plumptre's
decision to be set aside insofar as it contains a single conclusion which
is adverse to the appellant.  I see no reason to remit the appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal so that that matter can be reconsidered by a different
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and I reach that conclusion because in
response to the concern expressed by Judge Plumptre the appellant's
solicitors have filed and served a bundle under cover of letter dated 16th
July 2019 which contains a raft of evidence directed to show that the
relationship between the sponsor and the appellant is, contrary to Judge
Plumptre's concern, very much a genuine and subsisting relationship.

The sponsor has attended the hearing today.  He has made an additional
statement in support of the relationship between him and the appellant.
Offered the opportunity to cross-examine the sponsor about that statement
and about the supporting material exhibited to it, Mr Bramble has declined
the opportunity and, again, if I may say so, rightly so.  The evidence
contained in the supplementary bundle shows entirely clearly that the
relationship between the sponsor and the appellant is a genuine and
subsisting one and has been for many years and I am able to find
accordingly.  Having done so and having considered the positive findings
made by Judge Plumptre in relation to all of the remaining requirements
under Appendix FM, I conclude, and Mr Bramble does not object to me drawing
this conclusion, that the appellant satisfies the requirements for entry
clearance as a spouse and the appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds
accordingly.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   I  remake  the
decision on the appeal, which is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]

                      Upper Tribunal Judge M J Blundell

                                6 August 2019






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
 The respondent reached the correct conclusion on the application which  was
presented to her.


                                    [pic]

                      Upper Tribunal Judge M J Blundell

                                6 August 2019

