
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02250/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2019                   |On 18 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Palwinder [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain, Counsel, instructed by Lawfields
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge M A Khan ("the judge"), promulgated on 3 May 2019, by which
he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's decision of 21 January
2019, refusing her human rights claim.

With reference to the application form and its covering letter, the human
rights claim was put forward to the Respondent on the following basis.
First, that the Appellant had entered into a marriage with an individual
(whom I assume to have been a British citizen) who had subsequently
committed domestic violence against her over the course of time, and this,
in conjunction with other matters, had led to her suffering from depression
and anxiety.  Second, it was said that the Appellant had established other
ties whilst in the United Kingdom and that when her circumstances were
taken as a whole, she should be granted limited leave to remain in the
United Kingdom.

In refusing the human rights claim, the Respondent asserted that the
Appellant had obtained a fraudulent English language test certificate and
that as a result she had acted dishonestly and her claim fell to be refused
with reference to S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  In
addition, there were no other circumstances in her case which would create
very significant obstacles to her reintegration into Indian society, nor
were there exceptional circumstances.



The judge's decision

The judge deals with the English language test certificate first.  At a
number of points in his decision he states that he did not find the
Appellant to be a credible witness.  He rejected her claim that her former
college had booked the English language test, that she had never sat any
test, and that she was not even aware that a certificate had been produced
until the issue was raised by the Respondent.  The judge found that the
evidence produced by the Respondent for the appeal in the form of documents
contained in the Respondent's appeal bundle were "more than sufficient" to
establish that the Appellant had used a proxy test taker and had been
dishonest when obtaining the test certificate.  He found that the Appellant
had failed to provide an explanation in respect of the Respondent's
allegation against her.

The judge went on to conclude that inconsistent evidence had been given in
respect of the Appellant's father's businesses in India and the ability of
a witness at the hearing, Mr Singh, to financially support her were she to
return to her home country.

The appeal was duly dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The grounds of appeal in essence assert that the judge had failed to give
any or any adequate reasons in respect of the English language test
certificate issue, had failed to approach the issue of the burden of proof
on the English language test certificate correctly, and had failed to make
any findings in respect of material matters, in particular the question of
whether or not the Appellant was the victim of domestic violence and was
suffering from mental health issues as a result.

Permission to appeal was granted in somewhat unclear terms by First-tier
Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth on 22 July 2019.



The hearing

At the hearing before me there was some discussion as to whether or not the
Appellant had in fact ever used the English language test certificate when
making an application to the Respondent.  The Appellant has always claimed
that she had not, a claim supported to an extent by information contained
in a document at G1 of the Respondent's bundle.  Having taken instructions
in advance of the hearing, Ms Everett had received information indicating
that the English language test certificate had been used in an application
made on 25 June 2012.

In the event, this contentious issue does not play a material role in my
error of law decision.

Mr Hussain relied on the grounds of appeal.

Ms Everett acknowledged that there were some potential shortcomings in the
judge's decision, but any errors were unlikely to be material.



Decision on error of law

When the various challenges mounted by the Appellant are taken together and
notwithstanding a holistic and sensible reading of the judge's decision, I
conclude that there are material errors of law. The errors are as follows.


In respect of the English language test certificate issue, the judge has
clearly stated and restated his ultimate finding that the Appellant was not
a credible witness.  Whilst there is some merit in Ms Everett's submission
that what is said in paragraph 25 may indicate a sufficient reason for the
adverse credibility findings, overall and given the centrality of the issue
in the appeal, I conclude that the reasons are inadequate.  The restatement
of the ultimate conclusion, namely that the Appellant was not truthful,
does not of itself create sufficient reasons.  The point stated by the
judge at the beginning of paragraph 25 in respect of the Appellant's
discussions with friends at college about the need to take ETS English
tests, in my view, is not sufficient to support the overall conclusion that
none of her evidence relating to this matter was credible.

The second error, connected in a sense to the first, relates to the issue
of the burden of proof, which of course rested with the Respondent in
respect of the allegation of dishonesty on the Appellant's part.  The judge
acknowledged that the information sheet at E2 of the Respondent's bundle
was illegible, and that is clearly the case.  He went on to find that all
relevant information was in any event contained at the document at G1 of
that bundle.  In my view, the judge was wrong to have reached that
conclusion.  The information at G1 does not replicate all of the relevant
information that is contained in the familiar spreadsheet printouts that
this Tribunal and representatives are used to seeing in ETS cases.
Material information was missing.

Further, or in any event, the well-known generic evidence produced by the
Respondent in the appeal was no doubt sufficient to discharge the
evidential burden but not of itself sufficient to discharge the legal
burden.  However, in paragraphs 26, 27, and 28, the judge seems to have
concluded that that evidence was "more than sufficient" to discharge the
ultimate legal burden of showing that the Appellant had acted dishonestly.
This conclusion is stated prior to the final sentence at paragraph 28, in
which the judge states that there was an explanation required from the
Appellant, which she had failed to provide.  With respect, it appears as
though a firm conclusion on the question of dishonesty had been arrived at
prior to any assessment of whether a plausible explanation had been
provided by the Appellant. In this regard too, the judge fails to state the
threshold applicable to any explanation - it did not have to discharge any
legal burden.

The third error, which can be separated from the previous two, relates to
an absence of findings on material matters.  It is clear from the evidence
that the issues of domestic violence, mental health problems, and
estrangement from her family were put forward by the Appellant both in
respect of the application made to the Respondent and on appeal.  However,
the judge has failed to make any findings on this evidence whatsoever.

It is not entirely clear to what extent these issues were the subject of
detailed submissions at the hearing, but nonetheless I am satisfied that
the points were at least raised in the skeleton argument and by way of
clear evidence in the form of GP letters and a detailed account set out by
the organisation Southall Black Sisters.

Stepping back and considering whether these errors were individually or on
a cumulative basis material, I conclude that they must be.  The first error
goes to the issue of the Appellant's truthfulness and character, which was
of course the underlying basis relied on by the Respondent in refusing the
human rights claim in the first place.  If this is combined with the error
of relating to the approach to the burden of proof, then the materiality is
all the clearer.  The lack of findings on material matters is self-
evidently of consequence to the overall outcome.  In my view, it must be
the case that the Appellant's overall circumstances would be relevant not
only to her credibility as regards the English language test certificate
issue but, in any event, the question of whether her return to India would
involve her facing very significant obstacles or whether there were
exceptional circumstances in her case on an Article 8 assessment outside
the context of the Rules.

In light of the above, the judge's decision is set aside.





Disposal

In respect of disposal, both representatives were agreed that this matter
must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement, this must be the
correct course of action.  Not only is the Appellant's credibility an
important aspect of the case, but there has been a distinct lack of factual
findings by the judge in respect of relevant matters.  Therefore, the
significant extent of the fact-finding exercise is such that this matter
must be looked at entirely afresh at the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

       1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete
          rehearing, with no findings preserved;




       2) The remitted appeal shall not be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge M A Khan.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 16 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

