
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02596/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24th October 2019               |On 27th November 2019              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                 Kurtish [M]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dhaliwal
    which dismissed his appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal  of
    his human rights claim on 13th January 2019.  Dependent  on  his  claim
    were his wife and three children born  on  24th  September  2002,  30th
    April 2004 and 22nd May 2005.

 2. The renewed grounds for  permission  to  appeal  stated  the  appellant
    Kurtish [M] and his wife Humbe [M] and their three children [FM],  date
    of birth 24th September 2002, 16 years, [EM], date of birth 30th  April
    2004, 15 years and [LM], date of birth 22nd May  2005,  now  14  years,
    were all Kosovan nationals and all three  children  were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    arrived first in the UK on 3rd January  2002  and  following  a  failed
    claim for asylum the family were removed to Kosovo on 13th April  2006.
    They claimed they re-entered the UK together in June/July 2011,  having
    remained in the  UK  since  that  time.   On  20th  November  2018  the
    appellant made further submissions with his family as his dependants on
    the basis of their family and private  life  but  the  application  was
    refused on 13th January 2019, appealed and that appeal dismissed.

 3. It was contended that the judge materially erred in  law  in  that  she
    failed to consider material evidence going  to  matters  in  issue  and
    failed to give adequate reasons and/or  made  contradictory  irrational
    findings.

Ground (i): failure to consider material evidence on material matters and
give adequate reasons.

 4. The judge failed to engage with and  weigh  into  any  assessment,  the
    written evidence of all three children and the  oral  evidence  of  the
    middle child, who adopted  his  written  evidence  confirming  that  he
    entered the UK in 2011 and he attended the  Nene  Tereza,  an  Albanian
    school, and had remained in the UK since.  This evidence  went  to  the
    sustainability of the  judge's  negative  findings  of  fact  that  the
    children were not "qualifying children" for the purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and Section 117B(6) by reason  of  the  length  of  their
    residence, which in turn informed their best interests,  reasonableness
    and proportionality assessments.  The failure to assess evidence  going
    to a matter in issue was a material error of law.

 5. The evidence from the children also informed the weight to be given  to
    the other evidence before the judge  such  as  the  letters  from  Nene
    Tereza School referred to at paragraph 21(3), which were  rejected  for
    lack of proof of actual attendance at the school.   The  evidence  from
    the children also informed  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  social
    worker's report.  The judge erred in law by failing  to  address  prima
    facie relevant evidence, which contradicted the findings  of  fact  and
    undermined the appraisal of the evidence.

 6. The judge rejected the evidence of [E]  and  his  siblings,  which  she
    refers to as "having read", but it  was  incumbent  upon  her  to  give
    reasons justifying her findings and a bare assertion that  the  letters
    were read was insufficient MK (duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]
    UKUT 00641  (IAC).   Had  she  rejected  [E]'s  oral  evidence  it  was
    incumbent on her to say why.

Ground (ii): contradictory irrational findings

 7. At paragraph 21(vi) on the evidence of a letter from an  MP  the  judge
    finds that the appellant was in the United  Kingdom  from  16th  August
    2011 but this did not mean that the  children  were  with  him  in  the
    United Kingdom and that on the evidence  she  had  considered  she  was
    prepared to accept that the earliest date that the appellant's wife and
    children were in  the  UK  was  18th  August  2014  "and  that  in  all
    likelihood, the whole of the appellant's family were present in the  UK
    at that point".  These findings were inconsistent and irrational, given
    the plain reading of what is  stated  at  paragraph  47,  unequivocally
    finding that "he then made a conscious decision to return to the United
    Kingdom with his family illegally in the back of a lorry  and  contrary
    to their previous  removal",  namely  that  they  returned  to  the  UK
    together.  It followed that from what is  said  at  [47]  that  if  the
    appellant was in the UK in August 2011, then so were his children.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that  the
    judge's analysis did not engage with the written evidence  of  each  of
    the three children concerning the length  of  their  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom and arguably it was an error to fail to engage with  the
    detail of the letters.  Arguably there was other evidence, in  addition
    to the documents outlined by the judge, namely the children's  letters,
    when rejecting the first appellant's assertion as to the timing of  his
    arrival in the UK.  It was also stated in the grant  of  permission  to
    appeal that arguably the judge should have considered the accounts  the
    children provided  to  the  independent  social  working  [sic]  before
    reaching her credibility findings.

 9. The errors could be significant because if the children arrived in 2001
    as claimed they would  be  qualifying  children  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. It was stated in the grant of permission that there was less  merit  in
    the contention at [8]  of  the  grounds  that  the  judge  contradicted
    herself but the possibility that the overall credibility assessment was
    flawed and thus permission was granted on all grounds.

11. In relation to the contradictory and irrational finding, Ms Akinbolu at
    the hearing before me submitted that the judge seemed  to  accept  that
    the family arrived together.  Mr Walker argued that  that  finding  was
    not made.  The appellant was removed in 2006 and returned in  2011  but
    it was not clear on the evidence that the children accompanied him.

    Analysis

12. In relation to ground (i), Ms Akinbolu stressed that the length of time
    that the children had been in the United Kingdom was expressed  by  the
    independent social worker although she did confirm that the report  was
    premised on the information given to her  by  the  children.   She  did
    submit that the judge did not refer to the  independent  social  worker
    report when considering how long the children had been in  the  UK  and
    from [17] onwards it set out the factual  findings,  specifically  that
    the family had been here since 2011.

13. What is clear from the history of this family  is  that  the  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom with his wife concealed in the back of  a
    lorry on 3rd January 2002, their asylum claim was refused  and  he  and
    his wife and three children were removed from  the  United  Kingdom  to
    Kosovo.  The appellant then  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom,  again
    clandestinely, he asserts with his wife and three  children.   Clearly,
    the family had a facility for being able to enter  the  United  Kingdom
    without detection and without leave.  There was no  documentary  record
    of their re-entry either together or separately.  The judge  was  clear
    in setting out at paragraph 19 that  the  key  issue  was  whether  the
    children had been here in the UK for at least seven years in  order  to
    be deemed as qualifying children. Credibility was a central issue.  The
    judge carefully considered the evidence of the letters at the start  of
    her deliberations and noted that  the  appellant  accepted  during  his
    evidence that he had given incorrect  addresses  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The letters cited at paragraph 21, as the judge records, do not
    state that anyone had face-to-face  meetings  with  the  appellant  and
    members of his family in the United Kingdom.

14. The judge at paragraph 21(iii) explained in terms why she rejected  the
    evidence from the school  as,  not  least,  it  contradicted  the  oral
    evidence of the father and she found the following:

"(iii)      Also attached in the Appellant's bundle is a letter from Nene
Tereza that confirms at as at 25 March 2019, the Appellant's oldest child,
[F] was registered (my emphasis) on a full-time basis for the academic year
2011/2013 for an Albanian language and history course, that he was first
registered on 9 October 2011 and the expected date of completion for the
course was 30 June 2014.  Similarly, that the Appellant's second child,
[E], was registered for the same period for the same course and [L] the
third child was registered from the same period for the same course.  Of
significance is that on the bottom of each letter, it stipulates that the
certificate is provided as evidence that the above student is registered
for the period shown and that students registered on a full-time basis are
expected to spend at least 40 hours per week studying.

      I accept that these letters from Nene Tereza confirm that the children
      are registered with them.  I do not have any reason to take issue with
      that.  However, the letters do not  confirm  that  the  children  were
      attending merely that they were  registered.   There  are  no  records
      attached of the children's attendance levels, if any, particularly, if
      they were expected to study at least 40 hours per week.

      This is also in stark contrast to the Appellant's evidence, who stated
      that the children attended on Saturday's only and that they stayed  at
      home from Monday's to Friday's.

      I do not find that I can place reliance on these letters, they do  not
      support that the children were physically in the  United  Kingdom  and
      were attending Nene Tereza.

(iv)  There are letters from various medical practitioners but of specific
note is that there is a letter from Northampton General Hospital dated 18
August 2014 from a consultant paediatrician, who had attended on the
youngest child, [L] as it contains the outcome of recent tests.

      I can place reliance upon this as nothing undermines this and  indeed,
      it seems to be externally consistent with the  other  medical  letters
      that have been submitted.

(v)   A letter dated 31 November 2018 from St Giles Church which confirms
that the Appellant's wife has been attending a parent's group for the last
3 years.

(vi)  A letter from Brian Binley MP dated 16 August 2011 thanking the
Appellant for visiting his office on that day and confirming that a letter
had been sent to the UK Border Agency on the same date asking for further
information.

      As this letter specifically thanked the  Appellant  for  visiting  his
      office, I am able to accept that someone did attend in person  and  it
      is more likely than not, that it was the Appellant who attended at the
      offices of the MP.  I therefore accept that the Appellant was  in  the
      United Kingdom from 16 August 2011 but this does  not  mean  that  the
      children were with him in the United Kingdom."

15. I carefully considered the letters from the children which were said to
    have been ignored by the judge  and  I  set  out  the  terms  for  each
    individual letter  which  cites  the  arrival  date  to  illustrate  my
    conclusions on the judge's approach to the evidence.

16. The letter from [FM], born on 24th September 2002, stated in the  first
    paragraph:

      "Hello my name is [FM]; I arrived in England around 2011 for  a  fresh
      and a better future and was  attending  to  an  Albanian  school  Nene
      Tereza which is located in West Green London around two years.   These
      two years were rough but helped me get used to England  and  to  learn
      the language.

      After this two years I  moved  and  attended  to  Kingsthorpe  College
      located in Kingsthorpe Northampton."

17. The letter from [EM], born on 30th April 2004, stated:

      "My name is [EM].  I am writing this letter to  introduce  myself  and
      tell you about my past.  In 2011 I  arrived  in  England  and  started
      going to an Albanian school named Nene Tereza, which is  located  West
      Green London.  I stayed in the school for a rough two  years,  getting
      used to England and learning the language.  After two years I moved to
      a primary school named Kings Heath."

18. The third letter, from [LM], born on 22nd May 2005, stated:

      "Hello my name is [LM] I arrived in England  around  2011  for  a  new
      start and a brighter future.  I was attending to  an  Albanian  school
      Nene Tereza which is located in West Green London  around  two  years.
      These two years were rough but helped me to get used to England and to
      learn the language.

      After this two years I moved  and  attended  to  Kings  Heath  Primary
      School in Northampton."

19. First, although there was criticism of the judge for  failing  to  take
    into account this evidence the first  and  third  letter  are  written,
    initially, in identical terms, recalling evidence from when  they  were
    9, 7 and 6 years old respectively.  At the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, it can be seen from  the  Record  of  Proceedings,  that
    [EM], merely adopted his statement without more and  repeated  that  he
    had come in 2011.  This evidence, bearing in mind the vagueness in  its
    written form and mere adoption, cannot be said  to  outweigh  the  very
    specific finding of the judge that there  was  simply  no  adequate  or
    satisfactory evidence that  these  children  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2011.  As the judge stated quite clearly in the decision,
    the children were registered on a full-time basis for the academic year
    2011 to 2013 and that on the bottom of each letter  it  was  stipulated
    that the certificate was provided as evidence that the above student is
    registered for the period shown.   The  judge  specifically  identified
    that there were  no  records  attached  to  the  children's  attendance
    levels, if any, particularly if they were expected to study at least 40
    hours per week.  There is obviously a contradiction within the  letters
    when they refer to the 'academic year' of '2011 to 2013',  which  is  a
    contradiction in terms.

20. The judge clearly read  the  letters  from  the  children  because  she
    identified those letters at paragraph 29 and there  was  no  indication
    that  she  failed  to  take  them  into  account  when  coming  to  her
    conclusions, albeit that she refers to them in a later of her decision.
     That  said,  the  judge  clearly  did  not  accept  that  the  letters
    correlated with the objective evidence and I note that the letter  from
    [FM] identifies that he moved to Kingsthorpe College in 2013.  A letter
    from  Kingsthorpe  College  specifically  states  that  [F]'s  date  of
    admission to that school was on 1st September  2014,  which  completely
    undermines  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  in  his   witness
    statement.

21. In relation to [E], the  Nene  Tereza  letter  dated  25th  March  2019
    referred to him being registered for the academic year 2011 to 2013 but
    noted his expected date of completion as  30th  June  2014,  which  was
    again contradictory although I acknowledge the judge did not make  that
    finding in her decision.  The first  record  of  [EM]  at  Kings  Heath
    School was on 1st September 2014, at page  222  of  the  bundle,  which
    contradicts his statement that he moved school in 2013.

22. [LM]'s statement merely echoes that of [FM].  Again, there is no record
    of [L] at Kings Heath Primary Academy prior to 1st September 2014.

23. As the judge pointed out, it  is  the  absence  of  evidence  which  is
    critical in this regard.  The letters said to have been disregarded  by
    the judge were clearly  addressed,  but  take  the  matter  no  further
    forward, not least because they  are  vague  and  run  counter  to  the
    objective evidence.  It would not be difficult to obtain school records
    to show these children  attended  school  earlier,  and  as  the  judge
    pointed out, none was forthcoming.

24. It is a matter for the judge as to the  weight  to  be  placed  on  the
    evidence and it was open to the judge to disregard the social  worker's
    report on the basis that it was reliant, as observed, on the children's
    evidence that they had been in the country since 2011.  It was open  to
    the judge to find that the objective  evidence  demonstrated  that  the
    children had been resident in the United Kingdom only  since  at  least
    18th August 2014.

25. In relation to ground (ii) I do not find  that  the  comments  made  at
    paragraph 47 at the close of the  decision  materially  undermined  the
    previous finding effectively  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    children were in the country in 2011.  The context of  the  appellant's
    immigration history was that there was an ability by the appellant  and
    his family to enter the UK at their will and  under  the  radar.   That
    history  the  judge  clearly  recorded.   In  addition,  the  judge  at
    paragraph 47 merely  makes  the  comment  that  the  appellant  made  a
    conscious decision to return to the  United  Kingdom  with  his  family
    illegally in the back  of  a  lorry  and  contrary  to  their  previous
    removal.  The reference is to the decision being made and that he would
    clearly wish to have his family with him.  There was  no  evidence,  as
    the judge found, that the appellants actually came in together.

26. When considering errors said to be contradictory Floyd LJ set out in UT
    (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 the following at paragraph 26

         '26.     ... In R  (Jones)  v  First  Tier  Tribunal  and  Criminal
         Injuries Compensation Authority [2013] UKSC 19, Lord Hope said  (at
         paragraph 25):

             "It is well established, as an  aspect  of  tribunal  law  and
             practice, that judicial restraint should be exercised when the
             reasons that a tribunal  gives  for  its  decision  are  being
             examined. The appellate court should not  assume  too  readily
             that the tribunal misdirected itself just  because  not  every
             step in its reasoning is fully set out in it."'

27. In the light of the evidence  as  it  was  presented,  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for her findings and there was no  material  error  in
    the judge's decision because the letters, which  the  judge  had  read,
    could not have taken the matter further.

Notice of Decision

As such, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand, and the appeal
remains dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 25th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

