
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02645/2019
                                                             & HU/03945/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                            Mr. AMARNATH PENDYALA
                            Mrs. VINUSHA RAVANAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellants are nationals of India. They are a married couple, aged 38
and 32 respectively. They have a son who was born in this country and is
presently aged 2.

The first appellant ('AP') appeals against a decision of the respondent
dated 23 January 2019 refusing to grant him indefinite leave to remain in
this country on long residence grounds. The respondent relies upon
paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules, observing that during the course
of a previous application:

         '... there would have been a clear benefit to yourself either by
         failing to declare your full earnings to HMRC with respect to
         reducing your tax liability or by falsely representing your
         earnings to UK Visas & Immigration to enable you to meet the points
         required to obtain leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier
         1 (General) Migrant.'

The second appellant ('VR') appeals against a decision to refuse her leave
to remain on human rights (article 8) grounds, dated 20 February 2019.

Their appeals were initially considered by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Hall, who allowed them by a decision sent to the parties on 24 July 2019.
The respondent was granted permission to appeal and I set aside the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 13 November 2019 having determined
that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law. No
findings of fact were preserved.

This matter was listed before me on 8 January 2020 for the resumed hearing.


Anonymity

No party to these proceedings sought an anonymity direction.

Background

AP arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 February 2008 and enjoyed leave to
enter as a student until 31 August 2009. He secured a variation of student
leave to remain until December 2009 and then enjoyed leave to remain as a
Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant until December 2011. He subsequently
secured leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant until 18 March 2016.

AP married VR in India on 9 November 2013 and she secured entry clearance
as her husband's dependant. She was granted leave in line with her husband
until 18 March 2016.

In October 2010, AP started self-employment as an SAP Programmer, which
involved him working on projects and providing on-line lessons.

AP applied for indefinite leave to remain ('ILR') as a Tier 1 (General)
Migrant on 17 March 2016. The application was refused on the same day with
the respondent relying upon paragraph 322(5) of the Rules and identifying
the undesirability of permitting the appellant to remain in this country in
light of previous conduct:

         'You submitted an application on 18 March 2011 for leave to remain
         as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant. In this application, you claimed
         earnings of �35,897.75 for the period 01 March 2010 until 28
         February 2011, which gave you 20 points under the earnings bracket.
         This earning was broken down by �17,101.80 from your employment
         with Boots the Chemist and �21,074.02 from your self-employment as
         Pendyala & Co.

         You made a subsequent application on 18 March 2013 for further
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant. In this application,
         you claimed earning of �37,438.85 for the period 01 March 2012
         until 28 February 2013, which gave you 20 points under the earnings
         bracket. This earning was broken down by �19,963.85 from your
         employment with Bristol Laboratories and �14,475 from your self-
         employment as Pendyala & Co.

         ...

         The Secretary of State has verified records provided by HM Revenue
         & Customs (HMRC) to establish what you declared to them in the
         years relevant to your previous Tier 1 (General) application.

         HMRC check confirms:

             Total Income all sources

                  2013/2014 - �21,009

                  2012/2013 - �32,719

                  2011/2012 - �21,486

                  2010/2011 - �19,880

                  2009/2010 - �7,977

             Net profit from self-employment

                  2013/2014 - �2,247

                  2012/2013 - �15,810

                  2011/2012 - �2,728

                  2010/2011 - �2,778

             No dividends

         During your attendance today at the Premium Service Centre Croydon,
         you completed a short questionnaire regarding your self-employment
         earnings as part of your application. You stated in this
         questionnaire that amendments were made on one of the tax returns
         to HMRC and re-submitted a new assessment on 15 January 2016.

         Given the discrepancies between your earnings claimed to the Home
         Office and those declared to HMRC, an officer representing the
         Secretary of State asked you further questions regarding your
         previous earnings.

         You stated that you previously worked as a sole trader operating
         under the name of Pendyala & Co and you were registered as self-
         employed with HMRC for the financial year of 2010/2011.

         You were asked about the discrepancy in your earnings claimed for
         your application to the Home Office submitted on 18 March 2011. To
         which you replied that in January 2016 your accountant noted this
         discrepancy in regards to earnings declared to HMRC and that you
         subsequently paid �750 to HMRC towards this and re-submitted an
         assessment.

         You were asked to explain why the discrepancy occurred. You replied
         that the business was new and a cousin helped you with the HMRC
         claim.

         The explanation provided by you regarding the discrepancies has
         been noted by the Secretary of State. The fact that you have
         retrospectively declared these claimed earnings to HMRC is not
         sufficient to satisfy the Secretary of State that you have not
         previously been completely honest in your dealing with HMRC and/or
         UK Visas & Immigration to benefit your either by failing to declare
         your full earnings to HMRC with respect to reducing your tax
         liability or by falsely representing your earnings to meet the
         points required to obtain leave in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1
         (General) Migrant.'

As AP continued to enjoy valid leave to remain at the date of decision, he
did not enjoy a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. He did not seek
administrative review of this decision.

AP made an out-of-time application for ILR on 30 March 2016 and the
respondent refused this application on 15 January 2018. The decision was
confirmed by way of an administrative review decision dated 23 February
2018.

On 12 March 2018 AP applied for ILR on long residence grounds under
paragraph 276B of the Rules. By way of a letter sent to the respondent on
18 October 2018 AP stated:

'In light of my current application and the internal review your department
is carrying out, I would like to share the attached copy of [an] affidavit
with you as provided by my cousin (Bhanu Prakash Koyyada), as he has taken
sole responsibility in filing my tax returns for the year 2010-11 during
his stay in United Kingdom.

As I mentioned earlier during my previous ILR (SET O) application at window
and postal (during interview), that this was the only tax year (2010-11) I
had took help from my cousin (due to lack of knowledge as it was first year
of self-assessment) and ended up in error but all the other self-assessment
years tax returns were filed by qualified accountant and none of them were
reported calculation error.

I again admit tax error (year 2010-11) was identified by my accountant in
January 2016 upon review requested by me and was immediately rectified. No
government bodies, either UKVI or HMRC identified the error but I have
taken initiative in correcting it (my accountant suggested tax correction
as legitimate per HMRC Regulations) as a loyal resident of this country.

All the different amount of tax has been paid off to HMRC way back in 2016,
as HMRC updated my tax calculation.

I am sending you copies of HMRC assessment after tax correction along with
copy of SA02 and proofs of tax paid in the year 2016 for reconsideration.

I again want to make it clear that the error was unintentional, and I
regret my mistake.  I am still facing the punishment (31 months of stress
and depression to me and family members) for it and hope you consider the
attached documents before taking final decision in regards to my ILR
application.'

The affidavit from Mr Koyyada is dated 15 October 2018 and details, inter
alia:

'I would like to clarify that I have taken responsibility in filing the
self-assessment tax returns of [AP] for the tax year 2010-11.

...

It was [AP's] first year of self-assessment and he wasn't aware of any
accounting and taxing matters. My experience in running a business in India
made him to approach me (during my stay in UK). Using my taxation
knowledge, I have collected all relevant documents from him and finally
submitted his tax returns in January 2012 by online tax return submission
option on the HMRC website. Unfortunately, the error came to light in
January 2016, when the accountant reviewed his tax return. After further
digging into the error, I can conclude self-assessment calculations were
done bearing in mind as limited company, where I included his house rent,
phone and other bills and expenses within the self-employment expenses. Due
to which his expenses rose to �17,314 leaving his net profit only �2,778.
Thereby I would like to confirm, that [AP] is innocent and as a family
member he trusted me but unfortunately things didn't go well.'

The application for ILR was refused by means of a decision dated 23 January
2019. The respondent did not accept that AP had accrued ten years' lawful
residence. It was accepted that AP had enjoyed lawful leave from the date
of his entry into this country on 9 February 2008 until the expiry of his
Tier 1 (General) Migrant status on 18 March 2016. However, he overstayed
from 19 March 2016 and remained in breach of the Immigration Rules from
that date. The application was also refused with reference to paragraph
322(5) of the Rules. The decision details, inter alia:

'As part of your previous Tier 1 (General) Migrant application dated 18
March 2011 you claimed self-employed net profit earnings of �18,778.00 for
the period 01 March 2010 to 28 February 2011. These self-employed earnings
covered the tax year 2010/11.

In support of this application you provided bank statements and wage slips
to demonstrate your earnings from self-employment. The documentation you
submitted to UKVI showed that you demonstrated sufficient earnings to be
awarded 20 points and thus you obtained leave as a Tier 1 (General)
Migrant.

On 12 March 2018 you applied for indefinite leave to remain based on ten
years' long residence.

On 26 November 2018 UKV&I sent you a questionnaire to complete relating to
your previous Tier 1 (General) Migrant applications. You returned the
questionnaire on 17 December 2018.

Checks with HMRC have shown that for the tax year 2010/11, you initially
only declared self-employed earnings of �2,778.00. The above figures
declared to HMRC on your original 2010/2011 tax returns as regards to your
gross figures from self-employment of �7,230.00 is significantly lower than
the �18,778.00 claimed on your Tier 1 (General) application of 18 March
2011.

It is considered that your initial declared income to HMRC would have
acquainted to zero points in the previous earnings category rather than the
20 points that you have claimed.

It is noted that in the questionnaire you completed you were asked question
14: Have you ever needed to correct or submit your tax returns for the
financial years stated in your answer to question 2? You answered Yes and
stated that your tax was incorrect due to your lack of tax/accounting
knowledge and due to you trusting your cousin who has taken responsibility
for the unintentional calculation error.

However, it was your responsibility to ensure that your tax return was
submitted on time with the correct information and by failing to do so it
is considered that you have been deceitful or dishonest in your dealings
with HMRC and/or UKV&I. It is therefore not a credible explanation that you
would not have noticed the considerable discrepancy between the sums
declared to HMRC and on your Tier 1 (General) applications and the tax
implications this would have.

It is noted that you amended your tax returns for the tax year 2010/11 in
January 2016 so that your self-employment income matched the figures you
announced in your initial Tier 1 (General) Migrant application. However,
the fact that you have retrospectively declared these claimed earnings to
HMRC over five years later does not satisfy the Secretary of State that you
have not previously been deceitful or dishonest with HMRC and/or UK Visas &
Immigration.'

The respondent decided that AP was unable to meet the requirements of
Appendix FM. As for his private life rights consideration was given to AP's
position under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and the respondent determined:

'You are an Indian national and it is considered that you could return to
live there again. You can speak the local language and, having spent the
first approximately 25 years of your life in India it is considered that
you will be familiar with the local customs, traditions and way of life.
You have given no reasons as to why it would be impossible for you to
reside in your country of origin again. You have not demonstrated that
there are significant obstacles to your integration into India, the country
to which you would have to go if required to leave the UK. Whilst returning
to India may include some hardships, this does not give you any expectation
of being permitted to settle here in the UK. We do not accept that you have
resided here for so long that you would have completely lost all ties to
India and that you would be unable to reside in that country again. To
allow you to remain here now would be to allow you to circumvent the
requirements of the Immigration Rules and would advantage you over others
who have observed our Immigration Rules. Whilst you may prefer to reside in
the UK, there are no compelling reasons to allow you to do so.'

The respondent further determined that no exceptional circumstances arose
justifying a grant of leave to remain on Article 8 grounds outside the
Immigration Rules.

In the meantime, VR applied for leave to remain on 12 March 2018. The
respondent refused this application on 20 February 2019, detailing that she
did not meet the eligibility relationship requirements for leave to remain
on family life grounds under the Immigration Rules and no insurmountable
obstacles existed in relation to paragraph EX.1 of the Rules.

Hearing

AP and VR attended the hearing before me. AP gave oral evidence and was
subject to cross-examination. It was accepted by the parties that as VR was
not married to AP at the date of the application for leave dated 18 March
2011, or the filing of the 2010/2011 tax return in January 2012, she was
unable to throw any further light on the key issues in this matter. She
formally relied upon her witness statement but was not cross-examined by
Mr. Clarke.

The appellants made a 'rule 15(2) application' seeking permission to rely
upon evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, namely a letter
from Mr. Vishnu Vardhan Venumuddala, dated 6 January 2020. It details:

         'It is to confirm that [AP] was living with us (unofficially) in
         our house at [Hounslow] as a guest from April 2011 - October 2013,
         considering his personal circumstances and upon mutual
         understanding between us. He is my maternal relative and our
         families share great bond from back home to.

         We didn't incur any rental burden on him although some
         miscellaneous expenses were being shared between us.

         My family were happy during his stay with us and he was well
         behaved and a person with good character.

         At the moment I'm away from United Kingdom for personal family
         reasons but can respond for any queries sent to my email ...'

Mr. Clarke did not oppose the admission of this document.

No documentary evidence as to Mr. Venumuddala's ownership of the property
in Hounslow accompanies the application nor, in the alternative, are
details provided as to whether or not it was a rented property. No evidence
is provided as to the size of the property, including the number of rooms,
nor as to how many 'family' members resided there at the relevant time. The
reference to 'unofficially' is not explained. Mr. Venumuddala provides a
different home address to that detailed as being where he lived with the
appellant but presents no detail as to the date when he moved property. He
provides no evidence that he resides at the new address. I admitted the
document but observed to Mr. Gajjar that he would have to address the
notable failings in submissions when identifying the appropriate weight to
be placed on this document.

Decision

The Court of Appeal in Balajigari v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2019] EWCA Civ 673; [2019] 1 W.L.R. 4647 considered the
application and substance of paragraph 322(5) of the Rules and held that
the paragraph first involves deciding whether it is 'undesirable' to grant
leave. If so, the second stage is to decide as a matter of discretion
whether to refuse leave. 'Undesirability' requires reliable evidence of
sufficiently reprehensible conduct, and an assessment, taking proper
account of all relevant circumstances, of whether an applicant's presence
is undesirable. An earnings discrepancy only constitutes sufficiently
reprehensible conduct if it is a result of an applicant's dishonesty.
Carelessness or ignorance or poor advice are not conduct making it
undesirable for an applicant to remain here and genuine or innocent errors
do not meet the necessary threshold. The Court approved the procedural
guidance to the consideration of such matters by Martin Spencer J in R (on
the application of Khan) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2018] UKUT 384 (IAC); [2019] Imm. A.R. 239.

On the facts of this matter, there is a substantial discrepancy between the
income declared by AP on his tax return for 2010/2011 through self-
employment (�2,778) and his self-employed net profit income declared to the
respondent by his 2011 Tier 1 (General) Migrant application (�18,778).

I am mindful that whilst the burden falls upon the appellants to establish
that a failure to grant leave to remain is a disproportionate interference
in their protected family and private life rights, the burden to establish
dishonesty falls upon the respondent. As observed by Martin Spencer J a
finding that a person has been deceitful and dishonest in relation to his
tax affairs - or in seeking leave to remain - with the consequence that he
is denied settlement in this country is a very serious finding with serious
consequences.

As confirmed in Re H (Minors) (Child Sexual Abuse: Standard of Proof)
[1996] AC 563 and Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rehman
[2003] 1 AC 153, the balance of probability standard is a flexible standard
and so when assessing this probability the Tribunal will assume that some
things are inherently more likely than others. Though the civil standard of
proof on the balance of probabilities is finite and unvarying, the more
serious the allegation the less likely it is that the event occurred, and
thus the stronger and more cogent should be the evidence before a court or
Tribunal determines that on the balance of probabilities the event did
occur: Re: D [2008] UKHL 33; 1 WLR 1499.

As to the relevant civil test for dishonesty, the Supreme Court held in
Ivey v Genting Casinos (UK) Ltd (t/a Crockfords Club) [2017] UKSC 67;
[2018] AC 391 that the fact-finding Tribunal has first to ascertain the
actual state of the individual's knowledge or belief as to the facts. The
reasonableness of that belief is a matter of evidence going to whether they
held the belief, but it is not an additional requirement that the belief
had to be reasonable; the question is whether it was genuinely held. When
the state of mind is established, the question whether the conduct was
honest or dishonest is to be determined by applying the objective standards
of ordinary decent people.

Returning to the judgment of Martin Spencer J in Khan it is not sufficient
for an appellant, in this matter AP, simply to blame his accountant for an
'error' in relation to the historical tax return. The respondent is
entitled to take into account that, even where an accountant has made an
error, the accountant will or should have asked the tax payer to confirm
that the return was accurate and to have signed the tax return, and
furthermore the appellant will have known of his or her earnings and will
have expected to pay tax thereon. If, realising this (or wilfully shutting
his eyes to the situation), the appellant has not taken steps within a
reasonable time to remedy the situation, the respondent may be entitled to
conclude either that the error was not simply the fault of the accountant
or, alternatively, an appellant's failure to remedy the situation itself
justifies a conclusion that he has been deceitful or dishonest and
therefore he should be refused indefinite leave to remain within paragraph
322(5) of the Rules.

The facts arising in this matter require me to consider the truthfulness of
AP's account. If I am satisfied that an error occurred, I am then to ask
myself why AP did not realise that an error had been made because his
liability to pay tax was less than he should have expected or, at the
latest, should have been known to him at the time his next tax assessment
was completed and items such as personal rent and telephone expenditure
were not put through his accounts. I am required to consider the evidence
in the round, and to be mindful that the burden rests upon the respondent
to establish dishonesty.

The appellants did not seek to assert that there was no prima facie
evidence available to the respondent upon which she could found an
allegation of dishonesty. Such evidence is identifiable in the discrepancy
between the earnings for self-employment provided in the 2011 application
for further leave to remain and those subsequently provided to HMRC. The
burden of proof therefore transfers to AP as to the establishment of an
innocent error.

AP details as his innocent explanation that he relied upon the expertise of
his cousin, Mr. Koyyada, to competently complete his tax return for the tax
year 2010/2011. He was aware that whilst in India his cousin had completed
a Fundamentals in Business Accounting course in 2009, securing a grade A.
Further, he had work experience in the field of accountancy having worked
for accountants in this country between 9 May 2011 and 18 November 2011. He
explained to me that he asked his cousin to help him as he was trying to
save money. Whilst accountants were asking for �700, Mr. Koyyada was
willing to prepare AP's tax return for �300. AP further detailed that as he
trusted his cousin, he did not oversee his work and did not cross-check the
return with his actual income. In my decision dated 13 November 2019 I
accepted that despite not possessing domestic accountancy qualifications,
Mr Koyyada is permitted to be considered an 'accountant' for the purpose of
the appellant's defence to the error. This is because unlike the terms
solicitor or financial independent adviser the term accountant is not
protected.

AP's case as to innocent error rests largely upon his being able to rely
upon Mr. Koyyada having sufficient experience of accountancy so that he
could be reasonably trusted to competently undertake the required
calculations and complete the tax return. However, it does require me to
accept that Mr. Koyyada could have confused elements of accounting
procedure relating to limited liability companies when considering AP's
self-employed status.

Upon inspection the self-assessment tax return purportedly completed by Mr.
Koyyada is to be found at [C8] - [C19]. At [C10] the box for self-
employment is marked. The self-employment pages at [C18] - [C19] have been
completed. AP's business is detailed to be a business consultancy at
section 1 at [C18] and AP is identified at section 5 on the same page as
having commenced trading on 1 September 2010. The turnover is identified at
section 8 as being �20,092. Importantly, in the box entitled 'allowable
business expenses', also on [C18], �16,208 is placed within section 10,
which is entitled 'costs of goods bought for resale or goods used'. AP
could offer no explanation at the hearing as to why Mr. Koyyada, who has
accountancy experience, could reasonably believe that housing rent and
telephone bills could be placed in a section solely concerned with 'goods
bought for resale or goods used'. I observe that if an error were to be
made, it would be significantly more likely that the erroneous entry would
be placed at section 13 which is concerned with 'rent, rates, power and
insurance costs' or at section 18, 'other allowable business expenses'. It
is very difficult to understand as to how anyone with basic knowledge of
accounts could make the error that arises in this matter, namely
considering housing rent and telephone expenditure to be 'goods'.

I note that when completing the application for further leave to remain in
March 2011, some 3 or so weeks before the end of the tax year, AP relied
upon figures prepared by a firm of accountants. In evidence before me, he
was vague as to who prepared the figures relied upon, detailing, 'I don't
remember the person, their name. They were a professional. They were in the
Ilford area. I cannot remember the name of the firm. May have been called
Bukhari Associates.' I accept that over the passage of time, the name of
the accountancy firm may have been forgotten, but AP accepts that the
figures relied upon were calculated by a professional firm of accountants.
I observe when considering the evidence in the round that having already
paid a firm of accountants to prepare figures as to his earnings on all but
the last three weeks of the relevant tax year, it is unclear as to what
significant financial savings he would have made by requesting his cousin
to consider his financial documents afresh and prepare his tax return.

AP's position is that he provided his cousin with all relevant documents
and, as he trusted his cousin entirely, he accepted the completed
assessment and tax return without checking them. Because he trusted his
cousin he was not surprised or concerned that his tax liability on his self-
employed earnings amounted to a small sum.

The following year, and for the years thereafter, AP's accounts were
prepared by Faz Accountancy Services, who are based in Ilford. AP was
explicit in his evidence that the erroneous nature of the 2010/2011 tax
return was not picked up by the new firm of accountants because 'He did not
ask me anything about the previous tax year. He did not ask to see my tax
return. I don't recall him asking me about the previous year or when I
started business. He did ask me what year he was working on. I said it was
the second year of business. They did not ask me about this tax return
until 2016.' Mr. Gajjar accepted that I could take judicial note of the
usual professional practices of accountants when preparing annual tax
accounts, including consideration of capital allowances, depreciating
assets and sums to be carried over into the following year's accounts. I am
satisfied to the requisite standard that a competent accountant would wish
to consider the previous year's accounts and tax return when seeking to
prepare self-employed accounts and in such circumstances AP is not being
honest when asserting that Faz Accountancy Services expressed no interest
in being provided with information relating to the 2010/2011 tax return.

AP's evidence as to how he eventually found out about the erroneous tax
declaration is that he was contacted by a friend who was in the process of
applying for ILR. His friend's solicitor had suggested that his friend
check his tax returns as this was an issue the respondent was known to
consider in settlement applications made by Tier 1 (General) Migrants. AP
then recalled that he had received an email in January 2012 to which his
tax assessment was attached. He had not read it at the time but by typing
'tax return' into his search engine he found the unread email. AP expressly
informed me at the hearing that the document attached to the email was that
containing the page at [C19] of the bundle. He was then able to present
this document to his accountant. He had no other documents from this time
to present to his accountants save for his bank statements. He discussed
the matter with them, and they asked what goods he had bought that amounted
to some �16,000. He did not know, so contacted his cousin who then
explained the mistake that had been made. His accountants agreed to amend
his tax return and the amendment for AP's tax return for the year ending 5
April 2011 was received by HMRC on 21 January 2016, some two months before
he applied for ILR.

AP was very vague in his evidence. He was unable to name the author of the
relevant email, which he not read since its receipt in January 2012. His
evidence was that Mr. Koyyada had been provided with his user number and
password so that Mr. Koyyada could complete his tax assessment on the
Government Gateway portal. He further confirmed that Mr. Koyyada completed
the assessment online. He could not recall who sent the subsequent email to
him, though noticeably he did not assert it to be either Mr. Koyyada or
HMRC. No copy of the email has been filed with the Tribunal. AP has not
been able to provide a coherent explanation as to how a tax assessment
completed online by the only other person to have access to his account on
the Government Gateway could subsequently be sent as an attachment to him
by an unknown third person. A completed assessment is not automatically
sent by HMRC to a taxpayer by email after it is 'sent' on the Government
Gateway. The version of events being advanced by AP is fanciful and
unsustainable. I am satisfied that this is a crude attempt to manufacture a
necessary link between his asserted history of not being aware of the
failure to disclose his true self-employed earnings in 2011 with the
subsequent amendment of his tax return in 2016, just before he applied for
settlement. AP has provided no detail as to who could have sent this
document to him. In such circumstances, upon considering the very vague
evidence provided by AP, I find that it is unbelievable that some 4 years
after receiving an email that he did not open and read at the time he would
recall it and upon locating and opening it he would find attached the very
document he had not previously checked but related to the tax return that
now had to be amended before he applied for settlement. I am satisfied that
AP has concocted a purported history that simply cannot withstand even
cursory examination. Whilst mindful as to the seriousness of the finding, I
am satisfied that there is sufficient basis upon which to find that AP is
not being truthful as to the circumstances in which he sought to amend his
tax assessment for the year ending April 2011 and is deliberately seeking
to deceive the Tribunal.

I have significant concerns as to the veracity of Mr. Venumuddala's letter
of January 2020. AP relies upon it to establish that early in April 2012 he
moved property and as he did not pay Mr. Venumuddala rent the issue as to
whether to put rental payments through his accounts did not arise for the
2011/2012 tax year. Thus, he remained in ignorance of the initial error
concerning his rent being put through his accounts as a 'good bought for
resale or good used'. Beyond his bald assertion as to events, Mr.
Venumuddala provides no documentary evidence that he lived at the relevant
property in Hounslow, either at all or throughout the relevant period of
time. AP explained to me that he was seeking to save money for his wedding
and so was aided by living rent free with his relative. He detailed that he
continues to use his old address in Manor Park, East London, for
correspondence, stating that he believed that he would only reside with Mr.
Venumuddala temporarily. However, he detailed the Manor Park address as his
correspondence address when completing his tax return on 11 January 2012,
some 9 months after he purportedly moved away from that property to reside
with Mr. Venumuddala. He was unable to coherently explain as to why he
would permit his correspondence to continue to be sent to his former rented
accommodation for a period of time after he had moved into the home of a
relative in West London, some 30 or so miles away. I am satisfied to the
requisite standard that the letter is simply an exercise in deception
undertaken by AP and Mr. Venumuddala who seek to create a falsehood as to
AP not paying rent to explain why AP's accountants did not inform him at an
early stage that he could not put his housing rent through his accounts. I
am satisfied to the requisite standard that AP did not reside with Mr.
Venumuddala from April 2011 until just before he left to travel to India
for his marriage in 2013. I am satisfied to the required standard that at
the date the tax assessment was completed online he was residing at, and
paying rent for, the property in Manor Park which he detailed on the
assessment.

When considering as to whether an innocent error arose in this matter and
whether AP can offer an innocent explanation as to events, I am satisfied
that AP is an untruthful witness, prepared to rely upon a letter from Mr.
Venumuddala that contains untruths and to seek to rely upon evidence from
Mr. Koyyada that is patently false. I do not accept to the requisite
standard that someone with a knowledge of accountancy such as Mr. Koyyada
would put private housing rental payments and telephone costs through
accounts as 'costs of goods bought for resale or goods used' and further I
do not accept that someone with basic accountancy knowledge would confuse
allowable expenses for limited liability companies when preparing accounts
for a self-employed person. I do not accept the evidence of Mr. Koyyada and
find that he has engaged with AP in seeking to create a falsehood to hide
the true state of affairs relating to the filing of the 2010/2011 tax
return. The assertion that an email was sent to AP with the 2011 tax
assessment attached to it by an unknown person or entity in January 2012 is
simply untrue. I am satisfied that AP knowingly filed a false tax return so
as to limit his tax liabilities, in full knowledge of the figures
previously provided to him by accountants as to his earnings when he
applied for further leave to remain in this country. When seeking to
provide an innocent explanation before this Tribunal his recounting of
events comprises an accumulation of further deceit. He was dishonest to
this Tribunal as to the circumstances in which his tax assessment and tax
return were filed in January 2012 and was dishonest in his efforts to
persuade this Tribunal that he was the subject of an innocent error by Mr.
Kayyada. His continuing dishonesty in his evidence, such as the production
of Mr. Venumuddala's letter to the Tribunal establishes his ongoing
willingness to exercise deception and strongly evidences a willingness to
exercise deception when engaging with authorities in this country,
including HMRC. The appellant has wholly failed to provide an innocent
explanation. His conduct is dishonest by the objective standards of
ordinary decent people, and before this Tribunal he has encouraged family
members to provide statements lacking any semblance of truth to aid his
case. I am satisfied to the required standard that the respondent could
lawfully refuse AP's application for settlement by application of paragraph
322(5) of the Immigration Rules.

As to article 8, the Court of Appeal confirmed in GM (Sri Lanka) v.
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 that the
Immigration Rules and section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') are to be construed consistently and that
national authorities enjoy a margin of appreciation when setting the weight
to be applied to various factors in the proportionality assessment. The
test for an assessment outside the Rules is whether a fair balance is
struck between competing public and private interests. I am mindful that a
proportionality test is to be applied to the circumstances of the
individual case. There is requirement for proper evidence.

Neither AP nor VR can succeed under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. They
both grew up in India and left their home country when adults. They both
have qualifications and skills that they can rely upon when they return: AS
v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1284; [2018]
Imm. A.R. 169. There is no basis in their assertion that they have lost
material ties with India. Whilst AP has been in this country since 2008,
the respondent has consistently refused him settlement since 2016 on the
basis of his dishonesty. The appellants have provided no evidence capable
of establishing their suffering very significant hardship on return to
India and I observe that their true concern is losing what they perceive to
be the benefits of living in this country: Parveen v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 932.

Their child is not a 'qualifying child' under section 117B(6) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. As to the respondent's duty
under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the
'best interests' principle does not mean that it is automatically in the
interests of any child to be permitted to remain in this country
irrespective of age, length of stay, family background or other
circumstances. The child in this matter is aged 2 and has very little
connection to his wider community beyond his family and their home. His
best interests are to remain with his parents and accompany them to India:
Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
[2013] UKUT 197 (IAC); [2013] Imm. A.R. 696.

The appellants have only ever enjoyed precarious leave for the purpose of
section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act and so limited weight is given to their
private life in this country: Rhuppiah v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 W.L.R. 5536. In assessing the public
interest, I observe that AP secured further leave in 2012 through the
exercise of deception and he could only sponsor VR's entry into this
country because he had secured further leave to remain consequent to such
deception. No exceptional circumstances arise in this matter. It is the
public interest that the family return to India, and their removal would
not be a disproportionate interference in their family and private lives.
The appellants' human rights (article 8) appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

By means of a decision dated 13 November 2019 this Tribunal set aside the
Judge's decision promulgated on 21 March 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a)
of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCE').

The decision is re-made, and the appellants' appeals are dismissed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 21 January 2020




To the Respondent
Fee Award

As the appeals have been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 21 January 2020
