

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/02820/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business                   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 13 January 2021                            |on 9 February 2021           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              Md HABIBUL ISLAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:  Mr A Sayem, of Uzma Law Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 18 December 1986.

 2. By a decision  dated  28  January  2019,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's human rights claim (a) on suitability grounds,  because  he
    had used deception in an  English  language  (ETS)  test  taken  on  22
    February 2012;  (b)  because  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules on private life; and  (c)  because  there
    were no exceptional circumstances or unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    warranting a grant of leave outside the rules.

 3.  FtT  Judge  Farrelly  dismissed  appellant's  appeal  by  a   decision
    promulgated on 24 August 2019, concluding that the appellant  had  used
    deception in the test, and there  was  nothing  in  his  private  life,
    including his business interests,  to  give  him  a  right  to  remain;
    particularly in light of the 2002 Act,  section  117B,  on  the  little
    weight to be given to that private life.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT.  Grounds [1  -  5]
    challenge the finding on deception for failing to  apply  the  shifting
    burden of  proof,  for  overlooking  case  law  and  evidential  points
    favourable to the appellant (including  the  fact  that  he  had  never
    relied upon the ETS certificate), and for speculation;  [6]  says  that
    case law justified  more  weight  being  given  to  his  businesses  in
    assessing the appellant's private  life;  and  [7]  alleges  inadequate
    consideration  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  reintegration  into
    Bangladesh.

 5. FtT Judge Simpson granted permission on  all  grounds  on  17  December
    2019, adding the observation that since the hearing the respondent  had
    stated to Parliament that operational guidance was to be updated:

      ... to ensure we are properly balancing a belief  that  deception  was
      committed some years ago against other  factors  that  would  normally
      lead to leave being granted ... to ensure no further action  is  taken
      in cases where there is no evidence of an ETS certificate ...  [being]
      used in an immigration application.

 6. In a response dated 18 May 2020 to UT directions, the appellant  sought
    to rely  on  the  ministerial  statement  and  on  the  "APPG  report",
    published on 18 July 2019, which describes evidence of cheating in  ETS
    tests as "confusing, misleading, incomplete and unsafe".  The appellant
    said that guidance had been updated on 6 March 2020 (presumably in line
    with the statement,  although  no  direct  citation  was  given).   The
    response finally submits that as the appellant has resided  in  the  UK
    for over 10 years, and is "running a successful business with his team-
    mate", the damage caused by the adverse decision "will be irreparable".

 7. The  appellant  filed  a  skeleton  argument  dated  19  October  2020,
    modifying the grounds into [1] error in  circumstances  where  the  ETS
    certificate was never used [2] failure to apply the correct legal  test
    (shifting burden, and standard of proof) [3] failure to have regard  to
    material factors [4] unsustainable findings in light of the APPG report
    and [5] erroneous finding on article 8 outside the rules.   The  UT  is
    asked to find that the FtT materially erred in law, and that  the  case
    should be remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing before another judge.

 8. The SSHD did not file responses to the UT's various directions.

 9. The technology enabled an effective remote hearing.

10. Mr Howells said that considering the ministerial statement,  and  there
    being no evidence that the appellant had  tried  to  use  deception  to
    obtain leave, the respondent entirely withdrew the ETS allegation,  and
    the FtT should be taken to have erred in law on that point.

11. Such error of law is, at highest, on a retrospective  and  constructive
    basis.  Although the hearing proceeded on the basis of the  concession,
    without further analysis, I rather doubt, on reflection, if this  is  a
    legal error.  Ministerial statements and changes of Home Office  policy
    are not of the same nature as case law, subsequent to a hearing,  which
    is deemed authoritatively to state the law as  it  should  always  have
    been understood.  However, as well as the concession,  there  was  some
    apparent merit in parts of the appellant's "ETS grounds",  particularly
    on the APPG report.  After the concession by Mr  Howells,  the  hearing
    proceeded as if the ETS allegation was entirely  irrelevant,  so  those
    matters were not developed.  The matter may be academic, but I record a
    finding that the concession and the grounds, taken  together,  disclose
    error of law in the finding of deception.

12. Mr Howells said that the respondent's concession should not lead to the
    decision being set aside, for these reasons.  The effect of  withdrawal
    of an ETS allegation depended on the circumstances of  the  case.   The
    previous decision against the appellant in 2013  was  based  not  on  a
    fraudulent certificate, but on breach of employment  conditions,  which
    he had admitted.  As the alleged fraud had not been held against him in
    any decision prior to the one leading to these proceedings, he did  not
    qualify for the  benefit  of  the  policy.   The  ETS  matter  made  no
    difference to the article 8 outcome.  The decision should stand.

13. Mr Sayem expanded upon the grounds and skeleton argument.  He submitted
    that the error was material; the FtT's decision should  be  set  aside;
    the appeal should be allowed,  based  on  the  appellant's  entitlement
    under policy to 6 months leave; if not, the case should be remitted.

14. I am  obliged  to  both  representatives  for  their  assistance.   The
    concession by Mr Howells was well considered.   Mr  Sayem  has  pursued
    every available point for the appellant, both in the FtT and in the UT.
    Having heard their submissions, I reserved my decision.

15. It was common ground that the  period  of  60  days  mentioned  in  the
    skeleton argument  had  since  been  extended  to  6  months.   Neither
    representative took  me  to  the  source.   I  have  identified  it  as
    Educational Testing Service (ETS): casework instructions  Version  4.0,
    at page 9:

      If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds but  a  finding  is
      made by the Tribunal that the  appellant  did  not  obtain  the  TOEIC
      certificate by deception, you will need to give effect to that finding
      by granting six months leave outside the rules. This is to enable  the
      appellant to make any application they want to make or  to  leave  the
      UK.

16. The appellant is now entitled to a decision as  if  the  allegation  of
    deception had never been made.

17. The FtT's finding  on  deception  played  a  significant  part  in  its
    conclusion on proportionality - see [50] and [56].  The  outcome  might
    have been against  him,  even  without  that  finding,  but  it  cannot
    confidently be said that it  must  have  been  so.   The  point  is  so
    material as to require the  decision  to  be  set  aside  (without  any
    reflection on the judge, being based on significant matters which  have
    emerged since his decision.)

18. There was some force in Mr Howell's point that the  appellant  did  not
    benefit from the ministerial statement, because his  application,  even
    without that feature, would  not  normally  have  led  to  leave  being
    granted; but  the  case  turns  on  the  policy,  rather  than  on  the
    statement.  Mr Sayem stressed the value  of  the  appellant's  business
    interests to the community, but he appears to have fallen well short of
    the rules to remain in that capacity.  On the evidence which was before
    the FtT the argument that his  is  an  exceptional  case  in  terms  of
    private life is weak, if not fanciful.  So is  the  suggestion  of  any
    real difficulty re-integrating in Bangladesh.  Attention has  not  been
    drawn to anything to show a right to remain in the  UK  in  the  longer
    term, other than through some application meeting the  requirements  of
    the immigration rules.  However, in all the  circumstances,  and  given
    the history of these proceedings, policy, fairness, and proportionality
    require that he should have 6 months leave to enable him  to  make  any
    such application as may be open to him (or to leave the UK).

19. The decision of the FtT  is  set  aside.   The  appeal,  as  originally
    brought to the FtT, is allowed on human rights grounds, to  the  extent
    explained in the previous paragraph.

20. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


     22 January 2021
     UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email.



