
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02019/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 October 2017                     |On 26 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                METITA GREZDA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Alim Counsel instructed by Thoree & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant" against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  by  the  Entry
Clearance Officer in Warsaw refusing her application for leave to enter the
United Kingdom as a visitor.

2. The appeal was allowed on human  rights  grounds  and  the  decision  was
challenged by the Secretary of State on  two  grounds.   The  first  ground
contended that the claimant did not have a right of appeal and  the  second
ground contended that the First-tier Tribunal had  misdirected  itself  and
should not have concluded that the relationship between  the  claimant  and
her family in the United Kingdom engaged the protection of Article 8(1)  of
the European Convention on Human Rights.

3. The first ground can be addressed quickly.  Mr Wilding said that  he  did
not wish to rely on it.  He was right to make that decision.   He  had  not
settled the grounds and although the argument may have proved interesting I
find it extraordinary that the Secretary of  State  would  argue  that  the
claimant cannot take advantage of a statutory ground.

4. There is an obvious deficiency on the face of the Decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal.  There has been little or no attempt to justify the  finding
that the claimant could rely on Article 8.  The First-tier Tribunal made an
unequivocal finding that "there is a family life between the [claimant] and
his sponsor family in the UK" but gave little explanation  for  this.   The
partial explanation offered is, I find, quite wrong.   The  judge  said  at
paragraph 23:

  "the sponsor family are not able to travel  to  Albania  and  this  is  a
  weighty factor in this appeal".

5. Indeed the members of the sponsor's family are  not  able  to  travel  to
Albania because they are either far too young or are refugees from Albania.
 However I find Mr Wilding was unarguably  right  when  he  submitted  that
although it was conceivable that the impracticability of the United Kingdom-
based relatives travelling to Albania could feature as a weighty point in a
balancing exercise, it was an irrelevant consideration to  the  first  task
which was to establish if the  claimants  came  within  the  protection  of
Article 8 at all.

6. Mr Alim had produced appropriately a short and  clear  skeleton  argument
for which I am grateful.  This makes the point that  the  judge  was  aware
that he was dealing with a human rights appeal.  He had not fallen into the
trap of dealing with the case under the Rules and he  was  mindful  of  the
best interests of the children who, the judge found, should be  allowed  to
see their grandparents.

7. These things are right as far as they go but  they  do  not  address  the
question of real importance which is whether the judge was entitled to find
that the relationship between the appellant and her grandchildren  was  one
the United Kingdom was  required  to  promote.   The  judge  clearly  erred
because there was no attempt to justify this part of the decision  and,  as
was explained by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern  in  Adjei  (visit  visas  -
Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC) quoting with approval a decision  of  this
Tribunal in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  112  (IAC),
Article 8(1) will only be engaged in visitor  appeals  in  a  "very  narrow
range of claimants", typically people who are married to each other or  are
otherwise close life partners or parents and minor  children  who  wish  to
spend some time together.

8. All of this has been approved in rather emphatic terms by  the  Court  of
Appeal in SSHD v Tahir Abbas [2017] EWCA  Civ  1393.  There  the  Court  of
Appeal draws a strong distinction between the  "family  life"  end  of  the
private and family life spectrum and the "private life" end.  In  paragraph
25 of his judgment Burnett L J emphasised that people who rely  on  private
life will not normally be able to show that a decision made while they  are
outside the United Kingdom comes within the scope of Article 8(1).

9. Here the First-tier Tribunal Judge decided there was family life  but  it
went no more than a desire for grandparents to be  with  grandchildren  and
possibly their own adult children.  No effort was made to explain why  this
relationship came within the scope of the Article.  In the absence of  some
very unusual circumstance it does not.  The relevant relationship has to be
of considerable importance and one that there is a clear duty on the  state
to promote.  Relationships between children and grandparents  can  be  very
beneficial to all those involved.  So can relationships between cousins and
uncles or aunts with their nieces and nephews or even  just  good  friends.
To some extent the restriction is arbitrary but the received  jurisprudence
does not support extending the protection of Article 8(1) to  relationships
other than those indicated above.  The relationships relied upon  here  are
outside that scope.

10. I have no hesitation in saying the  judge  erred  in  law  because  this
decision was not explained and I set it aside.

11. Further, although Mr Alim did all that could have been expected  of  him
I can see no basis on the papers before me of finding that the relationship
here is one that attracts the protection of the Article.  Indeed it is  the
essence of the complaint that the relationship has not been developed.  The
children and grandparents had never met.  This is not a  case,  as  happens
sometimes, where a genetic  grandparent  is  the  caring  parent  in  every
meaningful sense.

12. It follows that I must, and do, allow the Secretary  of  State's  appeal
and substitute a decision dismissing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

13. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and I substitute  a  decision
dismissing the claimant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
State.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |







