
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02153/2019 (V)
                                                           HU/02149/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |On 19 August 2021                    |
|On 22 July 2021                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                              Tajin Binte Nurul
                               Md Sabir Hossin
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Fripp, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellants, who are citizens of Bangladesh, are a married couple.  The
first appellant was born on 15 July 1982 and the second appellant, her
husband, was born on 25 July 1988.

The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 12 February 2010 with a
student visa valid until 31 December 2011.  That leave was extended,
initially to 29 April 2012 and then subsequently to 25 July 2015.

On 7 October 2014, the first appellant applied for leave to remain as a
Tier 4 Dependent Spouse of the second appellant.  The application was
refused on 26 August 2015 and a subsequent appeal was dismissed by the
First-tier Tribunal on 16 May 2017 (Judge Talbot).  The first appellant
became appeal rights exhausted on 11 August 2017.

The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on 5 October 2010 on a
student visa valid until 30 June 2014.  On 25 April 2012, his leave was
curtailed to expire on 24 June 2012.  On 6 August 2012, he applied for
leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student which was granted on 3 October 2012
until 24 April 2014.

On 27 February 2013, the second appellant applied for leave to remain as a
Tier 4 Student which was granted on 19 April 2013 until 23 June 2015.  He
made a further application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student on 7
October 2014 but this was refused on 26 August 2015.  His subsequent appeal
was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 16 May 2017 (Judge Talbot) and
he became appeal rights exhausted on 11 August 2017.

On 23 August 2017, the first and second appellants made applications for
leave to remain based upon their private and family life under Art 8 of the
ECHR.

On 29 January 2019, the Secretary of State refused each of those
applications.  The Secretary of State concluded that the appellants could
not succeed under the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) based upon
their family or private life under para 276ADE(1)(vi) and under Art 8
outside the Rules.

In reaching her decision, the Secretary of State concluded that the second
appellant had submitted a fraudulently obtained TOEIC English language
certificate with his application for leave in 2012 as he had used a proxy
test-taker for one part of the examination process, namely the speaking
test.  That was also the conclusion of Judge Talbot in the second
appellant's appeal in 2017.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision sent on
25 January 2021, Judge Shore dismissed each of the appellants' appeals on
all grounds.

First, having considered the evidence, and having taken Judge Talbot's
previous appeal findings as a 'starting point', Judge Shore found that the
second appellant had, indeed, submitted a fraudulently obtained TOEIC with
his 2012 application for leave.  The second appellant's appeal, therefore,
failed under the Rules because he could not satisfy the 'suitability' test
under para S-LTR.4.2 of Appendix FM (read with para 276ADE(1)(i)).

Second, Judge Shore found that neither appellant could succeed under para
276ADE(1)(vi) on the basis that it was not established that there were
"very significant obstacles" to their integration on return to Bangladesh.

Third, the judge found that neither appellant's removal breached Art 8 as
it had not been established that there would be "unjustifiably harsh
consequences" such as to outweigh the public interest either in relation to
the first appellant or the second appellant.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  They did
so on three grounds.

First, in relation to the finding that the second appellant had submitted a
fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate, it was contended that the judge
had wrongly excluded consideration of two documents relevant to the ETS and
TOEIC language certificate issue: (1) the National Audit Office Report by
the Comptroller and Auditor General on the TOEIC scandal, "Investigation
into the response to cheating in English language tests" (24 May 2019) (the
"NAO report"); and (2) the report of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on
TOEIC (18 July 2019) (the "APPG report"). (Ground 1)

Second, it was contended that the judge had erred in law in his approach to
para 276ADE(1)(vi) and Art 8 outside the Rules by failing properly to have
regard to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the appellants'
circumstances in Bangladesh on return. (Ground 2)

Third, again in relation to para 276ADE(1)(vi) and Art 8 outside the Rules,
it was contended that the judge had failed properly to consider all the
evidence when he found that the appellants would not be estranged from
their families on return to Bangladesh. (Ground 3)

On 12 February 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) granted the
appellants permission to appeal.  In doing so, Judge Andrew found that
ground 3 was arguable but that grounds 1 and 2 were not.  She,
nevertheless, did not limit the grant of permission.

The appellants renewed their applications for permission to the Upper
Tribunal on grounds 1 and 2.  However, on 7 May 2021 UTJ Jackson issued
directions indicating that the effect of Judge Andrew's permission decision
was that permission to appeal had not been limited to ground 1 and was,
following Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388
(IAC), to be taken to be a grant of permission on all three grounds.

However, in addition, in relation to ground 1, UTJ Jackson indicated that
the appellants would need to address, in claiming that the NAO and APPG
reports should have been considered by the judge, the parties views on the
reasoning of the UT in DK and RK (Parliamentary privilege; evidence) [2021]
UKUT 00061 (IAC) were invited.

The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
Centre on 22 July 2021.  I was based in court and Mr Fripp, who represented
the appellants, and Mr Bates, who represented the Secretary of State,
joined the hearing (as did the appellants) remotely by Microsoft Teams.

Prior to the hearing, Mr Fripp filed a skeleton argument dealing
specifically with ground 1 in accordance with the direction of UTJ Jackson.
 Mr Fripp relied upon that skeleton argument and the three grounds of
appeal which he developed in his oral submissions.  I also heard
submissions from Mr Bates on behalf of the Secretary of State.

I will take each of the grounds in turn.

Ground 1

In his decision, Judge Shore, having heard evidence from the appellants,
found that the second appellant had submitted a fraudulently obtained TOEIC
English language certificate with his application for leave in 2012 and
that, therefore, he could not meet the suitability requirement under the
Rules.  In reaching that finding, the judge took Judge Talbot's earlier
finding as a 'starting point' applying Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702 which he
set out at para 40 of his decision.  The judge made the following findings
at para 50 of his decision:

"50. Applying the tests in Devaseelan, I make the following findings:

50.1 The first decision is always the starting point and in the second
appellant's case, he was found not to be credible on his claims of being
innocent of cheating in his TOEIC test;

50.2 The only 'facts' since the events were put forward to be considered
that related to his TOEIC test was the alleged change in the way the
Tribunal should view this type of appeal;

50.3 The only fact before them put forward for consideration was the fact
that he had chosen the test venue because it was close to his home;

50.4 I should treat with circumspection relevant facts that have not been
brought to the First Appeal's attention.  The issue of his reasoning for
choosing the test centre was not put to the First Appeal but would have
been known to the second appellant at the time of the First Appeal;

50.5 The issues in evidence on the First and current appeals relating to
the Appellants' account are materially the same, so I should treat the
issues as settled by the First Appeal rather than allowing the matter to be
relitigated;

50.6 In the light of my findings about the law relating to TOEIC tests, I
find that this is not one of the occasions where the circumstances
surrounding the First Appeal were such that it would be right for me to
look at the matter as if the first determination had never been made, and;

50.7 The findings of F-tTJ Talbot should be treated as settled and the
determination that the second appellant had not met the standard of proof
to switch the burden of proof back to the respondent should be preserved."

Although the judge went on to find that the second appellant had discharged
the evidential burden of proving an 'innocent explanation' on the basis
that his account of how he travelled to the test centre "satisfies the
minimum level of plausibility", the judge found that the respondent had
discharged the burden of proof of establishing that the innocent
explanation was to be rejected (see para 55 of the decision).

So far as that reasoning goes neither the grounds nor Mr Fripp in his
submissions challenged the judge's reasoning.  Instead, Mr Fripp submitted
that the judge had erred in law in para 49 when he had rejected
consideration of the NAO report of 24 May 2019 and the APPG report of 18
July 2019 both of which were critical of the ETS assessment of the
reliability of test results, particularly in relation to the issue of proxy
test-taking for the speaking part of the tests.

In respect of NAO report, para 8 of the grounds states that:

"The NAO 'key findings' included that 'ETS identified virtually every test
in the UK as suspicious.  It identified that 97% of all UK tests were
invalid or questionable.'  (Key findings, �2) that 'it is difficult to
establish accurately how many people may have been wrongly identified' by
ETS (Key finding, �6), and that as to the respondent, 'For two years the
[respondent] revoked the visas of anyone with an invalid test, without
expert assurance of validity of voice recognition evidence' (Key findings,
�3), and 'we saw no evidence that the Department considered whether ETS had
misclassified individuals or looked for anomalies.'  (Key findings, �8),
and 'it was not possible for the Department to check the accuracy of ETS
classifications' (Key findings, �9)."

At [49], Judge Shore said this:

"Mr Fripp did not raise the issue of the National Audit Office Report
published 24 May 2019 titled 'Investigation into the response to cheating
in English language tests', which raises some questions about the TOEIC
proxy issue, but I find that it does not carry the weight of legal
precedent.  Same is true with the report of the All-Party Parliamentary
Group (APPG) on TOEIC dated 18 July 2019, which was critical of ETS."

It does not appear that either the APPG report or the NAO report were
placed before Judge Shore or, indeed, relied upon by the appellants at the
hearing.  It would appear, from what the judge says at para 9 of his
decision, that the judge raised in his decision the relevance of both
reports himself.  It would appear, therefore, that it is only as a result
of that that the appellants now seek to rely upon these reports and
challenge the judge's decision not to take them into account.

In his written and oral submissions, Mr Fripp acknowledged that he was in
some difficulty in relation to his contention that the judge should have
considered the APPG report as the UT in DK and RK had excluded
consideration of that in a TOEIC/ETS case.  However, he submitted that the
UT in DK and RK had not excluded consideration of the NAO report which was
critical not only of ETS but also of the respondent.  Mr Fripp submitted
that, although the publishers of the NAO report were protected from legal
liability by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840 and it relates to
Parliamentary procedure, to admit it would not call into question the
Parliamentary procedure.  In relation to the NAO report (and, I apprehend,
in relation to the APPG report also), Mr Fripp submitted that the
appellants were not calling any of the contents into question but were
relying upon it.  Mr Fripp submitted that that approach was the proper
understanding of the Court of Appeal's decision in Warsama and Gannon v
Foreign & Commonwealth Office [2020] EWCA Civ 142 referred to by the UT at
[18] of its decision.

Mr Fripp further submitted in relation to both reports that the proper
approach was to determine its relevance factually and in relation to the
opinions expressed on a case by case basis following R (Cartref Care Home
Ltd & Others) v Commissioners for HM Revenue and Customs [2019] EWHC 3382
(Admin) also referred to by the UT at [20] of its decision.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bates relied upon DK and RK and submitted
that both the APPG report and also the NAO report were not admissible.  He
submitted that the UT had, in effect, concluded that both reports were not
admissible as to do so would infringe Parliamentary privilege because the
Secretary of State would either be in the position of challenging their
contents (which she could not do) or, and unfairly, being required to
accept their contents because their contents could not be called into
question in proceedings before the Tribunal.

In DK and RK, the UT, in a preliminary decision within appeals pending
before it, determined whether the APPG report should be admitted into
evidence, in effect to be relied upon by the appellants in that appeal, to
call into question the TOEIC/ETS process for determining whether fraud or
deception had been practised on the basis that English language
certificates had been obtained using a proxy test-taker.  The UT clearly
decided that the APPG report should not be admitted in evidence.  There
appear to be two reasons for that conclusion.

First, to admit that evidence would violate Parliamentary privilege.  The
UT accepted that the report of the APPG was not covered by Art 9 of the
Bill of Rights 1689 as it was not concerned with "proceedings in
Parliament" and therefore the prohibition on such proceedings "not [being]
impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament" did not
apply.  So, at [20] the UT said:

         "It is common ground that the APPG Report is not within the scope
         of Art 9.  Its report is not a proceeding in Parliament."

At [13] the UT noted the contents of the APPG Report as follows:

         "13. The APPG report, however, makes reference to proceedings
         before the Home Affairs Select Committee and the Public Accounts
         Committee. Paragraph 1.1 of the report expresses a view about the
         findings of the Home Affairs Select Committee and the National
         Audit Office (to which we shall turn in due course). At paragraph
         2.1 and its footnote, further reference is made to evidence
         provided by the respondent to the Home Affairs Select Committee. At
         paragraph 2.3, under the heading "Misuse of expert evidence"
         reference is made in the footnote to what was said at the Public
         Accounts Committee hearing on 10 July 2019. At paragraph 2.5, under
         the heading "'Questionable' students unjustly targeted", doubt is
         thrown over evidence given by the respondent to the Public Accounts
         Committee. By contrast, evidence given to the Home Affairs Select
         Committee by an individual who runs a college is referred to in
         approbatory terms."

At [15]-[21], the UT rejected the submissions made on behalf of the
appellants that the APPG report was based upon evidence and it was
legitimate to have regard to the report's conclusions emanating from that
evidence.

At [15]-[18], the UT concluded that the report was subject to Parliamentary
privilege and it could not be called into question in the FtT or UTIAC.
The UT said this:

         "15. Although the Upper Tribunal is not bound by formal rules of
         evidence, it cannot act in such a way as to violate Parliamentary
         privilege, whether that be to interfere with free speech in
         Parliament or by reference to the separation of powers doctrine.
         The Tribunal cannot interfere with or criticise proceedings of the
         legislature.

         16. Were the APPG report to be admitted, we are in no doubt that
         the Tribunal would be drawn into this forbidden area. The views of
         the APPG about the accuracy or otherwise of what was said to the
         Home Affairs Select Committee and the Public Accounts Committee is
         an integral aspect of the APPG report. They serve to inform the
         overall conclusions of the Group.

         17. The APPG report also makes reference to the National Audit
         Office report on TOEIC. The reports of the National Audit Office
         are documents that 5 attract the protection of the Parliamentary
         Papers Act 1840. This protects the publisher of any document
         ordered to be printed by either House of Parliament from any legal
         action that may result from it. 18. In Warsama & Gannon v Foreign &
         Commonwealth Office [2020] EWCA Civ 142, the Court of Appeal was
         concerned with the application of privilege to an unopposed return;
         that is to say, a paper ordered by the House of Commons to be
         printed following a motion on the floor of the House. In a letter
         of 15 December 2020 to the respondent in regard to the present
         appeals, Counsel to the Speaker of the House of Commons considers
         the factual position in Warsama to be analogous with that of
         documents covered by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840. In both
         cases, the House of Commons has an interest in the reporting in
         question being full and frank. Thus, as is the case with evidence
         provided to a Select Committee, the protection of privilege extends
         to a person who is not a Member of Parliament, in order to protect
         that person's ability to report fully and honestly to the House.
         That, we find, is the position with the National Audit Office
         report."

Although the UT at [23]-[24] accepted that the expert evidence that had
been submitted to the APPG could, albeit in the form of a transcript, be
admitted into evidence before the Tribunal without infringing Parliamentary
privilege, that was not the basis on which Mr Fripp now relied upon either
the APPG report or the NAO report.

With respect to Mr Fripp's spirited attempt to contend that DK and RK did
not prohibit admission of the APPG report, the UT's reasoning and
conclusion provide a clear path to the answer that it is not admissible.

Mr Fripp, however, also contended that the UT had not excluded
consideration of the NAO report.  Of course, the admissibility of the NAO
report was not directly in contention before the UT.  It was a report that
was referred to in the APPG but the issue of its admissibility as such did
not arise.

It seems to me that the only proper understanding of what the UT said in
[18] by reference to Warsama, the submission made by Counsel to the Speaker
of the House of Commons and the assimilation in the final two sentences of
[18] between material subject to the protection of Parliamentary privilege
and that the statement that that "we find ... is the position with the
National Audit Office report", can only mean that the UT took the view that
the NAO report was also not admissible.  As the UT pointed out in [17] the
NAO report attracted the protection of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840
and the UT found an analogy should be drawn with documents covered by that
legislation which extended Parliamentary privilege to papers made available
outside the Houses of Parliament to members of the public and so reversing
the well-known decision in Stockdale v Hansard (1839) 112 ER 1112).

Warsama was a case in which one issue was whether Parliamentary privilege
applied to prevent an action being based upon a report of an inquiry
ordered to be published by the House of Commons following a Motion for an
Unopposed return led by a criminal barrister specialising in child sex
abuse cases.  The Court of Appeal concluded that Parliamentary privilege
did extend to that report because Art 9 of the Bill of Rights applied as
the report was properly to be seen as "proceedings in Parliament" and could
not be called into question in any court or outside of Parliament.

Whilst the UT referred to Warsama and to the analogy drawn by Counsel to
the Speaker of the House of Commons in relation to it to documents covered
by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840, the analogy is not that Art 9 applied
either to the APPG or to the NAO reports.  It was specifically recognised
by the UT, as I have already noted, that the APPG report was not within the
scope of Art 9.  Nevertheless, the broader principle of Parliamentary
privilege was relied upon by the Parliamentary authorities and on whose
view the court should "pay careful regard" in reaching its view as to the
scope of Parliamentary privilege (see R v Chaytor [2010] UKSC 52 at [14]-
[15] per Lord Phillips).

In my judgment, that is precisely the approach taken by the UT in [18] in
concluding that Parliamentary privilege extended to the APPG report and,
although not directly raised before it, the NAO report by analogy of
reasoning.  That is a conclusion with which I agree and, it follows, that
the judge was not wrong to refuse to admit, and consider, both reports even
though his reasons for doing so may not have reflected the Parliamentary
privilege argument.

I do not accept Mr Fripp's submission that simply because the appellant was
seeking to rely on either report, there would be no breach of Parliamentary
privilege because it would not be calling into question its contents.  That
submission overlooks the fact that the respondent would, as Mr Bates
submitted, either be placed in the position where she would wish to
challenge the contents of the report (to some greater or lesser extent) but
could not do so or would have to simply accept its contents which would be
unfair.  As I pointed out to Mr Fripp in the course of his submissions,
parties generally seek to admit evidence that supports their case but which
may well be challenged by the other side.  It is that challenge which
raises the conflict with Parliamentary privilege identified by the UT in DK
and RK.  The point was made by Stanley Burnton J in Office of Government
Commerce v Information Commissioner and HM Attorney General [2008] EWHC 737
(Admin) at [57]-[58] considering whether Parliamentary privilege extended
to opinions expressed by Parliamentary Select Committees:

         "57. ... It was the duty of the Tribunal to determine the issues
         before it judicially, on the basis of the evidence and arguments
         before the Tribunal. ... The Select Committee had arrived at its
         view on the evidence before it, and not on the evidence that was
         before the Tribunal. Indirectly, in relying on the opinion of the
         Select Committee, the Tribunal relied on evidence that was not
         before it, and failed to make its decision only on the basis of the
         evidence and submissions before it.

         58. ... If a party to proceedings before a court (or the
         Information Tribunal) seeks to rely on an opinion expressed by a
         Select Committee, the other party, if it wishes to contend for a
         different result, must either contend that the opinion of the
         Committee was wrong (and give reasons why), thereby at the very
         least risking a breach of Parliamentary privilege, if not
         committing an actual breach, or, because of the risk of that
         breach, accept that opinion notwithstanding that it would not
         otherwise wish to do so. This would be unfair to that party."

In addition,  the UT in DK and RK gave an additional reason why the APPG
report should not be admitted into evidence as the opinions of the group,
were, in essence, not relevant to the Tribunal's task as those opinions
were based upon the evidence considered by each group and not the evidence
before the Tribunal.  At [19]-[22] the UT said this:

         "19. There is, however, a broader point, which emerges from the
         caselaw and which we respectfully consider was articulated well by
         Cockerill J in [(R(Cartref Care Home Ltd & Others) v Commissioners
         for HM Revenue and Customs [2019] EWHC 3382 (Admin)].  This is the
         principle that courts and tribunals determine cases by reference to
         the evidence before them and not by reference to the views of
         others, expressed in a non-judicial setting, on evidence which is
         not the same as that before the court or tribunal. Indeed, even if
         the evidence were the same, the court or tribunal must reach its
         own views, applying the relevant burden and standard of proof.

         20. Considerations of this kind informed why Cockerill J not only
         rejected the opinions in the APPG report before her as admissible
         opinion evidence but also voiced concerns about the factual
         statements in that report:-

             "170. I conclude therefore that while I am not barred from
             looking at such material by reason of any issue as to breach
             of Parliamentary privilege, I do need to ask myself serious
             questions about the nature of the evidence, and its
             admissibility as relevant factual or opinion evidence.

             171. As for the APPG Report I conclude that, following the
             authorities set out above, I cannot properly regard it as
             providing me with admissible factual evidence. It does not
             fall within any of the recognised categories where the
             contents of such documents can be adduced. It is not a witness
             statement, provided under the safeguards of the witness
             statement process. It was not written for the purpose of being
             relied on as a statement of facts; it is plainly written,
             although carefully and I am sure with much consideration, as a
             call to action. The sources for the factual statements are not
             given and are not capable of being checked. The process was
             not one where HMRC gave a response to the factual assertions;
             and it was apparent from the submissions made on the main
             conclusions that HMRC does indeed take issue with significant
             parts of what is said in the report.

             172. So far as the opinions relied on are concerned I may
             properly take into account the fact that concerned
             Parliamentarians expressed these views based on the material
             available to them; however, those opinions again must be taken
             with a rider as to the purposes for which they were given and
             the absence of the safeguards which would be expected of
             opinion evidence admitted in court in the usual way. I do not
             therefore regard the opinions expressed as admissible opinion
             evidence."

         21. The same is true of the APPG report on TOEIC. The opinions of
         the Group are clearly and forcefully expressed in the report. They
         are not, however, opinions to which we can have any material regard
         in reaching conclusions about the evidence which will be placed
         before us in these remitted appeals.

         22. Furthermore, much of the evidence given to the APPG is not
         relevant to the task we face in determining these appeals."

I agree with this reasoning which has equal application to both the APPG
report and the NAO report.  For this additional reason also, the judge did
not err in law in declining to consider the APPG report and NAO report in
relation to the opinions they expressed concerning the TOEIC/ETS process
and assessment of the English language tests.

As I have already indicated, no other challenge is raised in the grounds
(or in Mr Fripp's submissions) to the judge's finding that the second
appellant had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC English language certificate.
For the reasons I have given, I reject the sole ground of challenge to that
finding.  The judge did not err in law by failing to admit and take into
account the APPG and NAO reports.

Ground 2

Mr Fripp submitted that in finding under para 276ADE(1)(vi) that there were
not "very significant obstacles" to the appellants' integration in
Bangladesh and that their removal would not be disproportionate, the judge
fell into error in para 57.15 by failing to take into account the
circumstances in Bangladesh during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Mr Fripp submitted that the judge should have taken judicial notice that
Bangladesh was a poorer country and the appellants would not have access to
a vaccination programme which, at the time of the judge's decision, had
recently begun in the UK, it was the first country to do so.

At para 57.15 Judge Shore said this:

"The issue of the COVID pandemic is a non-issue.  I make this finding
because there was no evidence before me that the appellants were at any
more risk in Bangladesh than they are in the United Kingdom.  There may be
restrictions on travel between the United Kingdom and Bangladesh from time
to time, but the respondent would not remove appellants if there was a risk
to them because of a pandemic".

Mr Fripp accepted that there was no evidence before the judge as to the
actual position in Bangladesh during the COVID-19 pandemic at the time of
the hearing.

Mr Bates submitted that without that evidence, including evidence of the
comparative position in the UK and Bangladesh for example in relation to
the R rate, the judge could not be criticised for failing to make any
finding on this issue and had correctly concluded that there was "no
evidence" about the risk to the appellants in Bangladesh as a result of
COVID-19.

I agree with Mr Bates' submission.  It was for the appellants to establish
their case including the circumstances in which they would find themselves
in Bangladesh during the COVID-19 pandemic.  Whilst it may have been
difficult to provide supporting evidence, that was their obligation: the
burden of proof was upon them to establish their case under para
276ADE(1)(vi).  The judge could only reach his findings on the basis of the
evidence made available to him.

I do not accept Mr Fripp's submission that the doctrine of 'judicial
notice' applied.  Judicial notice - as it might pertain in this appeal -
permits a judge to take into account, subject to the requirements of
fairness and disclosure to the parties, matters not put into evidence
because the facts are notorious, common knowledge (or arise from
specialised knowledge of the judge), and are not reasonably to be disputed.
 In Dosoruth v Mauritius [2004] UKPC 51,  Lord Hope declined to apply
judicial notice to the issue of whether a bank or District Council's
offices in Mauritius were open on a Saturday (at [17]):

         "... it was not open to the appellate court to deal with the appeal
         on the basis that it was within judicial knowledge that the Bank
         and the District Council's offices were not open that afternoon.
         This was because, as the Supreme Court has explained, such a fact
         is neither notorious nor beyond serious dispute nor of common
         knowledge in Mauritius."

It would not have been enough, in any event, to assume Bangladesh is a
poorer country and had not yet begun a vaccination programme, without also
having evidence (without which it would have been pure speculation) what
risk that created for the appellants and relevant to the "very significant
obstacles" issue.  I am satisfied that the test for taking judicial notice
cannot apply to evidence concerning the circumstances pertaining in
Bangladesh during the COVID-19 pandemic at the time of the hearing which,
as Mr Fripp effectively recognised in his submissions, was a matter on
which there were difficulties in obtaining evidence at the time.

The final point referred to by the judge in para 57.15 of his determination
relates to his statement that the respondent would not remove the
appellants if there was a risk to them because of the pandemic.  It may be
that the judge should not have assumed that the appellants would only be
removed to Bangladesh by the respondent when no risk existed rather than
focussing on the risk to the appellants if returned now (see, e.g. JI v
SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 279 at [97] and  HF(Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1276
at [97]).  The point, however, had no impact on the judge's reasoning since
there was no evidence as to what, if any, risk there would be to the
appellants on removal now.  This was not a case, therefore, where the judge
found that there would be a risk to the appellants on removal but that that
risk would not eventuate because the respondent would not remove them to
Bangladesh until any such risk was obviated.  The finding by the judge in
para 57.15 is legally unassailable that there was no evidence to establish
what, if any, risk there was to the appellants on return to Bangladesh as a
result of the COVID-19 crisis.

I, therefore, reject ground 2.

Ground 3

Mr Fripp submitted that the judge had erred in law in his assessment of the
evidence when finding that it was not established that the appellants were
estranged from their families in Bangladesh which was relevant to both para
276ADE(1)(vi) and to the proportionality of their removals under Art 8
outside the Rules.

At para 57.16, the judge said this:

"I find that the second appellant's assertion that they have nothing or no-
one to return to in Bangladesh because his family will not support them
because they disapprove of the marriage due to the first appellant's age
and disability has not met the standard of proof required.  He produced an
affidavit from his father about the situation [A42 - A43], but did not
mention the situation when he appeared before F-tTJ Talbot in 2017.  His
father's affidavit was dated a couple of months after that refusal."

Mr Fripp submitted that the affidavit of the second appellant's father did
not state when the estrangement had occurred.  It was wrong, therefore, for
the judge to take into account that it had not been mentioned at the
hearing before Judge Talbot on 3 April 2017.

That argument is simply not sustainable.  The document is, in fact, at
pages 35 - 36 of the appellants' bundle.  Whilst the affidavit does not
refer to when the estrangement occurred, it was dated 27 July 2017, shortly
after the hearing before Judge Talbot.  Whilst it is true that no date is
referred to, the affidavit relates historical events beginning with the
appellants' marriage which took place on 31 July 2014.  The affidavit
refers to the second appellant's family becoming aware of the marriage,
that marriage was not accepted "due to above stated age and physical
discrepancies".  It was, in my judgment, entirely reasonable for Judge
Shore to approach this evidence on the basis that these events had not
occurred within three months following the hearing before Judge Talbot in
April 2017.  Judge Shore was reasonably and rationally entitled to take
into account that, although these events predated the hearing before Judge
Talbot, the appellants had not raised them at that hearing.

It is also noteworthy that at para 60 of his decision, Judge Shore,
referring to the evidence in the affidavit from the first appellant's
mother (at pages 37 - 38 of the bundle) noted that she did not suggest that
the second appellant's family had abandoned them, or that she had done so
or that she could not accommodate them on return.

In my judgment, the judge was entitled to find, on the evidence before him,
that the appellants had not established that their families had abandoned
them or would not support them on return to Bangladesh.

One final point raised in ground 3, but on which Mr Fripp did not directly
address me in his oral submissions, is that the judge failed to apply the
structured approach to assessing the credibility of the evidence set out in
KB & AH (credibility-structured approach: Pakistan) [2017] UKUT 491 (IAC).
The suggestion made in para 16 of the grounds is that the judge failed to
take into account the plausibility, consistent with well-known features of
social attitudes in South-Asian culture, of the second appellant's family's
response when he married a woman six years his senior with serious health
difficulties was plausible.  The grounds do not identify what evidence the
judge failed to take into account in this regard which was consistent with
the claim that the second appellant's family were estranged from him
because of his choice of wife.  In the absence of any such evidence, the
judge cannot be said to have fallen into error in failing to take it into
account or assess, by reference to it, the plausibility of the appellants'
account on this issue.

For these reasons, I also reject ground 3.

Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
the appellants' appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR did not involve the making
of an error of law.  The FtT's decision, therefore, stands.

Accordingly, the appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                29 July 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Shore,  in  dismissing  the  appeals,  made  no  fee  award  and  that
decision, given that the appellants' appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  have
been dismissed, stands.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                29 July 2021

