
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/02562/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th August 2019                     |On 6th September 2019               |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            Mrs Must Fateha Begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Rahman (MRKS Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to a
Decision of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Groom, promulgated on 1st April
2019 after a hearing at Nottingham on 27th March 2019.

The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh who came to the UK on 2nd
December 2015 as the spouse of a British citizen and she made the
application, subject to the appeal in August 2018.  The refusal was dated
23rd January 2019.  The Appellant and her husband gave evidence before the
judge and their case was that her husband, a British citizen, needed her
care in the UK, could not go to Bangladesh and that also both she and he
provided care for his mother, another British citizen, in the UK.

The main ground of appeal pressed before me was the failure of the judge to
take into account such medical evidence as there was in relation to the
Sponsor's medical conditions.  When the matter first came before the Upper
Tribunal, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Phillips adjourned the matter and
gave permission for the Appellant to vary the grounds to the Upper Tribunal
to include medical evidence in relation to the various persons concerned.
That evidence was provided to Judge Phillips in a bundle.

It is that ground which is particularly relied upon today, namely that the
First-tier Tribunal had erred and made a procedural error in failing to
take into account medical evidence.  However, the only medical evidence
that was available for the First-tier Tribunal was a carrier bag full of
medication, which the judge declined to look at.  No proper medical
evidence was contained in the bundle nor offered on the day and there had
been no application prior to the hearing for an adjournment in order to
obtain medical evidence.  The judge was not in error in failing to look at
the medication because the judge is not a doctor or a chemist and looking
at bottles of medication would not have assisted her in identifying what
the nature or extent of the Sponsor's illnesses were.

The judge did note ,at paragraph 17 of the determination, that whilst the
Sponsor had medical issues, he worked three hours a day for two days a week
as a kitchen porter in a restaurant and she therefore did not accept that,
if he chose to return to Bangladesh with his wife, he would be unable to
find similar work there and that the health conditions that the Appellant's
husband had had not prevented him from either being able to work in the UK
or providing some level of care for his elderly mother.  The judge noted
that it was notable that the Appellant's husband claimed that, if his
mother was unwell, he stayed overnight with her, implying that his own
level of debility had not prevented him from looking after the needs of
another.

The judge went on to say that while it may be the case that the Appellant
and her husband may not choose to relocate to Bangladesh, there were no
insurmountable obstacles to that happening.  That again is referred to at
length in paragraph 22 considering private and family life, and again, of
course, it is a matter for the Sponsor whether in fact he returns to
Bangladesh with his wife or not.  One of the major factors which were
clearly factored into the judge's reasoning was the fact that the Appellant
had spent fifteen years as a single parent in Bangladesh while her husband
was in the UK, bringing up their six children with very little assistance
or support from him.

It cannot be said that a judge errs in failing to take into account
evidence that was not put before the judge and therefore I find the judge
in this case has made no error of law material or otherwise and the appeal
to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision


The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed [pic]                            Date 2 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed [pic]                            Date 2 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
