
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02197/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2021                               |On 16 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           Mr Paul Devonte Thomas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lay, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Reid ("the judge"), promulgated on 31 December 2019, by
which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the
Respondent, dated 16 January 2019, refusing a human rights claim.

The human rights claim had been based on Article 8 and the assertion that
the Appellant had established private and family life in the United Kingdom
and that in all the circumstances a removal to Jamaica would be
disproportionate.  In particular, it was said that the Appellant had
established family life with at least his mother in this country (she had
been here since 2002 and had indefinite leave to remain) and his private
life had evolved during the course of his residence in this country since
the age of 13.  His teenage years included a difficult time as a result of
which he was placed in foster care.  He had been receiving ongoing support
by the relevant local authority and their Leaving Care team.

The judge was faced with a difficult situation.  Neither the Respondent nor
the Appellant were represented at the hearing.  The judge heard from the
Appellant, his mother, his partner and his key worker, Mr Kevin Martin.
Having described the nature of the Appellant's case and directing herself
to a number of authorities on Article 8, the judge set out her core
findings and conclusions.  She found that the Appellant's grandmother, with
whom he had lived in Jamaica since his mother left in 2002, had died after
his arrival in the United Kingdom.  She accepted that the Appellant had
been taken into foster care and had been granted limited leave to remain
from May 2015 to May 2018.  She accepted that he continued to live in
supported accommodation and had the assistance of a key worker in respect
of learning independent living skills and other matters.  The Appellant had
not lived with his mother since 2015.  The judge accepted that the
Appellant had passed a number of GCSEs and was currently studying a Level 3
catering course.

The judge appeared to accept that the Appellant was in a relationship with
Miss Mayeye, a British citizen, but in the absence of cohabitation went on
to effectively disregard this in respect of the overall Article 8
assessment.

Acknowledging what are described as the "difficulties" in the Appellant's
time in the United Kingdom, in particular relating to his relationship with
his mother, the judge did accept that there was family life between the two
for the purposes of Article 8(1).  At paragraph 31 the judge acknowledged
the fact that the Appellant was receiving five hours a week help from Mr
Martin and that he was "less mature" than other young men of the same age.
The judge described the Appellant as not being "truly adult-adult".

In addressing the issue of whether the Appellant could return to Jamaica
the judge found that even if contact could be re-established with his
father there would be no effective support from that source.  There was a
finding that some family friends in Jamaica might have been able to offer
"some moral support".  Taking account of a number of factors, the judge
concluded that whilst a return to Jamaica would be "difficult" for the
Appellant, it would not meet the threshold of very significant obstacles to
(re)integration as set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
Rules.

In considering Article 8 outside the context of the relevant Rules the
judge first dealt with family life.  Weighing up relevant matters, she
concluded that the Respondent's decision was proportionate with respect to
the Appellant's relationship with his mother in the United Kingdom.

In terms of private life the judge took into account the importance of
maintaining immigration control and the fact that the Appellant's leave to
remain in the United Kingdom had always been precarious.  The fact that the
Appellant had been a minor during some of his residence did not of itself
render his case "exceptional".  The Appellant's reliance on public funds
was a relevant factor.

On the Appellant's side of the balance sheet the judge took into account
his relationship with his mother and other individuals and acknowledged the
"difficult time" experienced by the Appellant as a teenager.  Again, the
judge concluded that the Respondent's decision was proportionate.  The
appeal was accordingly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal were drafted by legal representatives who had
apparently come on record after the hearing before the judge.  These
grounds are brief and assert that the judge was wrong to have concluded
that the Appellant's status in the United Kingdom was precarious and that
she also erred in her consideration of whether there were "exceptional
circumstances" in the Article 8 claim as a whole.

Permission to appeal was granted ultimately by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
on 22 July 2020.  Her grant stated that it was "at least arguable that the
judge's consideration of the exceptional circumstances in this case was
insufficient."

At the remote error of law hearing Mr Lay provided a skeleton argument and
focussed his attention on the judge's assessment of all relevant factors
outside the context of the Rules.  In essence, he submitted as follows.
Whilst the judge might have been entitled to place little weight on the
private life by virtue of section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act, the same
mandatory consideration did not apply to the family life between the
Appellant and his mother.  The judge had failed to make clear the relevant
delineation and had not stated what, if any, weight had been placed on this
particular relationship.  Further, and more importantly, the judge had
failed to assess the relevance of the Appellant being in receipt of ongoing
assistance from the local authority Leaving Care team, in particular that
provided by Mr Martin.  This did not feature in the assessment of factors
on the Appellant's side of the balance sheet, with reference to paragraphs
42 and 47 of the decision.

Having heard and considered Mr Lay's argument, Mr Walker conceded that
there were material errors in the judge's decision with reference to the
issues raised on the Appellant's behalf in the grounds of appeal and as
expanded on in oral submissions.  He accepted that the judge had failed to
undertake a sufficiently complete assessment of all factors going to the
question of whether the Respondent's decision struck a fair balance
notwithstanding any inability of the Appellant to meet the Rules.

I regard Mr Walker's concession as having been properly made.  Whilst the
grounds of appeal were relatively limited in scope, Mr Lay's expansion
thereon has been legitimately pursued and has identified matters of
substance which the judge failed to engage with when setting out her
conclusions, particularly in paragraphs 40 to 48.

In light of Mr Walker's concession and my agreement with it I conclude that
the judge has materially erred in law and that her decision must be set
aside.

In terms of disposal, I have carefully considered whether this matter
should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal or retained in the Upper
Tribunal.  On an exceptional basis and with reference to paragraph 7.2 of
the Practice Statement I have decided that remittal is the appropriate
course of action.  Relatively extensive fact-finding will be required when
this case is looked at again.  Further, detailed consideration will need to
be given to the nature of the support provided by the local authority and,
importantly, the reasons therefor.

It appears (although I have not taken this into account when reaching my
error of law decision) that there is additional information from the local
authority relating to the Appellant which was not provided to the judge.
If it does indeed exist, it will need to be considered in due course.

In addition, further evidence which has been the subject of a Rule 15(2A)
application by the Appellant indicates that his partner gave birth to a
baby on 15 August 2020.  This development clearly constitutes a "new
matter" for the purposes of section 85 of the 2002 Act, as recognised by Mr
Lay at the hearing.  Having canvassed this issue with Mr Walker, he
formally gave consent on the Secretary of State's behalf that the new
matter could be considered by the First-tier Tribunal on remittal.  It will
of course be for the Appellant to reduce evidence on, for example,
paternity and other relevant matters.

I will not preserve any findings in respect of the remitted hearing.  I
appreciate that doing so can potentially cause difficulties and both
representatives were agreed that this appeal should be reheard afresh.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

       1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House
          hearing centre);




       2) The remitted appeal shall not be  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Reid;


       3) There are no preserved findings of fact;


       4)  The  Secretary  of  State  has  given  consent  for  the  matter
          concerning the birth of a child in 2020 to be considered  at  the
          remitted hearing and the First-tier Tribunal shall do so.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                              Date: 9 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

