
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02095/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2019                                 |On 21 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                         Mr Theivendram Santharatnam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, Counsel, instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 17 July 1940, appealed to the
First-tier Tribunal, on Article 8 human rights grounds, against the
decision of the respondent dated 6 December 2017 to refuse to grant him
entry clearance.  The appellant claims to be an adult dependent relative
and claimed that he satisfied the relevant requirements of Appendix FM and
FM-SE and in the alternative relied on Article 8 with reference to GEN.3.2
of Appendix FM on the basis that his circumstances were exceptional and the
refusal of entry clearance would result in unjustifiably harsh
consequences.

In a decision, promulgated on 23 January 2019, Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Hodgkinson dismissed the appellant's appeal.

The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds that:

Ground 1

The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to apply the correct approach in
adult dependent relative (ADR) cases as set out in the case of BRITCITS
[2017] EWCA Civ 368 (where the Court of Appeal considered that the question
of whether care can reasonably be provided (in accordance with paragraph E-
ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM) allows for arguments about the emotional needs of
the relative in question).

Ground 2

The judge failed to afford the sponsor an opportunity to respond to the
appellant's objections in relation to the report of Dr Pathinathar dated 27
November 2018 (appellant's bundle, part D, pages 3 to 8), which the judge
found not to be independent for the purposes of Appendix FM-SE, paragraph
35.

Ground 3

The First-tier Tribunal failed in the proportionality exercise to
adequately address Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

Relevant Provisions

Appendix FM

Section E-ECDR.2.1 provides including as follows:

    "Section E-ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult  dependent
    relative

    E-ECDR.1.1. To meet the eligibility requirements for entry clearance as
    an adult dependent relative all of the requirements  in  paragraphs  E-
    ECDR.2.1. to 3.2. must be met.

    Relationship requirements

    E-ECDR.2.1. The applicant must be the-

    (a)  parent aged 18 years or over;

    (b)  grandparent;

    (c)  brother or sister aged 18 years or over; or

    (d)  son or daughter aged 18 years or over of a person ("the  sponsor")
    who is in the UK.

    E-ECDR.2.2. If the applicant is the  sponsor's  parent  or  grandparent
    they must not be in a subsisting relationship  with  a  partner  unless
    that partner is  also  the  sponsor's  parent  or  grandparent  and  is
    applying for entry clearance at the same time as the applicant.

    E-ECDR.2.3. The sponsor must at the date of application be-

    (a)  aged 18 years or over; and

    (b)

         (i)  a British Citizen in the UK; or

         (ii) present and settled in the UK; or

         (iii)    in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection.

    E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and  their  partner  are
    the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as
    a result of age, illness or disability require long-term personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.

    E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and  their  partner  are
    the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
    unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to
    obtain the required level of care in the country where they are living,
    because-

    (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who can
    reasonably provide it; or

    (b)  it is not affordable."

Appendix FM-SE

5.   Adult dependent relatives


    "33. Evidence of the family relationship between the  applicant(s)  and
    the sponsor should take the form of birth or adoption certificates,  or
    other documentary evidence.

    34.  Evidence that, as a result of  age,  illness  or  disability,  the
    applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:

         (a)  Independent medical evidence that the applicant's physical  or
         mental condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks; and

         (b)  This must be from a doctor or other health professional.

    35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK,  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they are living  should  be
    from:

         (a)  a central or local health authority;

         (b)  a local authority; or

         (c)  a doctor or other health professional.

    36.  If the applicant's required  care  has  previously  been  provided
    through a private arrangement, the applicant must  provide  details  of
    that arrangement and why it is no longer available.

    37.  If the applicant's required level of care is not, or is no longer,
    affordable because payment previously made for arranging this  care  is
    no longer being made,  the  applicant  must  provide  records  of  that
    payment and an explanation of why  that  payment  cannot  continue.  If
    financial support has been provided  by  the  sponsor  or  other  close
    family in the UK, the applicant must provide an explanation of why this
    cannot continue or is no longer sufficient to enable the required level
    of care to be provided."

6.   Appendix FM - Exceptional Circumstances:

    "GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4),  where  an  application  for
    entry clearance or leave to enter or remain made under  this  Appendix,
    or an  application  for  leave  to  remain  which  has  otherwise  been
    considered  under  this  Appendix,  does   not   otherwise   meet   the
    requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of  the  Rules,  the  decision-
    maker must consider whether  the  circumstances  in  sub-paragraph  (2)
    apply.

    (2)  Where sub-paragraph (1) above  applies,  the  decision-maker  must
    consider, on the basis of the information provided  by  the  applicant,
    whether there are exceptional circumstances which would render  refusal
    of entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a breach of Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  applicant,  their
    partner, a relevant child or another  family  member  whose  Article  8
    rights it is evident from that  information  would  be  affected  by  a
    decision to refuse the application."

Error of Law Discussion

 1. In summary, Ms Shaw's submissions asserted that the judge materially
    erred and did not properly apply BRITCITS and had been distracted based
    on criticisms earlier in the decision, in relation to the second report
    of Dr Pathinathar.  It was her submission that the only reference to
    the appellant's psychological and emotional needs, was at [36] of the
    Decision and Reasons whereas the majority of the decision, in Ms Shaw's
    submissions, had focused on criticisms of Dr Pathinathar's report.

It was her further submission, and she relied on the grounds of appeal,
that reference to the psychological and emotional needs of the appellant
were made throughout, including the sponsor's written statement, the
reports and letters of Dr Balamuraly, the appellant's GP, dated 10 July
2017 and 23 October 2018, which said that the appellant has depression and
senile dementia and the need for family support being essential, and the
report of the social worker, P Sarmilan (although Ms Shaw conceded that the
judge at [25] and [26] gave little weight to the evidence of the social
worker and such has not been challenged).

In addition to the social worker's evidence, however, Ms Shaw relied on,
and the skeleton  argument referred to, the short report of Dr Pathinathar
at appellant's bundle, part D, pages 1 and 2, which had said that the
appellant has dementia and depression, and that the appellant needed, most
importantly, moral/psychological support from a close family member.

In respect of ground 2, it was Ms Shaw's submission, relying on the case of
O'Reilly v Mackman [1983] UKHL 1 (25 November 1983) that the decision
breached the appellant's fundamental right of fairness and that the sponsor
and the appellant's representative had no opportunity to address the
concerns in relation to Dr Pathinathar's long report and that such an
opportunity should have been afforded, particularly in the light of the
judge's positive credibility findings in relation to the sponsor's evidence

Ms Shaw did accept, however, that the requirement that the requisite
evidence in such cases be independent (paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE) is
set out in the Immigration Rules and that it is for the appellant to
discharge the burden of proof including to show that the report is
independent, and she accepted that the appellant's representatives would
have been aware of such a duty. Ms Shaw also accepted that there was no
challenge in the grounds of appeal to the judge's findings (at [40] and
[43]) that it had not been established that the requisite care was not
affordable and the judge had found that the appellant's evidence that he
could not afford a reasonable care home in Colombo was insufficient.

Ms Shaw confirmed that the main focus of her challenge was on the judge's
approach to the BRITCITS case law and the alleged lack of consideration of
the appellant's psychological and emotional needs.

In respect of ground 3, Ms Shaw, although she conceded that the judge had
indicated at paragraph 2 that it was Mr Fripp's position that Article 8
outside the Rules was not relied on as GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM (on the basis
that the appellant's circumstances were exceptional and the refusal of
entry clearance would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences) made
comprehensive provision for the appellant's circumstances; it was her
further submission that this concession was implicitly withdrawn where at
[8] the judge recorded that Mr Fripp needed further time to consider the
issue of whether the appellant's relationship and claimed contact with the
sponsor was properly established.

It was Ms Everett's submission that the judge was entitled to come to the
conclusions he did in respect of all the reports, including the report in
question from Dr Pathinathar, and that, in her submissions, there was not
undue emphasis on this report.  Ms Everett further submitted that the
sponsor's witness statement, which the judge reproduced in large part in
the Decision and Reasons at [9], is not geared towards the emotional and
psychological needs of the appellant, notwithstanding the references to the
appellant's upset and the impact on his mental health.  It was her global
submission that overall the emphasis was not on claimed psychological and
emotional needs.

At paragraph 57 of the sponsor's witness statement, reproduced at page 8 of
the Decision and Reasons, the sponsor indicated that he had considered
getting the appellant into a care home with good facilities in Colombo and
that: "In terms of quality and reputation, I could find only two kinds of
care homes in Colombo."  He went on to state that of those two kinds of
care home the second kind of care homes are the ones with "excellent
quality and reliability" but that they are very expensive.  It was also
indicated specifically at paragraph 58 of that witness statement, at page 9
of the Decision and Reasons, that the sponsor had enquired about the care
for his father's medical condition, including dementia and diabetes, and
had been given a specific quote for the treatment of those conditions.  It
is significant that there was no mention in his witness statement that such
good care homes could not care for the appellant's emotional and
psychological needs.  Clearly the sponsor's own evidence strongly suggests
that he himself accepts they do but that the prohibitive element was the
cost.

In respect of the Article 8 ground, Ms Everett's primary submission was
that she was not persuaded that it was a live issue and it was her view
that there was a concession at paragraph 2 and that this was not withdrawn,
and that Article 8 outside the immigration rules was no longer relied on.
In the alternative, it was her submission that it could not arguably have
been successful and that there was nothing exceptional in the appellant's
circumstances.

In reply, Ms Shaw highlighted paragraph 16 of the grounds for permission to
appeal in respect of claimed references to psychological and emotional
needs, including from the sponsor and the other witnesses (although she
accepted that the social worker's evidence had been found not to have
weight attached and did not add anything).  She also relied on the letters
of Dr Balamuraly and the other report of Dr Pathinathar.  Although Ms Shaw
made submissions that it might have been difficult for the representative
for the appellant to respond to the respondent's submissions in respect of
the report of Dr Pathinathar, she conceded that this may not be a good
submission and did not make it with what I find to be any force.  She
conceded that there was nothing produced, for example, by way of a witness
statement from Mr Fripp, to indicate any difficulties with dealing with
this part of the appellant's evidence in submissions.

Conclusions

Ground 1

I am of the view that Judge Hodgkinson, in a careful and well-reasoned
decision reached findings which were entirely open to him.  Ms Shaw
indicated that ground 1 was her strongest submission: that the judge failed
to deal with the emotional and psychological requirements, which, it is
confirmed, could be taken into account when considering E-ECDR.2.5 of
Appendix FM.  The judge had the relevant jurisprudence of BRITCITS (both
Court of Appeal cases in 2016 and 2017) before him as set out at ([11]) and
directed himself properly, including at [44], that the Rules had been held
to be lawful by the Court of Appeal in BRITCITS.  The Rules were clear and
specific in their requirements.  The fact that such (emotional and
psychological) requirements can be taken into account does not of course
mean that cases containing such elements must in every case be successful.

The judge was well aware of the appellant's difficulties which were not
limited to physical care needs, which is highlighted by the judge's
findings (as concluded at [42], that E-ECDR.2.4 is satisfied) that the
appellant required long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks and
the judge took into consideration in particular the evidence of Dr
Balamuraly and that this was reiterated in Dr Pathinathar's evidence.

The judge highlighted at [38] that there was no challenge to the general
medical expertise of Dr Pathinathar or Dr Balamuraly and the judge at [21]
had set out the evidence of Dr Balamuraly in relation to the appellant's
conditions, including his vulnerabilities, that he had mild depression and
had exhibited symptoms of senile dementia.

It is entirely evident therefore, that it was central in Judge Hodgkinson's
mind that the emotional and psychological difficulties experienced by the
appellant must be taken into consideration in reaching findings under
Appendix FM.  At [36] the judge considered that Dr Pathinathar had
indicated that the appellant would not receive any form of affectionate
care, which, Judge Hodgkinson noted, was a very generalised comment not
supported and that at paragraph 17 of that report Dr Pathinathar appeared
to contradict paragraph 16 by indicating that even if the standard of care
was adequate the sponsor could not afford it.

As indicated at paragraph 15 above, it was the sponsor's own evidence that
there are care homes that can meet the appellant's needs and this was not
qualified in his witness statement evidence, for example, by any indication
that the care homes would not meet with the appellant's emotional and
psychological needs.  In fact in my view, the opposite is the case, as at
paragraph 58 of the sponsor's witness statement, the sponsor specifically
outlined his father's needs, including his dementia, and had identified an
additional cost for such care.  As already noted the sponsor's main
substantive objection in respect of the care homes with 'excellent quality
and reliability' was cost.

Although emotional needs may well go beyond the mere fact of the dementia
diagnosis and the grounds for permission to appeal cite references in the
evidence to emotional and mental health issues, the judge had this in mind
throughout as demonstrated by his careful consideration of all the
evidence.  It has also not been the case of the appellant or the sponsor,
prior to the Upper Tribunal appeal, that even with proper care the only
place where the appellant's needs could be met would be with his family in
the UK.  Whilst undoubtedly that is their preference it was also the
sponsor's evidence on appeal that the better care homes were not
affordable, not that they were not suitable.

Whilst concerns were raised in relation to such care homes being Sinhalese
speakers rather than Tamil speakers the judge dealt rejected this account,
which was both in Dr Pathinathar's report and in the sponsor's witness
statement.

At [34] the judge noted the similarities between the sponsor's evidence and
Dr Pathinathar's evidence and found that there was no evidence, for
example, of any close examination by the sponsor as to whether there were
any care homes in Colombo which might offer Tamil-speaking services or that
the sponsor has made any enquiries of any such care homes.  The judge also
noted that the sponsor did not appear to have viewed any care homes in
Jaffna or Colombo.

The judge's consideration of the reports and other evidence provided
necessarily required and included consideration of the appellant's
emotional and psychological needs as they were 'part and parcel' of the
appellant's needs.  Additionally, at the conclusion of the decision, in
considering GEN 3.2, the judge took into account the appellant's 'evident
medical and living problems' which further demonstrates that the judge had
been considering integral emotional and psychological needs throughout.

 When considered fairly and holistically, the First-tier Tribunal, in
reaching its conclusions that E-ECDR.2.5 was not satisfied, took into
consideration all the aspects of the care that the appellant would require,
including emotional and psychological. Ground 1 does not disclose any error
of law.

Ground 2

In respect of ground 2, the appellant's criticisms of the judge's findings
in respect of Dr Pathinathar's report of 27 November 2018 are unfounded.
Ms Shaw went so far as to state that that these findings informed the
"bulk" of judge's decision and that the judge had been distracted by this.
That is not the case.  Although Ms Shaw was able to refer to paragraphs
which mentioned Dr Pathinathar's longer report, many of these paragraphs
were also in the context of discussions and findings in relation to the
sponsor's evidence as well as the findings on Dr Pathinathar, including at
[34] and [38] to [40].

I accept Ms Everett's submission that, in addition to the fact it is for
the appellant to discharge the burden of proof, including that the reports
were independent and the appellant would have been aware of this, the Home
Office Presenting Officer made submissions in this regard (as referred to
at [31]). There was nothing in the grounds of appeal or otherwise, for
example, a witness statement from Counsel, that might suggest that there
were issues in dealing with this evidence and the submissions made at the
hearing.

Although in the grounds for permission to appeal it was argued that these
arguments were made by Mr Williams in his closing statement and had not
been put to the sponsor in cross-examination, there was no request for an
adjournment or any suggestion that this submission could not be relied on
in light of the lack of cross-examination.  It was for the appellant to
discharge the burden of proof, including in respect of the independence of
the reports relied on.  The decision does not disclose an error of law
under ground 2.

It was not the case that the appellant did not have an opportunity to
address this concern.  The judge noted the concerns of Mr Williams, the
Presenting Officer and it was submitted that the report was not objective,
unbiased or independent, The judge found there to be merit in the argument
that the report was prepared at the request of the appellant/sponsor for
the evidence-based reasons that the judge gave.  As already noted, the
judge did not call into question the medical qualifications of Dr
Pathinathar but rather that this report as a whole did not constitute
independent evidence and presented as though it had been written to put
forward the appellant's case in the most favourable light.  Those findings
were open to Judge Hodgkinson for the sustainable reasons he gave, which do
not disclose any irrationality.

Although it was argued that the independence of the report was a key factor
in the dismissal of the appeal, in fact, as set out at [41], the
independence of the report was a secondary finding, as the judge found that
the appellant's case inevitably foundered on the affordability point (at
[40]), which has not been substantively challenged.  Any alleged error
therefore in the consideration of the independence of the requisite
reports, which has not been established in my view, could not in any event
be material.  Ground 2 is not made out.

Ground 3

In respect of ground 3, I agree with Ms Everett that the ground does not
withstand scrutiny, including given that it is recorded, by the First-tier
Tribunal judge, that Article 8 outside the Rules was not relied on and
there was no specific challenge to the judge's findings under GEN.3.2.
including that there were no exceptional and/or compassionate circumstances
which would warrant a grant of entry clearance.

I do not agree with Ms Shaw's interpretation of the judge's findings at [8]
as a withdrawal by Mr Fripp of his earlier concession.  This was not in the
appellant's grounds and the issue at [8] of the Decision and Reasons was in
relation to E-ECDR.2.1 and the first paragraph of the Entry Clearance
refusal where the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that there was
any evidence of contact between the appellant and the sponsor to
demonstrate an ongoing and genuine relationship.  The judge found in the
appellant's favour in this regard at [19].  The Judge was not, at [8]
asking Mr Fripp to address whether or not there was family life for the
purposes of Article 8 and it could not be said to be relevant to Mr Fripp's
earlier concession that Article 8 outside of the Rules was not relied on
(given the comprehensive provision of GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM).

In any event, given the judge's comprehensive findings, it is difficult to
see how a specific finding that family life was established would take the
appellant's case much further, given the judge's conclusions that, even
allowing for the appellant's evident medical and living problems, this did
not render the respondent's decision disproportionate, taking into account
all the factors.  It was further open to the judge to find, and indeed
incumbent on him to do so, that the fact that the appellant did not meet
the Rules was highly relevant to the assessment of proportionality ([44]).
Ground 3 is not made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error of law
and is preserved.

Anonymity Direction

None was sought and none is made.


Signed                                  Date:  15 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  15 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
