
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03805/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by remote hearing              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 18 June 2021                  |On 29 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                IZHAR UL HAQ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain of Counsel instructed on behalf of the
respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) (hereinafter referred to as  the
    "FtTJ") who allowed his appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 23 February 2021 to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the Appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

 3. Whilst the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant,  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The hearing took place on 18 June 2021, by  means  of  Microsoft  teams
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A  face
    to face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
    The advocates attended remotely via video as did the appellant and  his
    wife. No technical problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I
    am satisfied both advocates were able to make their respective cases by
    the chosen means. I am grateful to Mr Diwnycz and Mr Hussain for  their
    clear oral and written submissions.

The background:

 5. The appellant's immigration  history  is  summarised  in  the  decision
    letter and the papers before the tribunal. The appellant is  a  citizen
    of Pakistan who entered the UK on 25 October 2008 with entry  clearance
    as a student until 31 December 2009.

 6. On 16 December 2009 he made an in time application for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 general student which was granted on 23 June 2010  until  6
    January 2011.

 7. On 20 December 2010 he made an in time application for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 general student which was granted on 20 January 2011  until
    23 May 2013.

 8. On 10 July 2012 curtailment consideration was raised and his leave  was
    curtailed from 8 September 2012 when the sponsor licence was revoked.

 9. On 8 September 2012 he made an in time application for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 general student which has refused on 10 December  2012  and
    made an out of time appeal on 20 July 2013. This was  dismissed  on  17
    December and he was declared appeal rights exhausted on 6 January 2014.

10. On 4 December 2013 he made an application for leave to remain as a Tier
    4 general student which was  granted  on  31  December  2013  until  12
    October 2015.

11. On 26 July 2014 he left the UK whilst holding valid leave and return to
    Pakistan. On 5 January 2015 curtailment consideration was  raised;  his
    leave is a Tier 4 student was set to be curtailed from 30 May 2015 with
    the sponsor licence revoked.

12. On 11 September 2014 he arrived in the UK and claimed asylum which  was
    refused on 23 January 2015. He appealed and this was allowed on 19 June
    2015. On 5 October 2015 he was granted  humanitarian  leave  to  remain
    until 4 October 2020.

13. On 19 April 2019 he made an application for indefinite leave to  remain
    based on long residence grounds.

14. In a letter dated 7 February 2020 the respondent informed the appellant
    that she was minded to refuse his application on the grounds that false
    representations had been made. The purpose of the letter  was  to  tell
    him why Secretary of State believed false representations had been made
    and to give him an opportunity to respond.

15. The appellant did respond to that letter and his replies were  set  out
    in the decision at page 3. The appellant stated that the respondent had
    assumed that he had acted dishonestly due to the act of others and that
    no voice recordings or other evidence been provided to show that he did
    not take part in the test. He stated he had no need to elect a proxy to
    sit the test as he had good knowledge in English prior to  sitting  the
    test as evidenced by the IELTS with an overall score of 5.0 and that on
    29 October 2013 he achieved a first-class  pass  in  level  1  reading,
    writing and listening in on 30 November 2013 he achieved a  first-class
    pass in level I speaking city and Guilds and he had sat these tests  on
    9 October 2013 which was less than a year after he sat the ETS tests.

16. The Respondent refused the application on 19 April 2019.  Consideration
    was given to his application for long residence and reference was  made
    to the letter sent to him on the 7 February 2020. It set  out  that  in
    February 2014 ETS was suspended as a provider of English language  test
    for immigration purposes and that having analysed their test data  they
    determined using voice recognition analysis that TOEIC  tests  at  some
    test centres were taken by proxy sitters and that they had declared the
    test to be "invalid" and the scores cancelled.  On  the  basis  of  the
    information provided by  ETS  the  respondent  set  out  that  she  was
    satisfied that the certificate was fraudulently obtained  and  that  he
    had used deception in the application on the 8 September 2012.

17. The respondent therefore was satisfied that his presence in the UK  was
    not  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  his  conduct  made   it
    undesirable to allow him to remain  in  the  UK.  The  application  was
    therefore refused under paragraph 276B(ii)(c) of the immigration  rules
    and also under paragraph 322(2).

18. By reference to his application for indefinite leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of long residence the respondent  refused  it  under  paragraph
    276B (i)(a) because there was a gap in his  continuous  leave  from  16
    January 2013 until 31 December 2013 when he was next granted  leave  to
    remain in that while he appealed against the refusal dated 10  December
    2012, the refusal was not received until 30 July 2013 which is  out  of
    time. Therefore the appellant could not meet the requirements for  long
    residence under paragraph 276D with reference  to  paragraph276B(ii)(c)
    and 276B(iii).

19. It was set out that the respondent considered that  the  appellant  had
    acted dishonestly because for the purposes of his application  dated  8
    September 2012 for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  general  student,  he
    submitted a TOEIC certificate which was taken at Elizabeth  College  on
    25 July 2012 and that ETS had declared the certificate as invalid.

20. The respondent considered the application under the private life  rules
    under paragraph 276ADE but that his application fell for refusal  under
    paragraph R-LTRP 1.1(d) (i) because he did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements under S-LTR 1.6 and 4.2 of the Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had, in an earlier application  for  leave  to
    remain as a student, submitted an  English  language  test  certificate
    from ETS which was false. The Respondent referred  to  the  Appellant's
    test scores having been cancelled by ETS and  in  reliance  on  generic
    witness evidence about such fraudulent tests and was satisfied that the
    Appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained and that he had  used
    deception in his application on the 8 September 2012.

21. Separately, the Respondent considered the Appellant's circumstances  on
    the basis of his  private  life  established  in  United  Kingdom.  The
    application  was  refused  on  private  life  grounds  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules on the same suitability  grounds  as
    above and on eligibility grounds that there were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his return to  Pakistan  where  he  has  resided  for  the
    majority of his life and where  he  has  retained  knowledge  of  life,
    language and culture. There were no exceptional circumstances found  to
    warrant a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

22. The Appellant appealed that decision and on the 12 February his  appeal
    was heard by the First-tier Tribunal. In a determination promulgated on
    the 23 February 2021 the judge  allowed  his  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

23. In summary, the FtTJ considered the evidence  advanced  on  behalf  the
    respondent to demonstrate that the appellant had use deception, but for
    the reasons set out at paragraph [63] -[68] reached the conclusion that
    the respondent had discharged the evidential burden on her by reference
    to the generic evidence but having considered the  specific  individual
    evidence  that  related  to  this  appellant  and  the  evidence  taken
    together, the FtTJ reached the conclusion that the respondent  had  not
    discharged the evidential burden  to  demonstrate  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities  that  the  appellant  had  used  deception  in  the  way
    asserted. The  FtTJ  therefore  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

24. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and on
    the 16 March 2021 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parks  granted  permission
    for the following reasons:

         "The judge appears to have given insufficient weight to the generic
         evidence relied on by the Home  Office  which  does  discharge  the
         initial burden and then place the onus on the  secretary  of  state
         when the burden shifted to the appellant. The appellant's test  was
         invalid which  meant  the  different  procedures  followed.  It  is
         arguable that the judge erred in the approach to the  evidence  was
         actually presented."

The grounds:

25. Mr Diwncyz relied upon the written grounds. No  oral  submissions  were
    made in support of the application. In  those  written  grounds  it  is
    submitted  that  in  allowing  the  appeal  the  judge  erred  in   his
    consideration of the evidence before him for 3 reasons.

26. Firstly, the judge was wrong to criticise the SSHD and the  failure  to
    produce a recording to the  appellant.  It  is  for  the  appellant  to
    request that from ETS and therefore his reasoning was flawed.

27. Secondly it is submitted that the  FtTJ  was  wrong  to  criticise  the
    respondent failing to call the appellant to undertake an interview  and
    that  when  results  are  cancelled  on   what  was  considered  to  be
    conclusive evidence of fraud by ETS, there is no requirement  for  such
    an interview. Thus it was  submitted  it  was  unclear  why  the  judge
    concluded that the evidence was weakened by the failure to allow him to
    have an interview. It is submitted that this reduced  the  weight  that
    would have been given to the respondent's case and caused his reasoning
    to be further flawed.

28. The third ground asserts that the judge based his reasoning in part  on
    conjecture and supposition and highlights paragraph 34 where the  judge
    made reference  to  the  college's  conduct  and  that  they  may  have
    substituted the appellant's voice recording for their own  benefit.  It
    is submitted that that reasoning "borders on the perverse".

29. Overall it is submitted that the FtTJ's reasoning is so unreliable that
    the determination as a whole is infected and should be set aside.

30. Mr Hussain on behalf of the appellant relied upon the rule 24  response
    that was filed on behalf of the appellant dated 1 June  2021.  In  that
    response it is submitted that the respondent is simply seeking  to  re-
    argue the points that were raised before the FtT  and  were  rationally
    and adequately addressed in the determination at [23].

31. It is further submitted that the grounds are disingenuous  and  are  no
    more than an attempt to reargue the points already made  and  that  the
    judge undertook a careful evaluative assessment of all the evidence and
    properly directed himself in law. It is submitted that the judge  found
    in the appellant's favour and rejected the respondent's arguments.  The
    written submissions  highlight  that  the  grounds  fail  to  make  any
    reference to the "innocent explanation" that  the  appellant  gave  and
    which the judge accepted.

32. Finally it is submitted that the Upper Tribunal should  be  mindful  of
    the Court of Appeal's decision in KB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ
    1385 where the court should be  reluctant  to  find  an  error  of  law
    "simply because it does not agree with it,  or  because  it  thinks  it
    could make a better one."

33. In his oral submissions Mr Hussain submitted that  the  grounds  really
    challenge the weight given to the evidence and that  at  paragraph  23,
    25, 26, 27,28 the judge assessed the appellant's oral evidence  and  at
    paragraph 30 was entitled to conclude that there had been  no  specific
    deception put to the appellant in cross examination. He submitted  that
    the judge had undertaken a well -reasoned assessment of the appellant's
    credibility.

34. As to the legal assessment of the issues, at  paragraph  23  the  judge
    accepted that the initial burden on the respondent had  been  satisfied
    and thereafter set out the correct legal test which had  to  apply  and
    that in reality the grounds were an attempt to reargue the case  before
    the upper Tribunal.

35. When asked to deal with the matters in the grounds and by reference  to
    paragraph 34, Mr Hussain submitted  that  whilst  the  judge  had  made
    reference to other issues they did not demonstrate that the  judge  had
    failed to consider the central issues of the case and those were firmly
    addressed in his decision. Thus any complaints made in the grounds  are
    not material to the outcome. Even if it could be  said  there  was  any
    conjecture at paragraph 33 or at paragraph 34 they  did  not  undermine
    any other findings that were made. At paragraph 37 there  was  a  clear
    analysis of the appellant's oral testimony  and  cross-examination  and
    therefore the decision was based on the evidence before the FtTJ.

36. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

Decision on error of law:

37. I remind myself that the  question  whether  the  decision  contains  a
    material error of law is not whether another Judge could  have  reached
    the opposite conclusion but whether this Judge reached a conclusion  by
    appropriately directing himself as to the relevant  law  and  assessing
    the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

38. I have carefully considered the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent. The issue that forms the context of this appeal is that the
    respondent considered that the appellant had acted dishonestly  because
    for the purposes of his application dated 8 September 2012 for leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 general student he  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate
    which was taken at Elizabeth College on 25 July 2012 and that  ETS  had
    declared the certificate as invalid.

39. I have given careful consideration to  the  overall  decision  of  FtTJ
    Hillis. It has not been argued by respondent that the judge  failed  to
    apply  the  correct  approach  in  determining  the  issue  of  whether
    deception had been used or that the FtTJ did not adequately address the
    "innocent explanation" given by the appellant.

40. In the decision of SM & Qadir [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167  the  three-stage
    approach was summarised. That involves considering, first, whether  the
    Secretary of State has met the burden on her  of  identifying  evidence
    that the TOEIC certificate was obtained by  deception;  second  whether
    the claimant satisfies the evidential  burden  on  her  of  raising  an
    innocent explanation for the suggested deception;  and  third,  if  so,
    whether the Secretary of State can meet the legal burden of showing, on
    the balance of probabilities, that deception in fact took place.

41. I do not find that there is any error in the judge's assessment of  the
    evidence. It is plain from reading the decision that the judge properly
    reached  the  conclusion  at  paragraph  23  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the initial evidential burden and that this was accepted  on
    behalf of the appellant.

42.  It is also plain from reading the evidence referred to in the decision
    that  the  appellant  had  offered  an  innocent   explanation.   After
    undertaking an assessment of that evidence, the FtTJ accepted it. I can
    see no error in the FtTJ's factual assessment. As set out at [24 -  26]
    of the FtTJ's decision, the judge recorded the evidence  given  by  the
    appellant  concerning  the  surrounding  circumstances  of   the   test
    including the cross examination undertaken by the  presenting  officer.
    At [24] the judge recorded that during cross-examination the  appellant
    "gave a detailed account of the modes of transport  and  the  route  to
    travel to the test centre personally." The judge set out  the  evidence
    that was given, that he had taken his passport with him and produced it
    to the test centre who checked his details  before  permitting  him  to
    take the test. He gave evidence as to why  he  had  gone  to  Elizabeth
    College (at [24]) and  at  [25]  the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning how the test was undertaken. The judge  noted  that
    he was not asked in cross-examination what the test questions were what
    the test involved. At [26] the judge records the  appellant's  evidence
    as to his efforts to contact  the  college  to  obtain  evidence  after
    receiving the refusal decision in February 2020 but that it had  closed
    down. Further attempts to obtain information about his test results was
    undertaken with the company's office in France and Holland but  he  was
    advised they had no information about the college. The judge  concluded
    "I conclude that this is a credible  explanation  taking  into  account
    that the Elizabeth College was removed from the  approved  list  around
    2014 as a result of the ETS report." Whilst the appellant not contacted
    ETS, the judge stated "there is no evidence before me that ETS are open
    to answering questions asked of them by people whose  tests  they  have
    concluded were taken by proxy test takers." Consequently the judge  set
    out his conclusion on this issue "I accept that the appellant generally
    believed his first point of enquiry was with Elizabeth College and that
    was a reasonable stance for him to take."

43. The FtTJ had the opportunity to see and hear the  appellant  give  oral
    evidence. As  he  stated  at  [27]  "the  appellant  answered  all  the
    questions asked of  him  without  hesitation  or  prevarication  and  I
    concluded that he was credible and reliable in his account in interview
    and oral testimony." After undertaking an  overall  assessment  of  the
    evidence, the FtTJ concluded that the appellant "is a credible  witness
    who gave reliable evidence that he was totally unaware of any deception
    ..."( at [36]).

44. In Majumder and Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 at paragraph  18  the
    court stated:

         "... in  considering  an  allegation  of  dishonesty  the  relevant
         factors include the following: what the person accused had to  gain
         from being dishonest; what he had to lose; what is known about  his
         character; the culture environment in which he  operated;  how  the
         individual accused of dishonesty performed under cross examination,
         and within the  tribunal's  assessment  of  that  person's  English
         language proficiency is commensurate with his or her TOEIC  scores;
         and whether his or her academic achievements are such that  it  was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."

45. Those were factors that the FtTJ had regard to set  out  above  and  at
    [31] where he concluded that the fact that the appellant and studied in
    English in the UK and passed examinations set out  in  the  certificate
    submitted and in English prior to  coming  to  the  UK  and  after  the
    disputed test certificate in  July  2012  was  "significant  supporting
    evidence of the appellant's evidence that he was competent  in  English
    and did  not  need  the  use  of  a  proxy".  In  reaching  an  overall
    conclusion, the judge was entitled to take into account the  appellants
    English language ability.

46. The FtTJ therefore concluded from the evidence that "the appellant  has
    provided an innocent explanation of his having taken the disputed  test
    personally and not by way of a proxy test taker."

47. Having reached those  factual  findings,  the  judge  was  required  to
    consider the evidence as a whole to  consider  whether  the  respondent
    discharged the burden on him to demonstrate that  deception  had  taken
    place on the  balance  of  probabilities.  It  is  plain  from  reading
    paragraph [28] that the FtTJ was aware of the correct  legal  test  and
    that he made a self-direction that "the  burden  of  proof  in  proving
    deception is on the respondent show, on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that the appellant was aware  that  the  test  certificate  issued  was
    fraudulent and that he deceived the Home Office into granting his leave
    to remain in his application dated 8 September  2012."  I  can  see  no
    error of law in the FtTJ's self-direction set out at [23] or at [28].

48. Grounds 1 and 2 assert that the judge erred in his consideration of the
    evidence based on 2 matters. Firstly  that  the  judge  criticised  the
    respondent on the failure to produce the recording of the appellant and
    secondly that the judge criticised the respondent for failing  to  call
    the appellant for interview. It is submitted that in  both  cases,  the
    judge reduced  the  weight  that  should  have  been  afforded  to  the
    respondent's case and caused his reasoning to be flawed.

49. It is correct that the judge did observe at  [32]  that  there  was  no
    evidence to show  that  the  respondent  had  released  the  recording.
    However it is  not  clear  whether  the  judge  was  referring  to  the
    recording being released to the appellant by the Secretary of State  or
    that his observation was made on the basis that there was  no  evidence
    that the recording of this appellant had been sent to  Prof  French  to
    analyse before refusing the application. If the judge was referring  to
    the latter failure, it is common ground that Prof French would not have
    had the individual recording of this appellant. In any event I  do  not
    find that that observation at [32]  carried  any  real  weight  in  the
    FtTJ's decision. Nor do I consider that the FtTJ's observation that the
    appellant was never invited to an interview at [33] carried any  weight
    in his decision.

50. Furthermore, when reading paragraph [33] the reference  made  to  there
    being no interview  was  followed  by  the  FtTJ's  assessment  of  the
    evidence obtained from ETS where the judge  stated that  the  documents
    produced by ETS did no more than show that the  recording  provided  by
    Elizabeth College in respect of the appellant speaking test  alone  did
    not contain the voice of the appellant was of someone else and that "it
    provides no reliable and persuasive evidence that the appellant did not
    take the test as described by him in his oral testimony...". The  judge
    does not seek to link the failure to interview the appellant  with  his
    assessment  of  the  documents  produced  by  ETS  at  paragraph  [33].
    Consequently I am not satisfied that those grounds demonstrate that the
    FtTJ's assessment of the evidence was flawed and the  grounds  fail  to
    take into account the other factual findings  made  in  favour  of  the
    appellant and the analysis of the evidence of the respondent.

51. Turning to the last ground, it is submitted on behalf of the respondent
    that at paragraph 34 the judge based his reasoning on  "conjecture  and
    supposition" and that this was reasoning which bordered on the perverse
    and thus his reasoning was so unreliable that the  determination  as  a
    whole should be set aside.

52. At paragraph 34 the FtTJ stated as follows:

         "I conclude that the respondent has not shown  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that Elizabeth College sent  the  appellant's  actual
         test recording or, alternately, has not simply substituted all  the
         speaking tests taken with a single recording by proxy  examinee  of
         the standard test texts  and  picture  examinees  are  required  to
         describe to enable them to charge all their clients for their  test
         certificates irrespective of whether or not they passed  the  test.
         Such a course by the college would circumvent the need to mark each
         test and the costs involved in that process."

53. To consider that ground, it is important to consider paragraph [34]  in
    the context of the relevant legal authorities. At  paragraphs  [2]  and
    [21 the FtTJ made reference  to  the  decision  of  SM  and  Qadir  and
    reference is made to the general authorities in this area of law.

54. In the  decision  of  SM  and  Qadir,  the  panel  concluded  that  the
    respondent's generic evidence "suffices  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden" of proving that the TOIEC certificates "had  been  procured  by
    dishonesty".  The  panel  in  that  case  recognised  that  there  were
    "multiple frailties for which this generic evidence was  considered  to
    suffer."

55. The decision in MA (ETS-TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450  ("MA"),  was  a
    statutory appeal and the presidential panel  reconsidered  the  generic
    evidence in light of the expert evidence which it heard from 3 experts.
    Evidence before the Upper Tribunal was more extensive than it had heard
    before in SM and Qadir. In particular,  the  ETS  voice  files  of  the
    appellant had been obtained and it was agreed that the  voice  was  not
    his. However, he challenged whether the file was indeed a recording  of
    the test he had  taken  and  there  was  evidence  from  three  experts
    exploring the issues of how the wrong file may have been supplied.

56. In that case the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 15 set out  matters  about
    which the joint  experts  had  expressed  concern.  In  particular  the
    tribunal referred at paragraph 15 (x) to a "distinct  lack  of  clarity
    relating to the processes described by ETS in (xi) above".

57. Also at paragraph 15 the tribunal expressed disquiet as to the evidence
    linking a particular set of records to a particular candidate. In short
    it seems procedures were lax  and  non-existent.  Rather  (15(xi),  the
    integrity of the  system  depended  heavily  on  the  "reliability  and
    probity of test centre staff".

58. Although not part  of  the  guidance  for  which  MA  is  reported,  at
    paragraph 47 the Upper Tribunal acknowledged that there were  "enduring
    unanswered questions and uncertainties relating in  particular  to  the
    systems processes and procedures concerning TOEIC testing  and  in  the
    subsequent allocation of scores in the later conduct and activities  of
    ETS." Accordingly, much still turned on the Upper Tribunal's assessment
    of the appellant's oral evidence. They  found  his  evidence  to  be  a
    fabrication. It was emphasised that "the question of whether  a  person
    is engaged in fraud in procuring a TOEIC in this  language  proficiency
    qualification will invariably be intrinsically fact sensitive."

59. Based on those authorities, the criticisms made by the FtTJ set out  at
    [33] and [34] cannot be described as "perverse" as  the  respondent'  s
    grounds assert. It was open to the FtTJ to take into account  that  the
    documents produced by ETS provided  no  "reliable  persuasive  evidence
    that the appellant did not take the test as described by him  his  oral
    testimony and that the test centre did  not  substitute  a  proxy  test
    recording without his knowledge irrespective  of  whether  he  actually
    passed the test or not.".

60. Where at [33] the FtTJ stated "there is no evidence  of  continuity  of
    storage and handling of the recording analysed by ETS" that  conclusion
    was based on the earlier assessment of the ETS evidence set out by  the
    panel in MA which I  have  summarised  above.  I  satisfied  that  when
    reading the decision as a whole the reasoning of  the  FtTJ  could  not
    properly be described as "bordering on the perverse" nor did he rely on
    any conjecture or supposition as asserted  and  was  entitled  to  have
    regard to the lack of evidence and the "frailties"  identified  in  the
    ETS system as evidenced above.

61. As with any judicial decision, the decision of this FtTJ should be read
    as a whole. Ground 3  fails to take into account the assessment made by
    the judge as a whole, and pays no regard to  the  other  parts  of  the
    FtTJ's  reasoning  which  led  to  his  overall  conclusion  that   the
    respondent had not discharged the burden of proof  that  the  appellant
    was complicit in any deception perpetrated against the Home Office  (as
    set out at [36]).

62. In this context I remind myself of the words of Lord Justice  Underhill
    in Ahsan (as cited) at paragraph 33 and that although  it  seems  clear
    that deception took place on a wide scale it does not follow that every
    person who took the TOEIC test was engaging in deception.

63. Having considered the evidence that was before the Tribunal and in  the
    light of the specific grounds of challenge made,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that the judge erred in law in reaching his decision.

64. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
    that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error  on  a
    point of law. I therefore dismiss the appeal. The decision of the  FtTJ
    shall stand.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated    21 June 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

