
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/03305/2019
                                                HU/03298/2019, HU/03302/2019
                                               HU/03303/2019 & HU/03304/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Microsoft Teams             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 July 2021                      |On 14 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Amman
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Al - Z and 4 children
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:         Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by D Duheric &
Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellants are a mother and 4  children,  all  citizens  of  Syria,
    living in Jordan.


 3. This decision should be read with:

      i) The ECO's decisions dated 15 January 2019.

     ii) My decision on error of law, and accompanying directions,  dated  6
         August and issued 3 September 2020.

    iii) Updating statement by the sponsor, dated 23 July 2021.

     iv) The skeleton argument for the  appellants,  filed  in  response  to
         directions.

 4. The respondent  did  not  file  a  skeleton  argument  in  response  to
    directions.  No criticism attaches to Ms Aboni, who was  only  recently
    allocated the case.

 5. The primary facts of the case are in no significant dispute.  Ms  Aboni
    did not propose to cross-examine the sponsor, so his  latest  statement
    was taken as adopted in evidence, with no further questions.

 6. The appellants  are  a  mother,  two  adult  children,  and  two  minor
    children.  They are all recognised as refugees in Jordan.  At the  time
    of the FtT hearing they were living apart from the husband  and  father
    of the family, but he has since re-joined them.

 7. The sponsor is the brother of the first appellant.  He is recognised as
    a refugee in the UK, and lives here their mother, along with  his  wife
    and their son. Before leaving Syria, the appellants lived next door, in
    a family compound.

 8. The first  appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  large  further  extended
    families, including sisters  in  Kuwait  and  in  Abu  Dhabi,  and  two
    brothers in the Netherlands.

 9. (I note that the appellants' skeleton argument refers  to  them  having
    "five nephews / cousins and the extended families of those nephews  and
    cousins" in the UK.   That  appears  to  go  beyond  what  is  recorded
    elsewhere; but  the  case  does  not  turn  on  the  exact  number  and
    whereabouts of relatives.)

10. The points of reference in the immigration rules  are  those  providing
    for refugee family reunion, for extended family reunion, and for  adult
    dependent relatives.  The appellants accept that they cannot  meet  any
    of those requirements.

11. The appellants contend that they have family life with the sponsor  and
    his family for article 8 purposes.  Their skeleton argument then relies
    upon  the  respondent's  Asylum  Policy  Instruction,  Family  Reunion,
    version  4.0,  published  on  9  January  2020,  under   the   heading,
    "Exceptional circumstances or compassionate factors".  The  policy  has
    been amended in course of these proceedings, but Ms Aboni advised  that
    there is no material difference.  The policy  identifies  a  breach  of
    article 8 where there would be "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
    the applicant or their family".  The appellants' skeleton argument says
    that many of the examples given apply in this case,  and  that  adverse
    factors in terms of section 117B of the 2002 Act are outweighed.

12. Mrs Aboni made the first submission.  She said that family life  within
    the meaning of article 8 was not established, as  nothing  went  beyond
    "normal emotional ties", and that in any event the circumstances of the
    appellants in Jordan did not meet  the  tests  above.   Employment  was
    allowed to the adult family members.  Medical care and education,  even
    if not to the same standard as in the UK, were provided.  It was in the
    best interests of the minor children to remain  in  family  with  their
    parents.  Now that the family had reunited in Jordan, it  would  be  an
    interference with family life for the appellants  to  remove  with  the
    husband and father remaining behind.

13. Mr Caskie said that it was extraordinary to suggest  that  the  appeals
    should be refused for  breaching  family  life  with  the  husband  and
    father; and as the submission accepted that family life  existed  among
    them, he was bound to  follow,  and  the  SSHD  would  be  barred  from
    contending that family life did not exist. The terms of the Home Office
    policy were a misleading starting point,  as  the  question  is  simply
    whether the ECO's decisions are a  disproportionate  interference  with
    family life.  The position of the youngest child, who is autistic,  was
    key.  The starting point was that family life existed before the  civil
    war among all members of the family in 3 houses in a  shared  compound.
    The idea that the children did not have family life with their cousins,
    or the first appellant with her mother, was simply wrong.  Two  spouses
    and their children could not fall within the policy, but they did  fall
    within section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act.   Jordan  was  not  a  rich
    country and had 1.3 million refugees, 14% of the population, so it  was
    incorrect to say that an autistic child could access what was required.
     As to employment of the adults, apart from the number of refugees,  it
    was likely that opportunities were limited by networks of nepotism  and
    patronage.  Points weighing heavily in favour of  the  appellants  were
    the best interests of the children,  and  the  reunion  of  an  elderly
    mother  and  grandmother  with  her  family.   Although   the   Refugee
    Convention does not make detailed provision for family reunion, article
    8 does, so an end should now be put to the separation of  this  family,
    brought about by their flight from persecution.

14. Mrs Aboni had nothing to add in reply.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. I do not take it as adverse to the appellants' case that their entry to
    the UK would interfere with family life with the husband and father who
    has re-joined them in Jordan.  Beyond  that,  I  generally  prefer  the
    submissions for the SSHD.

17. Parties were not at odds on the meaning of "family life" in article  8.
     The matter is helpfully set out in  MacDonald's  Immigration  Law  and
    Practice, 10th ed, June 2021, at [7.37]:


      The existence or non-existence of 'family life' within the meaning  of
      Article 8(1) is 'essentially a question of fact depending on the  real
      existence in practice of close personal ties'[pic]. The nuclear family
      relationships of spouses, and of parents and minor children,  are  the
      paradigm cases of family life. Article 8(1)  may  protect  the  family
      life arising from a lawful and genuine marriage[pic], the family  life
      between a natural father  and  his  child[pic],  or  the  family  life
      arising from a lawful adoption[pic], even though family life  has  not
      yet been fully established. 'Family life' is not  confined  solely  to
      marriage-based relationships and may encompass other de facto  'family
      ties' where parties are living together outside marriage. Although, as
      a rule, cohabitation may be a requirement for the existence of  family
      life between an unmarried couple, exceptionally other factors may also
      serve to demonstrate that a relationship has sufficient  constancy  to
      create  de  facto  'family  ties'[pic].  When   deciding   whether   a
      relationship of an unmarried couple can be said to amount  to  'family
      life', a number of factors may  be  relevant,  including  whether  the
      couple live together, the length of  their  relationship  and  whether
      they have demonstrated  their  commitment  to  each  other  by  having
      children together or by any other means. Family life embraces the  tie
      between  a  parent  and  their  minor  child,  even  if  there  is  no
      cohabitation[pic]. From the moment of a  child's  birth  there  exists
      between the child and their parents a bond amounting to  family  life,
      which  subsequent  events   cannot   break   except   in   exceptional
      circumstances[pic]. An adoption may give  rise  to  family  life  even
      where it does not meet  the  requirements  of  relevant  international
      instruments.  The  significance  of  the  failure   to   satisfy   the
      requirements of relevant international instruments will vary from case
      to case[pic]. Family life is not limited to the relationships  between
      members of the nuclear family.  Relations  between  siblings,  between
      grandparents and grandchildren, and uncle  and  nephew[pic] are,  for
      example, potentially within the scope of 'family life',  depending  on
      the strength  of  the  emotional  ties.  Relationships  between  adult
      siblings or adult children and their parents or other adult  relatives
      do not ordinarily amount to family life unless  there  are  additional
      elements of dependency going beyond normal family ties[pic].  However,
      it has been recognised  by  the  courts  that  family  life  does  not
      necessarily end once a child attains their  majority,  and  that  some
      young  adults  continue  living  with   their   parents   into   their
      twenties[pic], and the case law is replete  with  examples  of  family
      life being found to exist between adults and their parents,  siblings,
      children and/or other adult relatives. Ultimately,  the  existence  or
      non-existence of family life is a question of fact.  Family  life  can
      also exist outside the confines of blood, adoption and  marriage.  For
      example, the relationship of foster carer and foster  child  may  give
      rise to family life[pic], and this may continue even after  the  child
      attains their majority. The tie  between  a  disabled  adult  and  his
      friend, who was living with him and caring for him full-time, has also
      been held to amount to family life[pic]. Article 8 protects  not  only
      currently existing family life but also  the  development  of  a  real
      family life in the future.[pic].

18. Close personal ties are essential to engage  article  8;  but  not  all
    close ties create a relationship of family life.  Outside  first-degree
    relationships, something beyond the norm is required.

19. Although there may be instances of several connected  nuclear  families
    qualifying to be treated as one unit, extended family life of that type
    usually lies beyond the paradigm and outside the scope of article 8.

20. There is no doubt that  close  ties  existed  among  all  the  numerous
    extended family members in this case while they lived  in  the  several
    houses in their compound, and that they continue to feel those bonds.

21. The grounds, skeleton  argument  and  submissions  for  the  appellants
    identify sympathetic features, but nothing to take the case beyond  the
    extended family norm.  Each adult sibling lives within his or  her  own
    paradigm family unit.

22. The family unit of the appellants comprises husband,  wife,  their  two
    minor children and (tenably, at least) their two  adult  children.   It
    does not incorporate their second-degree relatives.

23. In the absence of family life for article  8  purposes,  the  decisions
    appealed against are proportionate.

24. The appeals, as originally brought to the FtT, are dismissed.

25. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  There does not appear to  be  any
    need for one, but as the matter  was  not  addressed  in  the  UT,  the
    direction is left in place.

      [pic]

      3 August 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




