
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03536/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 March 2020                     |On 27 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 BILAL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Islam, Legal Representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    it is convenient to continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1979. He  appealed  to
    the FtT  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  6  February  2019
    refusing entry clearance as the spouse of a partner present and settled
    in the UK.  His application for entry clearance was made on 26  January
    2018.  The basis of the refusal of entry clearance was  with  reference
    to paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules  ("the  Rules")  and  the
    suitability requirements under Appendix FM.

 3. His appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge  ("the  FtJ")
    after a hearing on 27 September 2019.  To put my decision into  context
    I summarise the FtJ's decision.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The FtJ set out the appellant's immigration  history.  He  was  granted
    entry clearance as a work permit holder on 29 June 2006 and arrived  in
    the UK on 11 July 2006 with leave until 27 June 2007. He overstayed and
    was encountered on 22 March 2011  whilst  working  illegally  at  which
    point he gave false identity details.

 5. He was then served with notification of his status as an overstayer. He
    gave  "every  impression"  of  intending  to  return   to   Bangladesh,
    purchasing a ticket on 29 March 2011. However, he  did  not  board  the
    plane. He made what the respondent described as a frivolous application
    for asylum. His application was refused on 10 May 2011 and  his  appeal
    was dismissed on 23 June  2011.  He  made  a  voluntary  departure  for
    Bangladesh in July 2011.

 6. At [14] the FtJ said that the appellant spent some periods of  time  in
    detention after his being encountered and  that  "clearly  concentrated
    his mind with regard to returning to Bangladesh".

 7. At [15] he said that the issue  was  whether,  in  terms  of  paragraph
    320(11) of the Rules, the circumstances of the appellant's breaches  of
    immigration law are sufficiently  aggravating  to  justify  refusal  of
    entry clearance.

 8. The FtJ noted that the appellant's behaviour involved  his  overstaying
    after his visa expired, working illegally and giving false  details  to
    an immigration officer when encountered. He  said  that  the  appellant
    had, on  the  face  of  it,  delayed  his  departure  and  caused  some
    inconvenience  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by  failing   to   depart
    immediately.

 9. In relation to his asylum claim, he said that although he had the right
    to claim asylum, looking at the determination of  Judge  Easterman,  it
    would appear that he had no real grounds for that application. The  FtJ
    said that he was satisfied that "it can be described  as  frivolous  or
    spurious".

10. At [17] he pointed out that in his view, in the appellant's  favour  he
    did eventually depart voluntarily and the matters complained of by  the
    respondent are now of some eight years ago. The FtJ noted that there is
    a public interest in those without leave returning  voluntarily  "which
    should not be discouraged by an overzealous  application  of  Paragraph
    320(11). He also said that he must take into account the fact that  the
    appellant meets all the requirements of the Rules for a grant of  entry
    clearance under Appendix FM (apart from paragraph 320(11)).

11. He concluded as follows:

         "18.     I have  given  the  matter  anxious  consideration.  I  am
             satisfied given the passage of time and the public interest in
             encouraging illegal immigrants to depart that the decision  is
             disproportionate. I am not satisfied that the circumstances of
             the appellant's immigration breaches can be described as truly
             aggravating.

         19.  The requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  being  met  the
             refusal must having regard to Article 8 be a  disproportionate
             interference with the appellant's right to family life."

    The grounds and submissions

12. The respondent's grounds of appeal argue that it was encumbent  on  the
    FtJ  to  assess  whether,  in  addition  to  the  serious  breaches  of
    immigration law that  he  identified,  there  are  further  aggravating
    features that would result in the refusal being  justified.  Thus,  the
    FtJ agreed with the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") and found that  the
    appellant did give false details to an immigration officer and that  he
    had submitted a frivolous asylum application as a means of delaying his
    departure.  Accordingly,  in  finding  that  there  were   insufficient
    aggravating features to justify refusal is to ignore the terms  of  the
    Rule.

13. The grounds contend that there were other aggravating features, such as
    absconding, not meeting temporary admission/reporting  restrictions  or
    bail conditions, using an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
    switching nationality, making frivolous applications or  not  complying
    with the redocumentation process.

14. It is clear that a proper reading of the Rule indicates that discretion
    is not to be exercised in an applicant's favour  when  such  additional
    factors are present. Given the FtJ's finding that there were  at  least
    two additional factors present,  the  FtJ  fell  into  clear  error  in
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds. The FtJ had used Article 8 as
    a "general dispensing power".

15. In submissions, Ms Everett argued that the  FtJ  had  misconstrued  the
    public interest at [18]. Although what the FtJ said in  that  paragraph
    is derived from a decision of the Upper Tribunal in terms of  the  need
    to encourage people to leave the UK when they are supposed to, this  is
    only expecting individuals to do what they are supposed to do.  It  was
    submitted that there was a parallel with  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act")  in  terms  of  the
    English language requirement and financial independence being  regarded
    as neutral factors rather than factors in an individual's favour.

16. Mr Islam referred me to that decision,  namely  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
    discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 IAC in relation to  what
    the FtJ said at [18].

17. It was suggested that the FtJ  in  fact  had  decisions  in  two  other
    appeals before him in  relation  to  this  appellant,  one  from  Judge
    Easterman in 2011 and one from Judge  T.  Jones  in  2017.  As  to  the
    relevance of the 2017 decision of  Judge  Jones,  as  far  as  I  could
    understand Mr Islam's submission it was that that decision was relevant
    because it was concluded in that appeal that there  was  no  breach  of
    Article 8 but now there is. Although Mr Islam said  that  Judge  Jones'
    decision was before  the  FtJ  in  the  instant  appeal,  there  is  no
    reference to it in the FtJ's decision.   It  was  conceded  that  Judge
    Jones did not actually make a finding in relation to paragraph 320(11).
    I was invited  to  take  into  account  that  paragraph  320(11)  is  a
    discretionary ground.

18. Although Mr Islam cited Balajigari v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 673, he could not identify  any  aspects  of
    that decision that he argued were relevant to this appeal.

    Assessment and conclusions

19. The ECO refused  the  application  for  entry  clearance  not  only  in
    relation to paragraph 320(11) but also  in  terms  of  the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules, in particular S-EC. 1.5. That provides that:

         "The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good  or  because,  for  example,  the  applicant's  conduct
         (including convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph  S-
         EC.1.4.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance."

20. The FtJ made reference to that aspect of the decision at [12]. It seems
    to me that he correctly identified the  fact  that  that  part  of  the
    respondent's decision was  made  in  the  context  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history, which in turn related  to  the  paragraph  320(11)
    issue.

21. Paragraph 320(11) of the Rules provides as follows:

         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused

         ...

         (11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
         way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents  from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as  absconding,
         not meeting  temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process."

22. Neither party referred me to any respondent's guidance in  relation  to
    paragraph 320(11) in terms of how it is to be applied. Two things  are,
    however, apparent from the  Rule  itself.  The  first  is  that  it  is
    discretionary: "should normally be refused". The  second  is  that  the
    list of "other aggravating circumstances" in the Rule is  not  intended
    to  be  exhaustive  given  that  preceding  the  list  of   aggravating
    circumstances it uses the phrase "such as ...".




23. It is important to bear in mind that the FtJ could not have allowed the
    appeal because he thought that the discretion within paragraph  320(11)
    ought to have been exercised differently. That  is  not  a  permissible
    ground of appeal within the 2002 Act.






24. It is clear enough that the FtJ did find that  there  were  aggravating
    circumstances, such as giving false details to an  immigration  officer
    and making a frivolous asylum claim. Working illegally is  probably  an
    aggravating circumstance in the sense that it is no doubt a breach of a
    condition of  leave.  The  FtJ  found  that  this  was  an  aggravating
    circumstance.



25. In concluding that the appellant's breaches of immigration law did  not
    show "truly aggravating" circumstances the FtJ was using a phrase taken
    from [14] of PS India although, unfortunately, neither in that  context
    nor in terms of the public interest issue that the FtJ referred to  did
    he cite that case. Had he done so his decision would have been clearer.



26. The respondent's grounds are misconceived in stating that "It is  clear
    that a proper reading of the rule indicates that discretion is  not  to
    be exercised in  an  applicant's  favour  when  additional  factors  as
    described are present". That, with respect, simply cannot  be  correct.
    Paragraph 320(11) applies where at least one of  the  factors  (i)-(iv)
    are present and there are other aggravating circumstances. That is what
    the Rule consists of but the Rule as a whole is  discretionary.  It  is
    not the case that where there are other aggravating circumstances  then
    the Rule becomes mandatory.



27. Similarly, the contention in the grounds that the FtJ had used  Article
    8 as a general dispensing power, unintentionally misrepresents what the
    FtJ said at [17]-[19].


28. If one asks whether the FtJ  sought  to  identify  whether  there  were
    aggravating circumstances, the answer is in the affirmative. He made it
    clear what he considered those aggravating circumstances were.





29.  The  respondent's  challenge  to  the  FtJ's  decision  is,   however,
    understandable in that the FtJ's decision should have been much clearer
    in its structure, and in its application of Article 8. In that  respect
    his decision is too concise and is unstructured.


30. Nevertheless, it is clear that  he  allowed  the  appeal  in  terms  of
    Article 8. Under "Notice of Decision"  he  expressly  stated  that  the
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds. In the preceding paragraphs
    he found that the refusal of entry  clearance  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with the  appellant's  right  to  family  life  (with  his
    spouse). He was entitled to take into account in  terms  of  Article  8
    that all the other  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  were  met.  He  was
    similarly entitled to take into account the passage of time  since  the
    breaches of immigration law (with aggravating circumstances),  as  well
    as the fact that the appellant (eventually) returned voluntarily.


31. There is some inconsistency in the FtJ's decision in terms  of  whether
    or not paragraph 320(11) applied. He found that there were  aggravating
    circumstances in the matters he identified that come  within  paragraph
    320(11) yet went on to  conclude that there were no 'truly' aggravating
    circumstances. However, that is not a matter that  the  respondent  has
    raised as a ground of appeal.


32. As already indicated, the FtJ's decision could, and should,  have  been
    much clearer in its structure and reasoning  in  terms  of  Article  8.
    However, after close analysis and with some  effort,  one  is  able  to
    discern the basis upon which the appeal was allowed in terms of Article
    8. Whilst it may be that another judge may have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion, that is not a basis upon which it could  be  said  that  he
    erred in law in his decision.


33. Accordingly, I am not satisfied, notwithstanding  the  deficiencies  in
    the FtJ's decision, that he erred in law in allowing the  appeal  under
    Article 8.

    Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision to allow the appeal  therefore
    stands.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                             Date  14  April
    2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




