
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03972/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Birmingham CJC          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2020                   |On 11 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs apply)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel


                        REMAKING DECISION AND REASONS

Background

These are a written record of the oral reasons given for my decision at the
hearing.

This is a remaking decision following the finding of an error of law by
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever in a decision promulgated on 14 May of
2019. The issues in the remaking decision are, albeit very serious, very
narrow.  Judge Lever's error of law decision is annexed to these reasons.

As recorded in subsequent directions given by Judge Lever on 9 July 2019,
on 10 December 2015, the respondent notified the appellant that a
deportation order was to be issued against him as he was a foreign criminal
who had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least twelve
months.  In the appellant's case, he was sentenced to a period of
imprisonment of two years.  Following representations made by the
appellant, the respondent refused his human rights claim on 1 February 2018
and the appellant appealed that decision.  His appeal was heard by the
First-tier Tribunal ('FtT') on 11 September 2018 and the FtT allowed the
appellant's human rights claim.  The respondent made an application for
permission to appeal that decision and permission was granted.  On 3 April
2019, Judge Lever heard the appeal in the Upper Tribunal on whether or not
an error of law had been made by the FtT.  For reasons provided in the
decision promulgated on 14 May 2019, Judge Lever found that an error of law
was made by the FtT in this case and decided that the FtT decision needed
to be set aside and the decision remade in the Upper Tribunal.

I will come to provide further detail as to exactly the errors of law and
in particular the scope of appeal identified.  On finding an error of law,
Judge Lever gave directions, which provided that the parties be at liberty
to provide fresh evidence so long as it complied with the appropriate Upper
Tribunal rules and that there should be a resumed remaking hearing in the
Upper Tribunal.  In that context, more recent evidence, not limited to, but
focusing on, a report of a consultant psychiatrist, Dr C Pourgourides,
dated 29 September 2019 was produced and indeed that is the report on which
both representatives before me focused.

As recorded by Judge Lever in the error of law decision, which is annexed
to this decision, at paragraph 9:

"9.  The central issue was whether the appellant could satisfy the relevant
provisions of the Immigration Rules, namely paragraph 398(a) or Section
117C(3) of the 2002 Act.  In both instances the issue was whether the
effect of deportation would be unduly harsh on the couple's child.

10.  The judge had concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for the
appellant to be removed to India but his wife remain in the UK (paragraph
129).  The grounds for permission to appeal did not find that the decision
was arguably erroneous and it is indeed sustainable for the reasons
provided by the judge.  The judge had further concluded that it would be
unduly harsh for the child to expect to relocate to India in all the
circumstances, principally those summarised by him at paragraph 133 of the
decision.  Again the grant of permission had found that no arguable legal
error was made in the finding and it is also a sustainable finding and the
adequate reasons were provided by the judge at paragraph 133.

11.  The judge had then considered as he needed to, whether it would be
unduly harsh upon the child if the appellant was removed to India in
circumstances whilst the child remained in the UK with his mother and the
extended family members referred to within the evidence.  The judge had
acknowledged that it was not an easy decision but had decided it would be
unduly harsh for reasons provided essentially summarised at paragraph 135.
The judge referred to the 'hugely negative impact upon the son that would
not be compensated by indirect contact, the fact the appellant had only one
conviction and that he did not present a high risk of reoffending.'  In
respect of the first factor the judge clearly was influenced by the written
evidence of a social worker, Ms Harris."

Judge Lever then went on to consider the case law of WZ (China) [2017] EWCA
Civ 795 and the well-known authority of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and in
particular paragraph [14] of WZ (China), which stated:

"I bear in mind that [the appellant] has an established family life in this
country, that his family and children have UK nationality and that his wife
would have to give up work to look after the children if he were removed
and they were to remain in this country.  However, none of those facts
takes his case out of the ordinary.  Deportation necessarily results in the
break-up of the deportee's family if they remain in this country after his
removal."

Judge Lever then went on to consider KO (Nigeria) as consistent with that,
in particular noting at paragraph [44]:

"Nor do I have any difficulty in accepting the submission that the
children, who have enjoyed a close and loving relationship with their
father, will find his absence distressing and difficult to accept.  But it
is hard to see how that would be any different from any disruption of a
genuine and subsisting parental relationship arising from deportation.  As
was observed by Sedley LJ in AD Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 248."

Judge Lever held that the FtT had erred in law as the decision did not
provide adequate reasons for why the effect of the appellant's deportation
would be unduly harsh on hi son, given that that would be the normal
consequence of deportation.  The FtT relied on the social worker's
statement, as noted in the grounds granting permission, which the
respondent criticised as providing little or no evidence to support her
contentions on potential future risks.  Essentially, it was asserted that
the social worker had strayed into speculation.

Judge Lever concluded that there was nothing on the face of the evidence
and inadequate reasons provided by the FtT to indicate why this case fell
outside the ordinary in terms of the necessary effects of deportation as
referred to both in WZ and KO.

Identified issues and preliminary matter

I discussed with Ms Aboni and Mr Mackenzie the fact that the Court of
Appeal in a separate case has granted permission on the issue of whether
section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act relating to the effect on the child being
unduly harsh, required the effect to relate to both that child living
outside the UK; and remaining in the UK without their deported parent, as
was required by paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.  Permission had
been granted to the Court of Appeal in respect of an appeal which I
understood would be heard on 12 March 2020 to consider the point, which if
it were confirmed that either one or other of those criteria but not both
was required for the purposes of section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, might be
determinative in the appellant's favour.  Mr Mackenzie indicated that his
client wished to proceed with the hearing, whilst Ms Aboni sought an
adjournment pending that decision.  I ultimately concluded that it would be
in accordance with the overriding objective that I proceed.  I did so on
the basis that if the current understanding of the law, namely that unduly
harsh within the meaning of Section 117C(5) imported both requirements that
was a matter that could be readily rectified in the appellant's favour if
there were a finding that he had not met the test of undue harshness in
relation to separation, whereas conversely, if I found that it would be
unduly harsh for the appellant to be separated from his son, then the Court
of Appeal's decision would not affect my remaking.  The principal benefit
with proceeding today was that it would not be necessary for there to be a
further hearing and that the remaining issues by reference to the undue
harshness of the separation of the appellant from his child could be
considered today.  In the circumstances, I regarded it as in accordance
with the overriding objective that I proceed and I did not grant the
application for an adjournment by Ms Aboni.  I should emphasise that no
other basis for the adjournment application was made and it was solely on
the issue outlined.

In terms of the scope of the issues, it is important to note the narrowness
(albeit the seriousness) of the issues.  Ms Aboni and Mr Mackenzie agreed
both the correct legal analysis of the requirement of undue harshness and
they agreed that in respect of the report of Dr Pourgourides, her
conclusions would, had those conclusions been justified, meet the
requirements of undue harshness.    I refer to the agreement on the
narrowness of the issues because it then limits the findings of fact
necessary in this remaking decision.

The correct legal analysis of the test under section 117C(5) of the 2002
Act (and not a substitution for that test) was agreed between Ms Aboni and
Mr Mackenzie as being that set out at [11] to [19] of Mr Mackenzie's
skeleton argument:

"11. ...the Supreme Court said that when deciding what is unduly harsh the
focus is on the child and matters relevant to the public interest do not
require to be weighed in the balance other than is inherent in the fact
that Section 117C is engaged at all.  It is simply a matter of looking for
a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for
any child faced with the deportation of a parent.  The phrase moreover
denotes something severe, or bleak and means more than just uncomfortable,
inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult: KO (Nigeria) at paragraph
[27].

12.  At the same time, however, the Supreme Court also warned against
inappropriately elevating the threshold for success: see [23], where Lord
Carnwath pointed out that the test is not one of the very compelling
reasons.

13.  In none of the individual cases in KO (Nigeria), by contrast to this
one, is any finding recorded that the children concerned risked facing
mental health or developmental difficulties as a result of separation from
the person being deported.  Nor does KO (Nigeria) say that developmental or
mental health difficulties are necessarily or normally to be expected for
children whose parents are deported.

14.  Other authorities point in the same direction (albeit it is accepted
that authorities predating KO (Nigeria) must be approached with care as
they may have applied the wrong test) ...

15.  By contrast, in SSHD v ZP (India) [2016] 4 WLR 35 (which also predates
KO (Nigeria)), the Court of Appeal upheld a decision of the FtT allowing an
appeal against refusal to revoke a deportation order, where there was
evidence from family members and a child psychologist that the child in
question was suffering psychological harm as a result of separation from
his deported parent."

The written submissions go on to deal with the authority of SSHD v JG
(Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 982, noting of course that that was a case
dealing with very compelling circumstances.

"18. Other cases applying KO (Nigeria) of which the appellant was aware
such as SSHD v KF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2051 similarly do not refer to
any evidence of potential damage to the mental health of any children
concerned."

Paragraph [19] of the skeleton argument concludes (and both representatives
were in agreement as to the correctness of that conclusion):

"What follows from KO (Nigeria) as applied in JG (Jamaica) as well as from
the earlier decision in ZP (India) is this: the threshold in 117C(5) is met
if there is evidence showing a harsh effect on a child or partner which
goes materially beyond what is normally to be expected where their family
member is deported.  It is not necessary that the effect should go
substantially or extensively beyond what is normally expected."

I discussed Ms Aboni and Mr Mackenzie the most recent report of Dr
Pourgourides and in particular her conclusion at page [21] of the
supplemental bundle:

"Although the decision as to whether separation would be unduly harsh is a
matter for the Tribunal, I am of the view that the foregoing discussion
evidences the potentially highly negative possible effects on [child A]
arising from a separation from his father."

Ms Aboni expressly accepted that if this were a conclusion that had been
permissibly open to the expert to make, then it did meet the test of
Section 117C(5).

On other preliminary matters, I discussed whether it was necessary for live
witness evidence to be heard from any family members and whether they would
be able to do so.  Neither Mr Mackenzie nor Ms Aboni indicated that they
wished to lead on any evidence, although the appellant's family members
were present and willing to do so.  This is noteworthy because of
subsequent criticism that Dr Pourgourides' report was reliant upon what Ms
Aboni asserted was self-serving reporting of the appellant's son's mental
health difficulties, by his parents, which Dr Pourgourides had simply
recited.  I emphasise that Ms Aboni did not seek to cross-examine any of
the witnesses who were in attendance in the Tribunal today.

Having identified these issues, I therefore come on to the crux of the
submissions.

The Secretary of State's submissions

Ms Aboni accepted that the whilst the expertise of Dr Pourgourides was not
challenged and she could be treated as an expert witness, first, she had
indeed relied solely on the account of the appellant's family members as to
the son's distress, in particular when the appellant had been in prison.
These reports were consequently self-serving and were absent of any reports
from any third parties or schools as to the son's distress.  She also added
that they were not based on any long-term observations but a single meeting
and assessment of the child.

Ms Aboni also asserted that the report was internally inconsistent, as it
referred at page [6] to the appellant's son as a 'happy, intelligent,
sociable, well-adjusted child growing up in a loving family', which was not
consistent with the assessment of an anxiety disorder.  She added that the
availability of family support for that child, in the event of the
appellant's removal, had been properly considered by the FtT,
notwithstanding the finding of an error of law.

The appellant's submissions

The parties were agreed on the correct legal analysis and the sole question
was whether I could have confidence in the conclusion of Dr Pourgourides.
One point to note, if it needed emphasising, was the significant expertise
in terms of her previous credentials, which were set out at pages [22] and
[23] of the supplemental bundle and which indicated that she had been a
member of the Royal College of Psychiatrists since 1994.  Ms Aboni accepted
that Dr Pourgourides's expertise as an expert in the field was
unchallenged.

Meeting the central criticism head on in relation to a concern that Dr
Pourgourides had simply recited self-serving evidence from the appellant's
family, this could be dealt with in two ways. First of all, that was an
assertion that was often made, but more rarely supported and in that
regard, I was referred to the authority of R (M) v IAT [2004] EWHC 582
(Admin), where Mr Justice Moses rejected as "unusual" and "unsupportable"
the view that psychiatrists accept their patients' account uncritically.
Given the expertise of Dr Pourgourides over many years, there was nothing
to regard this report as being 'unusual' or supporting the view that Dr
Pourgourides had accepted the account uncritically.

Second, however, and more importantly, it is clear that in fact the child's
supporting family were not the only source of evidence.  Whilst Dr
Pourgourides had to interview the child in a very controlled environment,
noting that the child was not fully aware of the circumstances of his
father's offending, the evidence is explicit on the point about the direct
experiences of that child.   The report was not internally inconsistent,
balancing the child's upbringing with the effect on that child of the
appellant's imprisonment and subsequent anxiety.  It made clear that the
presence of family support could not adequately mitigate the risk of real
harm to the appellant's son, if the appellant were removed.

Discussion and conclusions

I accept the parties' agreed proposition that what follows from KO
(Nigeria) as applied in JG (Jamaica) as well as from the earlier decision
in ZP (India) is this: the threshold in 117C(5) is met if there is evidence
showing a harsh effect on a child or partner which goes materially beyond
what is normally to be expected where their family member is deported.  It
is not necessary that the effect should go substantially or extensively
beyond what is normally expected.

As also agreed between the parties, Dr Pourgourides' expertise as an expert
in respect of the potential psychiatric harm to the appellant's son, in the
event of the appellant's removal, is unchallenged.  Her report is based on
interviews not only with the appellant, but with other family members and
the appellant's son himself. There is no suggestion that Dr Pourgourides is
intentionally biased, but instead that her information is based on a lack
of objective source evidence.  The report itself is lengthy, detailed and
gives a full explanation for how the conclusion is reached.

I accept Mr Mackenzie's submission that the report does not rely solely on
an account from the appellant or his wife.  Dr Pourgourides interviewed the
appellant's son, as recorded at page [12] of the report:

"He greeted me somewhat shyly but with some confidence.  He sat between his
parents while I introduced myself, using the previously agreed introductory
and explanatory remarks I had discussed with his parents.  He understood I
was a psychiatrist and would be compiling a report.  He readily agreed to
proceeding with meeting me without his parents though we all agreed he
could call upon them if he needed to, which did not prove necessary.

He made good eye contact and relaxed readily.  He gave a good account of
himself.  He was articulate and thoughtful.  He smiled appropriately at
times and appeared excited and engaged when discussing aspects of his home,
school and social life.

When discussing his previous separation from his father, his demeanour
markedly changed and he became visibly distressed and tearful, becoming
less communicative and more withdrawn."

The report continued with a discussion of his current mood and his progress
at school. At page [14], it stated:

"He had been in year 4 and starting preparation work for his 11 plus exams.
 He said he didn't know how to study or learn at his time and doing this
with mum (instead of dad) proved quite stressful.  She had 'left everything
to the last minute' whereas dad would have planned better.  It was very
upsetting and he never knew when dad would come back.  Dad would send him
stories in his letters and call him and this made him feel a little bit
better.

At this [child A] became tearful, as described above.  I didn't persist in
detailed questioning or probing as I was mindful of his distress.  He
described that hearing his father's voice had been difficult as it made him
miss him all the more and he felt scared and sad.  He told me that 'mum
knew [he] was sad but [he] tried not show it and decided to keep it to
[himself] and try and get on'.

In response to a direct question he said that memories of this time do come
back into his mind but he has tried to ignore them.  At such times these
feelings make it hard for him to sleep."

As noted from the previous passage, the assessment was conducted directly
with the appellant's child in the absence of his parents and included an
assessment of the consequences of the appellant's previous absence, when he
was in prison. Dr Pourgourides made an assessment under the Revised
Children's Anxiety and Depression Scale, or RCADS.  Her summary of that
assessment at [15] was as follows:

"The striking finding is that [child A] has scored a clinically significant
score above the threshold for separation anxiety.  It is also apparent that
he otherwise scores most highly for obsessive compulsive symptoms, but the
score is below the threshold of clinical significance."

Dr Pourgourides then referred to the independent social worker report,
which referred to increased risk of developing mental health issues, about
which Judge Lever had concerns that such concerns were unsubstantiated.
However, Dr Pourgourides continued at page [16]:

"Conclusions

I have based my opinion on a range of sources, including the information
contained in my letter of instruction; the written reports and documents
made available to me in advance, in particular the report provided by the
independent social worker, my interview and observations with the
[parents], my mental state examination of [child A] and the information
provided in the questionnaires he completed.  In addition, I have referred
to other evidence in the academic literature which I list where applicable
below.  I am of the opinion that [child A] does not currently meet
diagnostic criteria for any psychiatric, psychological or
neurodevelopmental disorder.

He does, however, currently display, and has displayed in the past, some
signs and symptoms of emotional and behavioural disturbance, which whilst
not currently amounting to a mental disorder are nonetheless significant,
and I discuss this below.  He is described as, and appears to be, a happy,
intelligent, sociable, well-adjusted child growing up within a loving
family."

The report further states:

"There are however features in his history which may predispose him to
developing a mental disorder or render him more vulnerable to stress.
These features are independent of the later impact of the separation from
his father in the past and the current uncertainty about the future which I
will discuss later in my conclusions.

The first is the evidence from the history provided by the parents of signs
and symptoms of significant separation anxiety in [child A's] early
childhood.  Separation anxiety is the manifestation of distress on
separation from home or major attachment figures.  It is normal in very
young children ...  [Child A's] anxiety was significant in that it
persisted beyond this age to a significant degree.  The symptoms of this
appear to have resolved spontaneously, which is not uncommon ...  However,
I think this history predisposes him to the development of a mental
disorder particularly when separation may be likely.  This predisposition
is not possible to quantify but it is significant.

The second relevant predisposing factor concerns aspects of his
personality, namely the fact he is described as a thoughtful, sensitive,
emotionally astute child who is able to read and respond to the emotional
state of others and with a tendency to hide his feelings for fear of
causing concern to the adults around him.  This personality profile also
predisposes him to some degree to the development of a mental disorder.

Turning to the issue at hand, in predicting the impact of a future possibly
permanent separation from his father, it is relevant to examine the impact
of the past, protracted separation from him during his incarceration and to
some extent also the subsequent shorter separations during the family
holidays.

The description of his behaviour and symptoms during his father's
incarceration indicate that he may have met the diagnostic criteria for
adjustment disorder.  ...  An adjustment disorder is the development of
emotional or behavioural symptoms in response to an identifiable stressor.
Such symptoms or behaviours are clinically significant as evidenced by
marked distress ...  The separation anxiety he experienced during his
father's incarceration was clinically significant.  There was evidence of
fear of separation; difficulty in separating at night; repeated occurrence
of physical symptoms such as stomach-ache or nausea on occasions that
related to separation from a major attachment figure.

I note however that the separation anxiety he experienced during his
father's incarceration actually persisted over time even following his
father's return home.  ...  It has only in recent months diminished
according to his parents.  However, I note that on objective, validated
assessment using the RCADS I administered, he continues to score for this
to a clinically significant degree.  Hence he is still suffering from a
clinically significant degree of separation anxiety...

This persisting separation anxiety therefore acts further as a predisposing
factor to the possible development of a mental disorder.  [Child A]
displays a number of other behaviours which act as markers of possible
underlying anxiety.  These are the behaviours around handwashing and the
routines relating to adjusting his ties and shoes.  These behaviours are
obsessive-compulsive in nature but are not currently clinically significant
...

It follows from the foregoing therefore that a future, more prolonged or
even permanent separation is likely to be particularly stressful for [child
A] and I am of the view that its impact upon him would be highly
detrimental, indeed harmful and potentially catastrophic.  It would place
him at a very high risk of developing a significant mental disorder...

The risk would be mitigated but not entirely offset by a range of
protective factors such as the presence of his mother, access to the
support of his extended family, and his school and social networks."

The report then deals with the wider objective evidence about the loss of
parents compared with permanent separation from them.  This in particular
related to an analysis of the important role that fathers played; that
parental roles were not interchangeable and the limited extent to which one
parent could compensate for the absence of another.  Dr Pourgourides noted
child A's particularly strong attachment to his father for a number of
reasons, including their compatible personalities.  Dr Pourgourides
continued:

"[Child A] is also now at an age in his development where the presence and
significance of a male role model is particularly important to him.  This
identification is arguably emerging with the onset of puberty when he may
begin all the more to see his father as a role model.  Again, the loss of
his father would be mitigated by the presence of other adult males in his
wider family but in my view the evidence is that this would not be
sufficient to offset the loss of his father in particular."

Dr Pourgourides then reached the conclusion already outlined.

Having considered the evidence set out above, I do not except Ms Aboni's
submission that Dr Pourgourides had simply relied upon source material
which might be self-serving from child A's relatives. She interviewed the
appellant's son alone, and assessed him by reference to RCADS, a diagnostic
tool.

Second, I rejected Ms Aboni's submission that Dr Pourgourides' report was
internally inconsistent. The reference to child A being a happy,
intelligent, sociable and well-adjusted child has to be seen within the
context of the wider assessment and conclusions referred to.  The report
contained clear and detailed reasons not only on child A's predisposition
to mental health issues but the reasons why they had manifested themselves
in the past and the likelihood of them manifesting themselves in the
future. The report had referred to the very high risk of child A developing
a significant mental health disorder.

Dr Pourgourides had expressly considered the issue which Ms Aboni raised
about the extent to which child [A]'s extended family could provide him
support and the extent to which that would mitigate the harm to him as a
result the appellant's removal.  She noted that whilst it would mitigate,
to some extent, the harmful effects, it would not do so entirely and it was
in that context of mitigating factors that she concluded that the
separation of child A and the appellant would be potentially catastrophic.

In summary, the three challenges that Ms Aboni raised, namely (1) that Dr
Pourgourides had uncritically accepted evidence that was self-serving is
not sustained because child A was also assessed by reference to objective
diagnostic criteria; (2)  the assertion of internal inconsistencies in the
report is not sustained when the reference to child A having a happy
childhood is considered in context; and (3) the mitigating factors of child
A's wider family were considered and expressly analysed by Dr Pourgourides
but nevertheless she reached the conclusions that she did.

In the circumstances, and noting that Ms Aboni accepted that if the
conclusion reached by Dr Pourgourides was one that was reasonably open to
her as an expert to reach, it  does meet the legal test of separation
between the appellant and child A as being 'unduly harsh', I concluded
without reservation that the report produced by Dr Pourgourides, whose
expertise is unchallenged, was a conclusion open to her to reach.

On one final aside, I accept the force of Mr Mackenzie's submission that
where the relatives of the appellant provided input into Dr Pourgourides'
report, they had been regarded by the FtT as particularly impressive
witnesses.  In particular, Judge Aziz noted at [106]:

"I next turn to the appellant's wife.  It was very clear from the way in
which she gave her evidence and the emotions she displayed whilst sitting
in the public gallery listening to the evidence of her husband and other
family members that the appellant's conviction has impacted upon her
enormously.  It goes without saying, but she has also been a victim in all
of this.  She was courageous in giving her evidence and I found her to be a
highly credible witness."

At [107], the FtT also noted that in hearing evidence from the appellant's
father and brother-in-law, whilst it was not an easy matter for them to
come to give evidence, nevertheless they were accepted as credible
witnesses.  Whilst the FtT may have had concerns about the appellant's
credibility, nevertheless the fact that Dr Pourgourides had referred to
evidence from the appellant's wider family, where those same family members
had been available to give witness evidence today, but their credibility
and honesty has not been called into question until in closing submissions
by Ms Aboni, her criticism of their input as self-serving, lacked force.
In any event, Dr Pourgourides drew her conclusions from a number of
sources, including an independent assessment that she carried out of child
A alone.

Conclusion

It follows from my findings set out above and on the basis of the narrowly
agreed issues between the representatives that for the purposes of section
117C(5) of the 2002  Act, that the appellant's separation from child A
would be unduly harsh and in the circumstances, I remake the FtT's decision
by allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   J Keith  Date 7 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have decided to make  a  fee  award  to  the
appellant of �140.


Signed   J Keith  Date 7 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

                        Annex - error of law decision

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03972/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd April 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                               mr Manav Arora
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 28th February 1978 is a citizen  of  India.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Mackenzie of Counsel.   The  Respondent
    was represented by Ms Cunha a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. On 10th December 2015 the Respondent had notified the Appellant that  a
    deportation order was to be issued against him  as  he  was  a  foreign
    criminal who had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
    twelve months.  In response to that matter the Appellant made a  number
    of representations sought to challenge the decision to  deport  on  the
    grounds that such a decision would be in breach of  his  human  rights.
    The Respondent refused his human rights claim  on  1st  February  2018.
    The Appellant appealed that decision.

 3. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Aziz  sitting
    at Birmingham on 11th  September  2018.   The  judge  had  allowed  the
    Appellant's human rights claim.  The Respondent  had  made  application
    for permission to appeal that decision but that  permission  to  appeal
    was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  19th  October  2018.   The
    Respondent had renewed that application to the Upper  Tribunal  and  on
    24th January 2019 permission to appeal was granted.  The Upper Tribunal
    Judge found that it was  arguable  that  there  had  been  insufficient
    reasons given for the finding that the  deportation  of  the  Appellant
    would be unduly harsh upon the child if the Appellant was removed  from
    the United Kingdom  with  his  child  remaining  with  his  mother  and
    extended family particularly given that a number of the  issues  relied
    upon by the judge for the normal consequences of deportation or related
    to statements and submissions not supported by evidence.  It  was  also
    argued that the judge had factored into this aspect irrelevant  factors
    including the fact the Appellant had only one conviction  and  did  not
    represent a high risk of reoffending.  Directions were issued  for  the
    Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether an error of law had been  made
    in this case and the matter came before me  in  accordance  with  those
    directions.  A Rule 24 response had  been  provided  by  the  Appellant
    dated 11th February 2019.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. The Presenting Office relied on the Respondent's grounds that had  been
    provided to the First-tier and renewed  in  the  permission  to  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The main ground  was  identified  as  being
    that the judge had failed to properly consider whether  it  was  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK if the  Appellant  was  removed
    and it was submitted that no  good  reasons  had  been  given.   I  was
    referred to the  case  of  WZ  (China)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  795  and  in
    particular paragraph 14 which, it was submitted were similar factors to
    that in the case before me and reinforced the  point  that  deportation
    necessarily causes family breakup if the family remain in the UK  after
    the Appellant's removal.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. It was submitted that the only real ground  for  permission  to  appeal
    that had been granted was in respect of the question of whether it  was
    unduly harsh for the child if the Appellant was removed  from  the  UK.
    It was submitted by Mr Mackenzie that the Grounds of Appeal amounted to
    essentially  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings  which  were
    reasonable.  It was said that the Respondent's submission  ignored  the
    social worker's report and the Appellant's wife's evidence and that the
    question of unduly harsh was a matter for the judge and he had focussed
    on the correct matters.  It was said that as  long  as  the  judge  has
    identified matters that went beyond the normal harshness occasioned  by
    deportation then that was enough.  The case of KO was referred to me in
    this instance.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and evidence in this  case.   I  now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The Appellant had married a British citizen in India in  2002  and  had
    entered the United Kingdom in 2003.  He  had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in 2004 and the couple's son had been born in 2006.  In
    September 2015 the Appellant had been convicted of one count of  sexual
    assault and sentenced to two years' imprisonment with a requirement  to
    sign on the Sexual Offenders Register for a period of ten  years.   The
    Appellant had argued that his  deportation  would  interfere  with  his
    family life and with his private life.

 8. Paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rule applied in  this  namely  that
    deportation of the Appellant from the UK was conducive  to  the  public
    good and in the public interest given his sentence of imprisonment  was
    for a period of more than one year but less than four years.

 9. The central issue was whether the Appellant could satisfy the  relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules namely paragraph 398(a) or  Section
    117C(3) of the 2002 Act.  In both instances the issue was  whether  the
    effect of deportation would be unduly harsh on the couple's child.

10. The judge had concluded that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to be removed  to  India  but  his  wife  remain  in  the  UK
    (paragraph 129).  The grounds for permission to  appeal  did  not  find
    that that decision was arguably erroneous and it is indeed  sustainable
    for the reasons provided by the judge.  The judge had further concluded
    that it would be unduly harsh for the child to expect  to  relocate  to
    India in all the circumstances, principally those summarised by him  at
    paragraph 133 of the decision.  Again the grant of permission had found
    that no arguable legal error was made in that finding and it is also  a
    sustainable finding and adequate reasons were provided by the judge  at
    paragraph 133.

11. The judge had then considered as he needed  to,  whether  it  would  be
    unduly harsh upon the child, if the Appellant was removed to  India  in
    circumstances whilst the child remained in the UK with his  mother  and
    the extended family members referred to within the evidence.  The judge
    had acknowledged that was not an easy decision but had decided it would
    be  unduly  harsh  for  reasons  provided  essentially  summarised   at
    paragraph 135.  The judge referred to the "hugely negative impact  upon
    the son that would not be compensated by indirect contact, the fact the
    Appellant had only one conviction and that he did not  present  a  high
    risk of reoffending."  In respect of the first factor the judge clearly
    was influenced by the written evidence of a social worker Miss Harris.

12. The case law of WZ (China) [2017] EWCA Civ 795 and KO (Nigeria)  [2018]
    UKSC 53 (in cases  referred  to  within  the  judgment)  provide  clear
    guidance on this issue.  WZ (China) at paragraph 14 stated:

         "In my judgment the Upper Tribunal  was  right  to  set  aside  the
         determination of the First-tier Tribunal.   Quite  apart  from  the
         reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal I cannot see  how  a  Tribunal
         properly applying the law as it  was  at  the  date  it  heard  the
         Appellant's appeal and given the public interest in the deportation
         of a person sentenced to two years' imprisonment  the  weight  that
         was appropriate could have allowed his appeal.  I take into account
         that until he committed his offence he had been of  good  character
         in that the reports before the Tribunal showed that he was unlikely
         to reoffend.  I bear in mind that he has an established family life
         in this country, that his family and children have  UK  nationality
         and that his wife would have to give up  work  to  look  after  the
         children if he were  removed  and  they  were  to  remain  in  this
         country.  However none of these facts takes his  case  out  of  the
         ordinary.  Deportation necessarily results in the  breakup  of  the
         deportee's  family  if  they  remain  in  this  country  after  his
         removal".

13. It is right to say that the facts in this case disclose no basis for  a
    shift in the general principles clearly asserted in  that  judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal.

14. In KO Lord Carnwath had looked at the Upper Tribunal  decision  earlier
    in KO together with other decisions in MK and MAB  referred  to  within
    the body of the judgment.  At paragraph 32 of KO it was noted  that  if
    Section 117B(6) focussed on the position of the child  as  accepted  by
    the Respondent it would be odd to find a different approach in  Section
    117C(5).  At least  without  a  much  clearer  indication  of  what  is
    intended than one finds in Section 117C(2).   Further  the  court  said
    that quite apart from the difficulty of reaching  a  rational  judicial
    conclusion on the question of individual's culpability it seemed to  be
    in direct conflict with the Zoumbas principle that the child should not
    be held responsible for the conduct of the parent.  At paragraph 36  in
    KO the court said

         "It is notable that in that passage contrary to the thrust  of  the
         earlier discussion no account is taken of the  seriousness  of  the
         particular offences or of the particular criminal  history  of  the
         father.  On its face that approach seems  no  different  from  that
         which I have accepted as correct in the earlier discussion.  It  is
         also consistent with that in the end adopted by the Upper  Tribunal
         on the facts of MAB and by contrast with its response to  the  much
         more severe situation considered in MK."

15. The court had further quoted from paragraphs 43 and 44 of the  original
    decision in KO and in particular I note at paragraph 44  the  following
    "nor do I have any difficulty in  accepting  the  submission  that  the
    children who have enjoyed a close and loving  relationship  with  their
    father who will find his absence distressing and difficult  to  accept.
    But is hard to see how that would be any different from any  disruption
    of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  arising   from
    deportation as was observed by Sedley LJ in AD Lee v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 248

         "The tragic consequences that this family short  lived  as  it  has
         been would be broken up forever  because  of  the  Appellant's  bad
         behaviour.   That  is  what   deportation   does."    This   family
         relationship was not of course short lived but  the  point  is  the
         same.   Nothing  out  of  the  ordinary  has  been  identified   to
         demonstrate that  in  the  case  of  this  particular  family  when
         balanced against the powerful  public  interest  considerations  in
         play although the children will find separation from  their  father
         to be harsh it will not be in all of the circumstances unduly harsh
         for them each to remain in the United Kingdom after their father is
         removed to Nigeria."

16. Paragraph 135 of the judge's decision  does  not  sufficiently  provide
    adequate reasons why the removal of the Appellant would be unduly harsh
    to the child remaining in the UK with his mother given  that  would  be
    the normal  consequence  of  deportation.   If  in  terms  of  abnormal
    features the judge was relying upon the social worker's  statement,  as
    noted the grounds granting permission commented that  the  Respondent's
    submission reflected the decision essentially there was  little  or  no
    evidence to support the contentions raised by the social worker in what
    may be, it was said, potential future risks.   Essentially  those  were
    speculative matters not evidence based.  It is also the case  as  noted
    in the grounds granting permission  that  the  judge  appears  to  have
    factored  into  his  reasoning  in  paragraph  135  matters  that  were
    irrelevant.

17. There is nothing on the face of the  evidence  and  no  sufficiency  or
    adequacy of reasons provided to indicate why this case fell outside the
    ordinary in terms of the necessary effects of deportation  as  referred
    to both in WZ and in those cases within and including KO.   It  is  for
    those reasons that a material error of law was made in this case.

Notice of Decision

18. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be set aside
    and the decision remade in the Upper Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
