
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03532/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2019                            |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                Sheraz Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 1 May 1977.  On 12 April
2016 he made an application for leave to remain based on ten years' long
residence.  This application was refused on 23 January 2018 with reference
to paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules, i.e. the Appellant had made
false representations for the purpose of obtaining leave to enter.  The
application was also refused with reference to paragraph 322(1A), which is
in mandatory terms where false representations have been made or false
information or documents have been submitted.

The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Roots for hearing on 5 September 2018.  In
a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 5 October 2018 the judge dismissed
the appeal, finding that the Respondent had discharged the burden of
showing that the Appellant had made false representations in respect of his
two Tier 1 applications in 2011 and 2013.

Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis of the following
grounds.:

Firstly, that the judge had incorrectly applied the law at [13] where it
was submitted that the judge's reasoning was circular in that he found even
if the Appellant had provided a credible explanation then that explanation
was rebutted by the initial evidence used by the Secretary of State to
satisfy the initial burden, see also [51] and the decision in Shen [2014]
UKUT 236 (IAC),

secondly, at [17] the judge failed to give proper reasons and placed
considerable weight on the fact that the Appellant has an MBA,

thirdly, in making irrational findings and failing to properly articulate
reasons relating to the oral evidence at [21], [22], [23], [24], [29],
[30], [32], [39], [42] and [45]; and

fourthly, that the judge's findings at [35] were procedurally unfair
because his concerns regarding the documentary evidence had not been put to
the Appellant in order to give him the opportunity to comment and likewise,
in respect of the accountants' evidence recorded at [44] it was asserted
that the judge had erred in failing to look at the evidence set out in the
bank statements.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Hollingworth in a decision dated 28 November 2018 on the basis that it was
arguable that the judge had not adopted the correct approach to the
switching of the evidential burden, that it was arguable that there had
been procedural unfairness and it was arguable that the judge had
insufficiently delineated the relevancy of the Appellant's qualifications
in arriving at credibility conclusions.

     Hearing

The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for hearing on 31 January 2019.
The Appellant's solicitors, Prime Law Solicitors, came off the record on 28
January 2018 on the basis that the Appellant had withdrawn his
instructions.  There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.
Given that it is clear the hearing notice was sent to both the Appellant
and his former solicitors and he was thus on notice of the appeal hearing,
I decided to proceed with the hearing in his absence.

I heard submissions from Mr Bramble on behalf of the Respondent, who sought
to rely on the judgment of Mr Justice Martin Spencer in R (on the
application of Shahbaz Khan) [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC).  In respect of the
first ground of appeal, Mr Bramble submitted that whilst it was perhaps a
little confusing it was clear if one looked at the judge's self-direction
as to the shifting burden of proof at [13] alongside [8], [47] and [48]
that although it was not the most precise, it does show that the judge was
mindful of the correct approach to be taken and there was no error of law.

In relation to ground 2 and the focus by the judge on the fact that the
Appellant has obtained an MBA, Mr Bramble submitted the point here is that
the Appellant is an educated man and what is important in the context of R
(on the application of Shahbaz Khan) is that it was reasonable to expect
the Appellant to have knowledge of certain facts and he submitted the judge
was entitled to take account of the fact that the Appellant was educated.

In respect of ground 3 and the assertion that the judge failed to provide
proper or sufficient reasons, Mr Bramble sought to rely on [37](iv) of the
judgment in Khan, which provides as follows:

"However, for an applicant simply to blame his or her accountant for an
'error' in relation to the historical tax return will not be the end of the
matter: far from it.  Thus, the Secretary of State is entitled to take into
account that, even where an accountant has made an error, the accountant
will or should have asked the tax payer to confirm that the return was
accurate and to have signed the tax return, and furthermore the applicant
will have known of his or her earnings and will have expected to pay tax
thereon.  If, realising this (or wilfully shutting his eyes to the
situation), the applicant has not taken steps within a reasonable time to
remedy the situation, the Secretary of State may be entitled to conclude
either that the error was not simply the fault of the accountant or,
alternatively, the applicant's failure to remedy the situation itself
justifies a conclusion that he has been has been deceitful or dishonest and
therefore he should be refused ILR within paragraph 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules."

Mr Bramble submitted that the judge had correctly followed what was
required.  The Appellant tried to claim he was not aware of the extent of
his earnings in 2010 to 2011 but the judge at [21] to [23] gave adequate
reasons as to why he found the Appellant's answers in this respect to be
evasive.  The judge was entitled to take account of the fact that in
respect of [29] of his decision the Appellant was unable to state who his
biggest client was, despite the fact that one would think the Appellant
would know which of his clients are his biggest earners.

Mr Bramble submitted that there was no basis to assert that the judge's
decision was perverse and circular and the judge found and was entitled to
find that the Appellant's answers were deficient for crucial years.

In respect of procedural unfairness, at [32] of the judge's decision it was
asserted that the judge's concerns about the documentary evidence were not
put to the Appellant in order to give him the opportunity to comment.  Mr
Bramble's point on this is that there was no statement from Counsel for the
Appellant at that hearing nor unfortunately was there a minute from Ms
Karbani, who represented the Home Office, and thus it was hard to take this
issue any further, given there was no particularisation of the points put
based on evidence which it is said was not put to the Appellant.

In respect of [22] of the grounds relating to [44] of the judge's decision
it is for the Appellant to prove his case and not for the judge to trawl
though the bank statements.  Mr Bramble submitted that overall the judge's
decision is in accordance with the approach advocated in R (on the
application of Shahbaz Khan).  The judge was properly appraised of what was
required of him and had gone about it accordingly.  He submitted that the
determination was very thorough and the grounds of appeal were just a
disagreement with those findings and that there was no evidence to
substantiate the procedural fairness point.

     Findings and reasons

I find no error of law in the Judge's approach to the burden of proof, as
is asserted in Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal. At [13] the Judge found
that the initial burden is on the Respondent and it then passed to the
Appellant to offer a plausible explanation. The Judge found that the
Respondent had made out his case; that the burden then passed to the
Appellant who he found had not provided a credible explanation. The Judge
also considered in the alternative that he was satisfied on the evidence
that it had been shown that the Appellant made false representations with
the necessary dishonest intent, on his Tier 1 applications and reiterated
his findings at [51].

The second ground of appeal asserts at [17] that the judge failed to give
proper reasons and placed considerable weight on the fact that the
Appellant has an MBA. I do not find that assertion to be made out. The
Judge was entitled to take account of the fact that the Appellant has an
MBA however he did so in the context of his educational background as a
whole, which includes a post graduate diploma in Business Management and
the Appellant's employment history as a business consultant, in respect of
which he claimed to have earned the equivalent of ï¿½95,000 pa for a 6 month
period. The Judge also addressed this again at [45] finding that it was not
credible that the Appellant was unable to notice a huge error in his tax
affairs for 3 years, despite his educational and employment history. I find
it was open to the Judge to make these findings on the evidence before him.

The third ground of appeal asserts that the Judge made irrational findings
and failed to properly articulate reasons relating to the oral evidence at
[21], [22], [23], [24], [29], [30], [32], [39], [42] and [45]. Contrary to
the assertions set out in this ground of appeal, I find that the Judge
properly addressed the evidence before him and reached rational conclusions
in respect of it, in particular: at [21]-[22] that the Appellant was
evasive in his responses as to his income, claiming that he was not aware
of what his earnings were and that he only checked the 2010/2011 accounts
roughly before giving them to his solicitor and that this was not credible
and showed the Appellant was trying to evade responsibility and at [29]
that he did not notice whether his clients were big or small and he did not
know who was his biggest client, which the Judge rejected on the basis that
this was not credible. The Appellant then stated that it was Bukhari
investments [30] but at [34] the income the Appellant received from them
was only ï¿½5253 [34]. It was further open to the Judge to reject the
accountants' explanation at [39]-[42] given that they prepared the
Appellant's accounts for 2010/2011; 2011-2012 and 2012/2013 and errors were
made apparently by the same employee in the 2010/2011 and 2012/2013 tax
returns but not in the 2011/2012 return.

In respect of the fourth ground of appeal, this asserted that the judge's
findings at [35] were procedurally unfair because his concerns regarding
the documentary evidence had not been put to the Appellant in order to give
him the opportunity to comment and likewise, in respect of the accountants'
evidence recorded at [44] it was asserted that the judge had erred in
failing to look at the evidence set out in the bank statements.

In respect of the first assertion, I do not find that this is made out. The
Appellant and his legal representatives were well aware of the issue under
appeal and that it would be necessary for the Appellant to demonstrate that
he did earn the income claimed in order to prove that he did not utilise
false representations in order to obtain leave to remain pursuant to Tier
1. I find that it was incumbent upon him and his legal representatives to
put forward his case clearly and it was open for the Judge to find at [38]
based on his summary of the evidence at [35] that the letters from three
clients, none of whom attended, showed income of only a few thousand
pounds, way short of the claimed income.

In respect of the second assertion, I accept that it was not appropriate
for the Judge to state at [44] that: "it is not for me to trawl through
these bank statements and add up the various receipts shown on them." I
find there is some merit in the assertion that it was open to him to ask
the Appellant's legal representatives to provide e.g. a schedule of
payments. However, ultimately it is for the Appellant to prove his case and
there is no explanation as to why no schedule had been prepared in any
event. Moreoever, the Judge did give careful consideration to the bank
statements from 1 October 2010 to 29 March 2011 and sustainably concluded
at [44] that the bank statements do not provide credible corroboration of
the Appellant's claims for this time period.

For the reasons set out above, I find no material errors of law in the
decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Roots.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
