
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03384/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                             Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 28 August 2018                                         On 25 September
2018


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     [S]
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S F Mardner, instructed by Aldgate Immigration


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Following a hearing on 6 June 2018 I found an error of law in the
decision by the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 23 March 2018, in which
the judge allowed S 's appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on
Human Rights.  A copy of my decision on the error of law issue is attached
to this determination.  In my decision I concluded that the judge had
erred, as indeed was common ground, in misstating the provisions of
paragraph 399 of HC 395 and therefore applied the wrong test with regard to
S's three children under the age of 18.  The judge applied a reasonableness
test whereas in fact the correct test is one of undue harshness.
Accordingly, the matter required to be redetermined, on the basis of the
judge's unchallenged findings of fact.

2.   In her submissions, Ms Mardner argued that on the basis of the facts
as found by the judge the undue harshness test was met.  It would be unduly
harsh for the children to be sent to St Lucia or for them to be separated
from the appellant on his deportation to St Lucia if that took place.  The
Secretary of State had said that the mother had control of the children and
the children can go back to St Lucia and contact can be maintained with the
appellant via Skype etc.  To send them back would be unduly harsh as they
spend a lot of time with their father and he provided financial and
psychological support.  Their mother relied on him.  In particular, she
relied on him to look after them while she was at work.  The children were
in court today to show their support.  Modern families did not always live
together in the typical way of the past and were maintained in different
circumstances and this was such a case.  He was actively involved in their
lives and the mother cooperated.

3.   The appellant's offences were not at the level of, for example, in MM
(Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617.  His offences were not at a level such that
it was in the public interest to deport him.  His most recent offence had
led to six months' imprisonment, in 2017, and that had triggered the
deportation.  He had been convicted of possession of a bladed article in
public.  He was a painter and decorator and was stopped at 2am outside his
own home.  The judge had noted the long spells of non-convictions.  The
judge had had in mind when considering the circumstances the children's
situation and impliedly took into consideration the absence of their father
from their lives.  It was argued that the judge had in fact appreciated the
undue harshness criteria.  All the witnesses had been found to be credible
and it was found that the appellant had a close relationship with his
children both financially and physically.  The children had never lived in
St Lucia.  He saw them every day, and trying to maintain the relationship
via Skype was not a possibility and it would amount to a serious
interference in the family life.  There was no substitute for physical
presence.  He should succeed under the undue harshness test.

4.   In his submissions, Mr Wilding relied on the refusal letter.  Some of
the issues had been resolved, for example, with regard to the appellant's
relationship with his children, which the judge had found to be genuine and
subsisting.  It was not argued that the children should go to St Lucia, so
it was a question whether it would be unduly harsh for them to be separated
from the appellant on his deportation.  This was a separation case.

5.   It was unclear whether the judge's finding as to the effect of the
appellant's removal was preserved as it seemed to be a conclusion rather
than a finding of fact.  The notion of "undue harshness" was essentially a
proportionality assessment.  The judge had failed to factor in other
elements.  It was difficult to see from the evidence before the judge and
the lack of updating evidence as to the consequences for the children.  The
appellant pointed to his concerns about his former partner, L, bringing the
children up but it was difficult to see where that took the case as there
was limited evidence as to the consequences of his deportation.

6.   The refusal letter referred to a pattern of offending which although
it was low level comprised a number of offences over a period of time and
on behalf of the respondent it was argued that he was a persistent offender
and placed a weighty public interest on the side of the scales against the
appellant.  The consequences of deportation are a fact and the consequence
of his own behaviour and it was clear, as it had been said in a number of
cases, that deportation separated families and the fact that that would
occur was not a reason for the appeal to succeed.  The law sought to
balance the nature and strength of the family unit and the disruption to it
as part of the balance.  It was not made out in this case.  There had been
interference and disruption but it did not cross the threshold and the
threshold factored in the public interest, as was said in MM (Uganda).
This was not an automatic deportation case but that did not reduce the
weight to be given to the public interest.  No private life or issues other
than undue harshness had been argued.  The appeal could not succeed on a
very compelling circumstances basis in any event.  The appeal should be
dismissed.

7.   By way of reply, Ms Mardner argued that the most recent offence had
triggered the deportation.  With regard to the drugs cases there had been
no intention to supply and there had been no convictions between 2001 and
2011 and then a two year gap and then nothing between 2013 and 2017.  Mr
Wilding had argued that this made him a persistent offender, but he would
hardly be seen as such in the criminal courts and that should not be
subject to a higher test here.  Deportation would be disproportionate when
balanced against the rights of his children.  Even on a basic level a six
month conviction should not have triggered his separation from his
children.  He had been in the United Kingdom for 29 years.  He had no
family in St Lucia, no hope of employment and was he in a mature stage of
his life.  He would be placed in unduly harsh circumstances.  As regards to
public interest, he paid his taxes and contributed to society.  The
possession of cannabis had been for his own use.  His son needed his
father's presence, which he had at the moment.  There would be a
significant interference and the consequences would be unduly harsh.

8.   I reserved my determination.

9.   Paragraph 399 is set out at paragraph 22 of my error of law decision.
It is clear that the relevant part of this is paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) which
is the paragraph applicable that it would be unduly harsh for the child to
remain in the United Kingdom without the person who is to be deported.  I
have to evaluate the appeal on the facts as found by the judge in the
context of that legal test.

10.  The judge found the witnesses all to be credible.  Among other things
this led the judge to conclude that the appellant has a genuine and
subsisting relationship with his children, and that finding has not been
challenged.  The evidence was accepted that he had been making financial
contribution for his children, even from detention, and that by looking
after them while their mother was at work he had been making emotional and
indirect financial contribution to their welfare.

11.  The judge accepted the evidence of three witnesses that the effect on
the lives of the three children had been nothing less than devastating and
this would be much worse if the appellant were to be deported.  This is a
reference to how the children were affected by the appellant's most recent
incarceration as well as the impact on them of his removal.  Whether or not
there is a specific finding there or a conclusion, the judge clearly found
at the end of paragraph 49 that the children needed their father to be
physically with them at this crucial time in their lives.

12.  It is clear from MM (Uganda) that with regard to the phrase "unduly
harsh" it was said that what was due or undue depended on all the
circumstances, not merely the impact on the child or partner in the given
case and this must therefore include the potential deportee's immigration
and criminal history.  In this regard it is clear, as summed up at
paragraphs 7 to 14 of the decision letter, that the appellant has a number
of convictions.  He has convictions from August 2001, August 2011, June
2013 and June 2017 of possessing a controlled drug, but there is no
suggestion that this was for other than personal use.  He was also
convicted in August 2011 of using threatening, abusive, insulting words or
behaviour with intent to cause fear or provocation of violence, and in
September 2013 of possession of an offensive weapon in a public place and
having a counterfeit currency note.  He was convicted in November 2013 of
battery.  The most recent conviction is that of November 2017 when he was
convicted for having a blade and/or an article sharply pointed in a public
place and that was the most recent offence and the one for which he
received a sentence of imprisonment which was a term of six months.

13.  As regards his immigration history, he was granted indefinite leave to
remain in May 1991.  He had come to the United Kingdom in 1989 and after an
interview on 10 July that year he was granted six months' leave to remain
in the United Kingdom as a visitor, subsequent to which the respondent was
informed that he was married and his leave was varied on 19 February 1990
and extended to 15 February 1991 and the grant of indefinite leave to
remain came some three months thereafter.

14.  As Ms Mardner argued, there have been significant periods when the
appellant did not offend.  In particular, there is the period between 2001
and 2011, and again between 2013 and 2017.  Clearly, as the judge noted,
any criminal offence is inexcusable, but equally, as he also pointed out,
there is a difference between serious and minor criminal offences.  I bear
in mind the finding of the judge that the children need their father to be
physically with them at this crucial time in their lives and taking account
of the evidence of the witnesses before the judge of the impact on the
children of the appellant's absence.  All the circumstances must be taken
into account, and in particular the criminal history and immigration
history as set out above and the weight that that has on the public
interest side of deportation and on the other side the impact on the
children of the appellant being removed to St Lucia in light of the judge's
findings.  I have concluded on balance that the evidence is such as to show
that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the United
Kingdom without the appellant.  As a consequence, his appeal is allowed on
human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 30 August 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

