
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/04964/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2020                           |On 07 January 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     I M
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONFIRMED)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms. D Revill, Counsel, instructed by Manchanda & Co
For the Respondent: Ms. S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh and is aged 59. He appeals
against a decision of the respondent not to grant him leave to remain on
human rights (article 8) grounds. The respondent's decision is dated 9
February 2018.

The respondent intends to deport the appellant consequent to a criminal
conviction.

The First-tier Tribunal (JFtT Herlihy) allowed the appellant's appeal by a
decision dated 21 August 2019. The respondent was granted permission to
appeal by JFtT Grant-Hutchison on 19 November 2019. By a decision dated 19
March 2020 this Tribunal (UTJ Kekic) allowed the appeal to the extent that
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside and it would be
remade by this Tribunal. UTJ Kekic preserved several identified findings of
fact made by JFtT Herlihy, which are detailed below.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal issued an anonymity direction, though no reasons
were provided for making it. UTJ Kekic did not set aside the direction.

I raised the issue as to the appropriateness of the direction continuing as
a preliminary issue at the resumed hearing. At the time neither I, nor as I
understand Ms. Revill, were aware that the appellant had stood trial for
raping his wife. Ms. Revill accepted that there was no justifiable basis
for the appellant to be anonymised, his criminal offending being a matter
of public record, but requested that neither his wife nor his children be
named in the decision.

I have considered the appropriateness of the anonymity direction
continuing. I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 ('Guidance Note')
concerned with such directions and I observe that the starting point for
consideration of anonymity directions in this Chamber of the Upper
Tribunal, as in all courts and Tribunals, is open justice. Paragraph 11 of
the Guidance Note confirms that an anonymity direction will not be made
simply because an appellant or witness has engaged in conduct that is
considered socially embarrassing to reveal. In particular, the fact that
someone has committed a criminal offence will not justify the making of an
anonymity direction, even if it is known that such a person has children
who may be more readily identified if the details of the person are known.

In re Guardian News and Media Ltd and Others [2010] UKSC 1, [2010] 2 A.C.
697 the Supreme Court held that, where both articles 8 and 10 of the ECHR
are in play, it is for the court or Tribunal to weigh the competing claims
under each article. Since both article 8 and article 10 are qualified
rights, the weight to be attached to the respective interests of the
parties and family members will depend on the facts.

The appellant's circumstances are not such as to justify the overriding of
article 10 rights. He has committed criminal offences which are a matter of
public record.

I observe that the appellant's wife, who continues to reside with him, was
subject to the serious assault that resulted in her husband's conviction in
2008. I am satisfied that usually the most proportionate approach would be
to ensure that the appellant's wife is not named in the decision and to
ensure that no detail is provided as to the region of this country in which
she resides. Such step would usually be more proportionate than directing
anonymity.

However, in the statements prepared for these proceedings there was no
express reference by family witnesses to the appellant's wife being a
complainant in a rape trial against her husband. Confirmation as to such
event was only secured during Ms. Revill's examination of the appellant.
The failure of the appellant and his solicitors to provide adequate details
as to this event within witness statements will be addressed below, but for
the purpose of considering the merits of an anonymity direction such
failure by the appellant's solicitors could have seriously impacted upon
the Tribunal having knowledge of relevant legal rights enjoyed by the
appellant's wife.

As I am now aware of the true state of affairs, I am mindful of sections 1
and 2 of the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1992 ('the 1992 Act'), which
provides:

         (1)

             (1)  Where an allegation has been made that an offence to
                which this Act applies has been committed against a person,
                no matter relating to that person shall during that
                person's lifetime be included in any publication if it is
                likely to lead members of the public to identify that
                person as the person against whom the offence is alleged to
                have been committed.


             (2)  Where a person is accused of an offence to which this Act
                applies, no matter likely to lead members of the public to
                identify a person as the person against whom the offence is
                alleged to have been committed ("the complainant") shall
                during the complainant's lifetime be included in any
                publication.

             ...


             (4) Nothing in this section prohibits the inclusion in a
                publication of matter consisting only of a report of
                criminal proceedings other than proceedings at, or intended
                to lead to, or on an appeal arising out of, a trial at
                which the accused is charged with the offence.



         (2)


             (1) This Act applies to the following offences against the law
                of England and Wales -

                  (aa) rape

Consequent to section 1 of the 1992 Act, there is a prohibition upon the
reporting of any matter which may lead to the identification of a
complainant in respect of certain sexual offences, including rape. Such
anonymity is for life, though there are a limited number of circumstances
in which the prohibition may be lifted by order of a court. I am satisfied
that such circumstances do not apply in this matter.

The appellant's wife therefore enjoys statutory protection as to her
identity in respect of her complaint of rape and as I am required to
consider this allegation in detail in my decision, I am satisfied it is
proportionate in respect of articles 8 and 10 rights that the appellant's
wife should enjoy anonymity in these proceedings. Further, in order to
ensure compliance with the statutory prohibition, I am satisfied that I am
required to anonymise the appellant and their children.

The continuation of the anonymity direction is therefore proportionate and
necessary. I confirm the directions at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1992 and married his wife in
1993. She enjoyed settled status at the time of marriage and was
naturalised as a British citizen in October 2016.

The appellant was subsequently granted leave to remain in this country as a
spouse and secured indefinite leave to remain on 11 June 1996.

The couple have eight children, all of whom are British citizens, and only
the last child is presently a minor. At the date of this decision the
children are aged: 26, 24, 23, 22, 20, 19, 18 and 15.

Criminal caution

The appellant has a caution in respect of common assault upon his wife,
which pre-dates the conviction detailed below.

Criminal convictions

The appellant was convicted at a Crown Court in 2008 on one count of
assault occasioning actual bodily harm and two counts of putting people in
fear of violence. He was sentenced to a total of 12 months' imprisonment,
with 6 months imposed for the ABH conviction and 2 x 3 months' imprisonment
consecutive in relation to the two counts of putting people in fear of
violence.

By means of her sentencing remarks, the Crown Court Judge observed, inter
alia:

         'The fact that [the assault] was committed in a domestic situation
         in the context of an unhappy marriage makes the offence no less
         serious. In fact, the aggravating features of this offence are that
         it was the culmination of a disagreement between you and [the
         appellant's wife] during the afternoon, and what makes it
         particularly bad is that it occurred in the presence of your young
         family. They saw you wrap a cable round the neck of your wife in
         anger and pull it tight. That must have been a horrifying incident
         for children so young to witness, happening to their mother, and
         indeed it must have been a very frightening experience for [the
         appellant's wife] as she was choking before she was released from
         the constraint.

         This is not the first time you have come to the attention of the
         police in a domestic violence situation. You have a previous
         caution in respect of a common assault upon her. The fact that your
         anger is prompted by money worries and stress is no excuse
         whatsoever.

         ...

         However, these offences, these two offences, were committed whilst
         on bail in respect of the assault on [the appellant's wife] and
         arise out of that matter. I granted you conditional bail, and I
         rather recollect that it was made clear to you about those
         conditions, and not contacting [the appellant's wife] or going
         around to her address. Yet, in flagrant breach of those conditions,
         you did go round to her address and you threatened the children in
         her presence, or you threatened to hurt the children, and you also
         threatened to kill her uncle, and in the context of the violence
         you had already shown to her back in October, no doubt that was a
         very frightening experience for her.

         Not satisfied with that, later that afternoon, you telephoned her
         uncle and you threatened to kill him and kidnap his children. Then
         an hour and 40 minutes later you threatened him again in the same
         terms. As I say these are very serious matters and you knew full
         well, or you certainly should have done, what you were doing was
         totally contrary to the bail you had been given, and, in the
         context of the previous assault, as I say, a very serious
         interference by way of harassment of your wife and her cousin.'

Deportation proceedings

On 7 July 2008 the respondent issued a 'reasons for deportation' letter and
a decision to make a deportation order. The appellant appealed and his
appeal was allowed by the Upper Tribunal (DIJ Wilson) to the limited extent
that the respondent was to reconsider the appellant's case following the
conclusion of Family Court proceedings. The decision of DIJ Wilson was
dated 21 April 2010.

During the course of those proceedings (IA/24119/2009) the appellant and
his wife gave evidence that they were in communication with each following
the appellant's release from prison and were reconciled. The appellant had
returned to the family home in August 2009. Social services subsequently
directed that he leave the property in September 2009 and he acted upon
such instruction.

DIJ Wilson noted at [19]-[20]:

         '19. In oral evidence he told me that it was due to frustration
             resulting from gambling problems. He then went on to state, 'I
             didn't threaten my uncle. I just went there. My root cause was
             gambling. I have got rid of that.  I will be able to save. I
             have not gambled since I have left the prison'. In re-
             examination the point was revisited, the Appellant again
             confirming he did not threaten his uncle. He was gently
             reminded that he had pleaded guilty to two counts, one of which
             was violence, to which he replied, 'Yes sir, I pleaded guilty
             actually in our culture it is different so I pleaded guilty to
             these offences. I said that if you do that I will kill you but
             I didn't mean that'. The judge's sentencing remarks were then
             read out to him that I have set out above, the Appellant then
             stating 'What it is if your uncle does it to me I think I will
             kill him, I meant that', the Appellant then accepted he did
             threaten his wife and uncle, going on to say why he had earlier
             said he had not threated, 'Actually when I was speaking it came
             out of my mouth now I'm saying I am pleading guilty I accept
             that'.

         20.  I find on the evidence before me the Appellant has developed
             little if any awareness of the impact of his violence,
             primarily directed at his wife, had either on his children or
             on his children's uncle.'

Trial in 2013

The appellant stood trial in early 2013 having been charged with two counts
of raping his wife. The prosecution called as witnesses to the events two
of the appellant's children who were aged around 14 and 13 at the time of
the trial. The Crown Court Judge accepted there was no case to answer at
the conclusion of the prosecution case on the ground that the evidence of
the witnesses was so contradictory and unreliable that it would not be safe
to leave it to a jury to consider the verdict. A direction was made that
the jury find the appellant not guilty on both counts.

Non-molestation order

In the late summer of 2013, the appellant's wife secured a non-molestation
order under section 42 of the Family Law Act 1996 from a County Court that
ran for 12 months. The appellant was forbidden, inter alia, from using or
threatening any unlawful violence towards his wife and going within 100
metres of the family home.

The appellant did not apply to set aside this order.

Heart surgery

The appellant underwent heart surgery in 2014.

Deportation proceedings (continuing)

Further to the decision of DIJ Wilson the respondent was not made aware by
the appellant as to the conclusion of Family Court proceedings despite a
number of requests seeking information. A fresh liability to deport notice
was served on the appellant on 7 June 2013. The appellant exercised his
statutory right of appeal and by a decision dated 30 July 2015 the First-
tier Tribunal (JFtT Meah) allowed his appeal to the limited extent that his
matter was to be reconsidered by the respondent: (DA/00322/2014). By means
of these proceedings the appellant confirmed that he had been reconciled
with his wife and had returned to the family home.

The appellant submitted representations to the respondent on 6 May 2015, 3
September 2015, 25 January 2016, 21 December 2016 and 10 July 2017.

The respondent refused the appellant's human rights representations on 9
February 2018 and issued the appellant with a notice to deport under
section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant enjoyed a genuine and
subsisting relationship with his wife. It was further accepted that it
would be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife to relocate to Bangladesh as
she was caring for their, then, three minor children. However, it was
decided that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife and
minor children to remain in this country in the absence of the appellant.

The appellant exercised his statutory right of appeal, which is now before
this Tribunal.

Preserved findings of fact

UTJ Kekic set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to the extent
that a finding is to be made as to whether very compelling circumstances
arise in this matter. She preserved the following findings of fact made by
JFtT Herlihy:

         '29. In considering the evidence before me I did not accept that
            the appellant is caring for his wife in any meaningful way and I
            find that her primary carer is likely to be [an older child]
            supported by the other adult children in the family. I found
            that the appellant's claim that he is his wife's carer not to be
            supported by the medical evidence relating to the award of
            Personal Independence Payment to him which was made on the basis
            that he needed aids or supervision in providing and preparing
            food, washing and bathing, managing his toilet needs and
            dressing and undressing. If the appellant is restricted to the
            extent disclosed in the PIP award, I do not find it credible
            that he can be providing care to his wife to the extent which he
            claims.

         30.  Further I did not find the evidence of the appellant and his
            brother credible to the claim that they have no family
            connections in Bangladesh. The evidence that the appellant's
            mother is not living in Bangladesh was clearly contradicted by
            the evidence of the appellant's wife. There appeared to be a
            contradiction between the evidence of the appellant and his
            brother as to who the appellant's mother was living with in
            Saudi Arabia. I do not find it credible that the appellant's
            brother would have visited Bangladesh on two occasions in the
            last 5 years for a holiday to be credible and I find it likely
            that the appellant's mother does live in Bangladesh and that
            there are extended family members also living there. My findings
            are supported by the evidence of the wedding invitation at
            [page] 11 of the appeal bundle relating to [an] invitation to
            the wedding of the appellant's [named child] (to take place on
            21 August 2019) which contains addresses in Bangladesh both for
            the bride and groom. It is not credible that [the] wedding
            invitation would contain an address in Bangladesh which is
            different from [the intended spouse's] address in Bangladesh if
            the [...] family had no connection in terms of extended family
            in Bangladesh.

         31. In considering the claim that the deportation of the appellant
            would be unduly harsh for his minor children and wife, both
            representatives referred to the decision in KO (Nigeria) v. SSHD
            [2018] UKSC 53 and it was submitted by the respondent's
            representative that this was concerned solely with the effect on
            individuals affected by [a] decision to deport and not on the
            appellant and that it went beyond more than harshness caused by
            separation. In KO (Nigeria) it was also Lord Carnwath's view
            that it does not suffice that the outcome is 'severe' or 'bleak'
            and the adverb 'unduly' must be given proper effect and so the
            position is quite distant from the test of 'unreasonableness'
            set out in section 117B(6)(b).

         32.  In examining the totality of the evidence it is clear that the
            appellant's minor children have lived apart from the appellant
            on two separate occasions and each time remained in the care of
            their mother and have at all times lived with their mother and
            siblings and I note that the social workers report refers to the
            reliance which the children have upon one another. There was no
            evidence before me that the two minor children suffered any
            educational difficulties or had any medical conditions such that
            removing the appellant from the home would give rise to unduly
            harsh consequences. The social worker found that the children
            were independent and supported one another.

         33. If the appellant were deported, life for the appellant's wife
            and minor children would change and they would clearly miss
            their father, but I find it would however be far from being
            unduly harsh. The appellant's wife and children would continue
            to live with their family members (the older siblings) with whom
            they have lived all their lives, they will continue living in
            the family home and attending the same schools and will continue
            to see their older siblings who have left home and who already
            provide assistance and who can be expected to help the
            appellant's wife with the consequences of the appellant's
            removal. There was no evidence that [the] appellant's wife
            worked, and it appears that she is supported by the State and
            has recourse to benefits, that would not be a matter that will
            cause or contribute to undue harshness. The appellant's wife
            will be able to continue to rely on the support of her adult
            children following her recent stroke and the support of the
            health authorities and social services. I note that the social
            worker in the report found that the children were very
            protective and supportive of their mother. I do accept that
            reliance upon modern means of communication, such as Skype, is
            no substitute for physical presence and face-to-face contact.
            However, in the event of deportation, such face-to-face contact
            would be possible. The appellant's wife has made visits to
            Bangladesh in the past as have the three oldest adult children
            and the appellant's minor children have grown up in a home with
            both parents who are of Bangladeshi origin and I find they are
            not estranged from Bangladeshi culture. There is no suggestion
            that the family's financial circumstances were markedly better
            than they are at present or would likely be in the future given
            the appellant is not working due to ill health.

         34.   I find it would be possible for the Appellant to see both his
            wife and children in Bangladesh and find that Exception 2 does
            not apply ...

         ...

         36.  I did not accept the appellant was without family connections
            in Bangladesh but I do accept that he has not lived in
            Bangladesh since 1992 and his links to that country are likely
            to have diminished over time. I accept that the appellant has
            clearly attempted to downplay his connections to Bangladesh
            having initially said that his brother had not visited for many
            years when clearly his brother had visited twice in the last 5
            years and he denied having a mother in Bangladesh which was
            contradicted by the evidence of his wife. I did not find the
            appellant was acting as a carer for his wife as the claim
            clearly conflicts with the evidence of the PIP award. The
            appellant says that he relies on financial support from his
            children and I see no reason why this would not continue if he
            were to return to Bangladesh. I do not find the appellant would
            in any event be destitute in Bangladesh as he is likely to have
            extended family connections for the reasons which I have given.

         37. With regard to the appellant's health there was no evidence
            that treatment for his diabetes and heart condition would not be
            possible in Bangladesh nor would his health conditions prevent
            his integration into that country. The appellant would be
            returning to Bangladesh at the age of 58, to a country he left
            at the age of 31 and would be returning with some health
            problems. It is apparent that he is clearly able to speak
            Bengali and his evidence is that he has worked in the United
            Kingdom for very many years but says that he is currently unable
            to work due to his health problems. The respondent noted that
            the award of PIP was not indefinite, and I note that the award
            was at the standard rate rather than the higher rate and is due
            to expire in August 2021.'

Hearing

The appellant

The appellant relies upon two supplementary witness statements, in addition
to the statement relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal. The first is
dated 5 March 2020. The second is undated and was adopted at the hearing.

I observe that there was a failure by the appellant to abide by rule 15(2A)
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules')
and to give notice indicating the nature of the evidence relied upon in the
supplementary bundles post-dating the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
Such failure was accompanied by a failure to explain why such evidence was
not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Further, several lengthy
paragraphs of the supplementary witness statements addressed matters upon
which preserved findings have been made and upon which the appellant has
previously been found incredible. I am satisfied that the appellant's
solicitors failed to recall relevant procedural requirements applicable to
appeals in this Tribunal. I admitted the evidence to permit a holistic
consideration of all available evidence.

By means of his supplementary witness statements, the appellant asserts
that the uncertainty as to his immigration status 'has led to my partner's
mental health issues deteriorating'. He further asserts that he is 'the
primary carer for our children and take care of my wife as she suffered a
stroke last year which has affected the right side of her body'. He relies
upon his not having re-offended since his conviction in 2008. He further
identifies his daily routine which includes waking his adult son and minor
daughter up in the morning and making breakfast for them. He wakes his wife
up and despite the fact that he 'can hardly walk without getting out of
breath due to ongoing health conditions' he considers that it is important
for his wife's recovery that he takes a walk with her. Upon their return,
he massages 'the affected right side of my wife's body, her shoulder, arm,
hands, back, leg and foot'. He describes how he aids his wife to wash and
dry herself and to get changed. He makes lunch for them and during the
afternoon the couple sit down and watch television together, chatting
throughout. He greets his children when they return home, and in the
evening 'I usually prep all the food, cut the vegetables and clean the meat
or fish, whatever we are making. Sometimes I cook myself or my eldest
daughter might help me. Other days, if my wife is feeling a little better,
I prep the food and she stirs the pot.' He massages his wife's affected
right side of her body in the evening to aid her recovery and they 'reflect
over the day we have had and talk about or kids, etc ... When we go to bed,
I sit down and spend quality time with my partner. I speak to her about her
worries and anxiety and try and help calm her down. When she suffers from a
panic attack, I talk to her and help her to control her breathing so she
can calm down from her panicked state.'

He observes that his wife is struggling with the ongoing deportation
proceedings, 'It is affecting her health and the way she functions on a
daily basis. As she is unable to sleep at night, she is tired during the
daytime and does not have much energy to do things with the kids,
especially due to her limited movement caused by her stroke. She cries to
me when we [are] alone, telling me how much she loves me and needs me and
that she cannot imagine life without me. She tells me she worries about the
children as she does not know how they will manage without me.'

He states that he undertakes grocery shopping, usually on his own but on
occasion accompanied by his son and grandson.

At �11 of his March 2020 statement, the appellant details:

         '11. I have been the backbone for my partner throughout the years
            we have been together, and I have always supported her
            emotionally and physically. But I can clearly see she is falling
            apart at the thought that we may be separated from each other.
            She would not be able to cope with looking after herself and
            take care of the children. In the event I was removed, she would
            not be able to carry out day to day tasks and would really
            struggle, our children are either at school, college, university
            or work. We do not have any family who are in the position to
            help, either due to them having their own kids to manage or
            because they live too far away from us.'

The appellant relies upon a deterioration in his wife's health following a
stroke. In his second addendum statement he states, inter alia, at �6:

         '6. ... I am trying to do everything possible, given my own health
            issues, to support her emotionally and physically (as so much as
            my health permits me too). I know without me she would not be
            able to manage. I am with her all the time and I am her
            backbone. I have tried to keep her as mentally strong as
            possible. But to remove me from my family would cause her world
            to come crashing down.'

In his evidence before me the appellant confirmed that he was on remand for
five or six months before the rape trial in 2013. He explained as to the
not guilty verdict that having heard the evidence it was concluded that his
wife had not been truthful and that 'the judge was angry with my wife'.

As to the non-molestation order issued after the trial in 2013 the
appellant informed me that he did not know about it initially but found out
about it later. Though he asked his solicitor to 'appeal' no steps were
taken to set it aside. He detailed that he is still not aware as to why his
wife secured the order. He informed me that save for what he described as
'the 2013 incident' there have been no incidents between him and his wife
following his release from prison in 2008. As to the incident leading to
the trial in 2013, he stated, 'it was so long ago I cannot recall it'.

The appellant was asked to explain what he meant at �11 of his March 2020
statement, where he referenced being the 'backbone' for his wife throughout
the years and having always supported her emotionally and physically. He
responded:

         'Whenever I was with my wife and children I looked after them. When
         I suffered my heart attack, when my children went to see me in
         hospital, and when they cried, I felt that they were my life.
         Nothing else mattered. Now that my wife is unwell, and is unable to
         help herself, along with the children we are the only people who
         can look after the family.'

The appellant relies upon letters from his GP, dated 30 June 2017 and 12
February 2020, confirming that he suffers from ischaemic heart disease,
essential hypertension and type 2 diabetes.

The appellant's wife

In addition to the witness statement that the appellant's wife adopted
before the First-tier Tribunal she relies upon two supplementary witness
statements. The first is dated 5 March 2020. The second is undated and was
adopted at the hearing.

Her evidence as conveyed by her statements is consistent with that advanced
by her husband. She confirms by her first supplementary statement that she
has suffered a stroke that has affected the right side of her body. She
details, 'my husband has been there for me unconditionally and I don't know
how I would have managed without him. I am suffering from depression,
anxiety, hypertension and panic attacks. The appellant has been my backbone
and supported me throughout. I don't know how I would have managed without
him'.

She details in this statement that she attended physiotherapy once a week
and her husband took her to all of the appointments despite him struggling
with his own health.

She explains that if the appellant were to be deported, she would not be
able to function without him and would not be able to care for either
herself or her children.

The appellant confirms in her March 2020 statement, at ��15-17:

         '15. I would like to explain that the appellant is the one who has
            kept us all together and functioning. Even when I suffer from my
            anxiety and panic attacks, he helps calm me down, he talks to me
            and helps me with my breathing. I honestly don't know how I
            would manage without him. Since my health has further
            deteriorated, the appellant has tried to take on additional
            tasks with children. Honestly, without him my life would fall
            apart. I would not be able to afford the care for myself or to
            help with my children or have support from our extended family
            to assist with the children. The appellant is the primary carer
            for our children. Without him I believe that this will have a
            huge impact on us all mentally and physically.

         16. With regards to our children, since they have found out there
            are issues with the appellant's case, they have been very
            emotionally upset, they start crying and questioning why this is
            happening to us. I honestly don't know how I will be able to
            take care of them and myself if he is taken away from us.

         17. In terms of the appellant, I could not ask for more, as a
            partner and the father. He is their role model, our best friend,
            his love [for] them is conveyed through his actions. His whole
            life is based upon their upbringing, their development and
            bonding. We all rely on him for love, stability and support.
            without him I worried that I won't mentally be able to cope and
            I fear having a breakdown.'

By her second supplementary statement the appellant's wife confirms the
physical impact of her stroke upon her. She explains that though her
husband is limited as to how he can help her physically due to his own
ongoing health problems, 'he is my backbone, my second pair of eyes and
gives me the emotional strength to carry on and not give up, without him I
will be totally broken'.

The appellant's wife provided medical evidence to the Tribunal as to her
present health condition. She suffered a stroke in June 2019, affecting her
right side. She suffers depression and hypertension.

In evidence to me she accepted that she had supported the appellant at his
deportation hearing in 2010, at a time where there were problems in the
relationship. She could not recall anything about the rape trial in 2013,
not even which children gave evidence against their father. She then
recalled as to the trial that the children's evidence concerned the
appellant trying to hit her. On several occasions she confirmed that she
could not recall accusing her husband of rape in 2012.

She could not recall any incidents of domestic violence occurring after the
appeal hearing in 2010. Her evidence was that the last time her husband hit
her was 'a long time ago, when my children were little'. When gently
pressed on the issue she initially stated that the last occasion of
domestic violence was in 2008. When reminded of her having applied for and
secured a non-molestation order in 2013, she changed her evidence and
stated that the last incident was in 2013, 'when there was an argument with
the children'. She stated that the last time her husband showed any anger
towards her, or shouted at her, was in 2013

The appellant's wife confirmed to me that she was not presently scared of
the appellant. If something happened to her in the family home, she would
have the support of her children.

The appellant's son

The appellant's now 18-year-old son attended the hearing and gave evidence.
In addition to the witness statement he relied upon before the First-tier
Tribunal, he adopted a supplementary statement dated 5 March 2020. He
explained that he resides at home with his parents and five of his
siblings. Two other siblings reside elsewhere. He confirmed to me that as
he grows up, he feels the need for his father's supportive guidance more
than ever. He detailed that his father and mother advise him as to how he
should live his life as a good human being. He explained his daily
interaction with his father and further observed that 'when my dad goes
shopping on the weekend, he takes me along with him and shows me how to
shop, what to look for when [buying] fresh produce and fresh meat and
fish.'

He observed, at ��14-16:

         '14. Life without the appellant is unimaginable; we are one
            beautiful family, who are emotionally and physically dependent
            upon each other. In my opinion I believe it would be unduly
            harsh to separate us from the appellant. We will be broken as a
            family if he was to be removed.

         15. I would be heartbroken if [my] father is sent back to
            Bangladesh. My [siblings] and I would be devastated, and it
            would be detrimental to their development and mental health. My
            mother would have no one to provide her with the support and
            help to look after all of us children.

         16. My father is my role model and the backbone to our family. He
            has guided me on the right path and kept me out of trouble and
            shown me the right way to live my life. Without my father's
            support and direction, I will be lost, and I believe our family
            will be broken.

In cross-examination the appellant's son accepted that his father had
engaged in repetitive domestic violence against his mother and that it was
common during his childhood for him to watch his father beat his mother. He
accepted that the infliction of physical harm affects emotional stability
and further accepted that such repetitive violence may be the cause of his
mother's present mental health concerns.

When asked by Ms. Cunha as to whether his father has assumed responsibility
for matters that his mother cannot undertake, he replied, 'kinda'. He
observed that whilst his mother may have required psychiatric support in
the past, he does not believe that she requires it at the present time.

As to whether he and his siblings could aid his mother in the absence of
their father he replied, 'we cannot always help'. In respect of his minor
sibling, he observed that his father helps them with schoolwork and that
his mother helps 'sometimes'. However, in response to further questioning
from Ms. Cunha he conceded that his mother helps his minor sibling more
often than his father does.

He stated that he had not seen his parents arguing since 2015 and was vague
as to what caused this argument, saying no more than it related to 'a past
incident'.

Other children

In addition, four of the appellant's seven other children provided witness
statements for the appeal proceedings in 2015. No updated evidence was
filed for the hearing before me. The children are broadly consistent in
asserting that it was unjust for the respondent to be seeking to deport
their father. Reference is made to the family being very happy together and
the children being emotionally and physically dependent upon their father
and his support.

One child detailed, 'I am so proud of my father and the way he has changed.
He no longer shout at us and he listens and talks to us and advises us
properly. When I see the way he treats me and my family members it makes me
realise that I'm proud to have him as my father. I love the appellant
dearly. Even my mother has changed and doesn't argue with my father as in
the past when they have argued it had an effect on us as kids. I realise I
also hurt my father in the past because I was resentful.

The minor child has provided no witness statement to the Tribunal.

The appellant has provided updated school and college reports in relation
to his three youngest children.

Children and Young People's Mental Health Service assessment (CYPS) October
2016

Filed with the Tribunal is a CYPS assessment concerned with the appellant's
minor child, dated October 2016. There is no indication contained within
the assessment as to a prohibition upon it being filed with the Tribunal.

The assessment records that in April 1997 there was a referral to social
services that the appellant's wife and her first three children were
victims of domestic violence perpetrated by the appellant, that such
violence resulted in their fleeing the family home and that they no longer
resided with the appellant. The appellant's wife and children returned to
the family home thereafter. In 2002 social services was informed by a
primary school that there were concerns that the children were witnessing
high levels of domestic violence, with reports of possible marital rape.
Further reports of domestic violence were recorded by social services in
2006 and 2007. Following the appellant's arrest in 2007, he was bailed to
an address in Leeds and the appellant's wife secured an injunction
preventing him from returning to the family home and also from entering
identified local areas. The day after securing this injunction the
appellant returned to the family home and made threats to kill his wife and
to take the children away from her.

Social services records evidence regular interventions in relation to the
children over the years. Three of the children left the family home
following allegations of physical assault upon them by their father. He is
recorded as hitting them with a coat hanger. One of the children was
supported in a move into foster care. Two children were subject to special
guardianship orders and five others to supervision orders. The assessment
identifies the family circumstances as being in a very difficult and
chaotic state between 2007 and 2013.

The assessment records that prior to the appellant's illness the children
all expressed that they did not want him to return home. However, in
interview with the social worker preparing the assessment several children
confirmed that they wanted their father to return home because of his
illness.

The children observed that their parents did not argue as much upon the
appellant's return to the family home late in 2014 and instead they talk
things through. The appellant was observed by the children to be much
calmer and more relaxed. Reference was made by the children to their
parents not having 'big' fights and the appellant shouting less. The
appellant's wife informed the assessor that the last act of violence
inflicted upon her as being in 2013. The appellant stated that he had not
hit or abused his wife for three or four years and if he feels angry, he
can just walk away.

The assessment observes, 'Perhaps his poor health and need for someone to
care for him are his main motivation for change. Certainly, it is difficult
to understand why [the appellant's wife] would resume this relationship
with a man who has been violent towards her for a long period of time and
now she is taking care of him.' As to this concern, the social worker
opined, inter alia, that the appellant's wife, 'may also feel that she and
the children will be more respected by the community if their father is
around and they are together'.

The conclusion reached was that the appellant's presence in the family home
did not raise safeguarding concerns in respect of the children.

Law

Foreign criminal

The appellant is not a foreign criminal for the purposes of section 32 of
the UK Borders Act 2007 as he was not sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment
or longer for a single offence: OLO and Others (para 398 - "foreign
criminal") [2016] UKUT 00056.

Ms. Revill accepts by her skeleton argument, dated 15 December 2020, that
the appellant was convicted of an offence that caused serious harm and so
he is a foreign criminal for the purpose of section 117D(2)(c)(ii) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2002 ('the 2002 Act'): R (Mahmood) v.
Upper Tribunal (IAC) & Others [2020] EWCA Civ 717, [2020] 3 W.L.R. 723, at
[74]. She was right to concede this point on behalf of the appellant.
Actual bodily harm is by definition bodily harm that is more than trivial.
If it is sufficiently serious to require a prison sentence - 'so serious
that nothing less will do' - a Tribunal will generally be entitled to
conclude, without more, that it has caused serious harm for the purpose of
section 117D(2)(c)(ii). In this matter the appellant wrapped a cable around
his wife's throat when angry and sought to choke her, in front of children.
Serious harm was caused.

The appellant has previously been found unable to meet the provisions of
the Exceptions to deportation set out at section 117C of the 2002 Act.

Very compelling circumstances

Section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act provides that the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in section 117C(4) and (5). The test is a very stringent
one: NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
Civ 662; [2017] 1 WLR 20.

The Tribunal confirmed in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)
Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC); [2019] Imm. A.R. 780 that section 117C(6)
applies to both categories of foreign criminals described by Lord Carnwath
in paragraph 20 of KO (Nigeria) v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 W.L.R. 5273, namely those who have not
been sentenced to imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those who have.

The Immigration Rules replicates the very compelling circumstances test at
paragraph 398, requiring an appellant to establish that there are very
compelling circumstances over and above those set out in paragraphs 399 and
399A of the Rules.

In Secretary of State for the Home Department v. Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ
1225, at [28] Mcfarlane LJ, giving judgment on behalf of the Court,
approved the Tribunal's self-direction:

         28. In its final paragraph, the tribunal refers to the phrase "very
            compelling circumstances", observes that "very" indicates a very
            high threshold and observes that  the  word  "compelling"  means
            circumstances  which  have   a   powerful,   irresistible,   and
            convincing effect. It is hard to contemplate  how  the  tribunal
            could have demonstrated any greater focus on the  public  policy
            factors in favour of deportation.

There is not a closed list of what will constitute 'very compelling
circumstances' and a flexible approach is required. Sir Ernest Ryder
confirmed in Akinyemi v Secretary of State for the Home Department (No. 2)
[2019] EWCA Civ 2098, [2020] 1 W.L.R. 1843, at [39]:

         39. The correct approach to be taken to the 'public interest' in
            the balance to be undertaken by a tribunal is to recognise that
            the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals has
            a moveable rather than fixed quality. It is necessary to
            approach the public interest flexibly, recognising that there
            will be cases where the person's circumstances in the individual
            case reduce the legitimate and strong public interest in
            removal. The number of these cases will necessarily be very few
            i.e., they will be exceptional having regard to the legislation
            and the Rules.

When undertaking a holistic proportionality balancing exercise, I can adopt
the balance sheet approach as encouraged by Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali v.
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 W.L.R.
4799.

Vulnerability

I informed the representatives that consequent to the medical evidence
presented on behalf of the appellant's wife to the Tribunal, and her
history of domestic violence, I consider her to be a vulnerable witness.

Ms. Revill made no application for the appellant to be considered a
vulnerable witness.

Decision

I have considered all of the evidence presented in this appeal holistically
whether expressly detailed in this decision or not.

This matter has required me to consider the various and differing forms of
a 'lie' or 'untruth'; a statement made by one who does not believe it with
the intention that someone else shall be led to believe it. The scope of a
'lie' is wide. It can range from a harmless or trivial untruth, told to
avoid hurting someone's feelings, to a bold-faced lie. It can encompass a
half-truth, a deceptive statement that includes some element of truth. A
lie can be the consequence of minimization, where denial is coupled with
rationalization in situations where complete denial is implausible. I also
observe a blue lie, a falsehood, told on behalf of a group, promoted to
strengthen bonds among the members of that group. Lies can be brazen or
told to protect others. They can be the result of fear and coercion or
offered to protect another. In the evidence before me, I am satisfied that
I have been faced with many lies, covering the range identified above. They
have mainly been crude in form, unable to sustain even gentle forensic
examination. The task for me has been in identifying their form, and the
rationale behind them.

For the reasons given below, and observing the findings of JFtT Herlihy, I
am satisfied that the appellant is generally a stranger to the truth. His
evidence is often riddled with lies that cannot withstand even gentle
scrutiny. He is a most unimpressive witness.

I observe at this juncture that the telling of a lie or a series of lies,
whatever their underlying rationale, does not necessarily mean that very
compelling circumstances cannot arise to reduce the public interest in the
deportation of foreign criminal.

Before engaging with the balance sheet approach, I proceed to consider the
evidence presented by the appellant and his family members at the hearing.

Preserved findings of fact

I return to the preserved findings of fact. The appellant and his brother
were found incredible as to their assertion that they have no family
connections in Bangladesh. JFtT Herlihy observed clear contradictions in
the evidence presented, including the fact that a wedding invite for one of
the appellant's United Kingdom-based children detailed an address for them
in Bangladesh. This was strongly suggestive of relatives residing at that
address. It is apparent to me that the evidence provided by the brothers
was a crude effort to hide the true position as to close familial links in
Bangladesh. Both brothers decided to lie to the Tribunal.

As to the impact of deportation upon the three younger children, who were
minors at the time of the hearing before her, JFtT Herlihy concluded that
all of the siblings were able to secure support from one another. She
observed that the children had been separated from their father on two
separate occasions: for several months after his conviction in 2008 and for
between five to six months whilst on remand from 2012 to 2013. Consequent
to consideration of the evidence placed before me it is possible to be
clearer as to the time the appellant spent away from the family home. The
first period of separation ran from the time of his arrest, in October
2007, to some unidentified point in 2010 as confirmed by the children in
various witness statements, with a short period of time when the appellant
returned home between August and September 2009. The appellant's wife
secured a non-molestation order for some period of this time. The second
period of separation ran from a time in the late summer/early autumn of
2012 to 14 December 2014 and again the appellant's wife secured a non-
molestation order for a period of this time.

Throughout the time that the appellant was absent from the family home,
several of the children remained in the care of their mother, whilst others
lived elsewhere. Over time, seven of the eight children again resided
together at the family home.

JFtT Herlihy determined that whilst the children will clearly miss their
father upon his being deported the circumstances were far from establishing
the required undue harshness. I conclude that such finding is
unimpeachable. She further found that the appellant's health concerns could
properly be treated in Bangladesh and that the appellant will be able to
integrate upon his return as he resided in Bangladesh until the age of 31
and speaks Bengali.

Domestic violence

I find that contrary to the appellant's evidence he was engaged in long-
term physical violence towards his wife and children over many years,
accompanied by emotional abuse. By using violence, he adopted coercive and
dominating behaviour to the personal detriment of his wife and children.

The appellant was married in 1993 and I am satisfied that it was not a
happy marriage from its early days. Social services have a record of
concerns as to domestic violence arising in the marriage going back to
1997. The severity of the violence in April 1997 was such as to require the
appellant's wife to flee the family home accompanied by a two-month-old
baby, a thirteen-month-old toddler and her three-year-old eldest child. I
find that it is more likely than not that such violence was being inflicted
by the appellant upon his wife from an earlier date, with the incident in
April 1997 being a crisis point on her part arising from real fears as to
her safety and the safety of her children.

I accept the evidence of the appellant's son that his father engaged in
repetitive domestic violence against his mother throughout his childhood
and that it was common for him to watch his father beat his mother. I note
that often physical abuse in a relationship is not simply confined to
inflicting pain but also a means of establishing dominance. I am satisfied
that the appellant intended the use of violence towards his wife not only
to exude dominance over her, but also upon the children whom he regularly
ensured were witnesses to his acts. The appellant was exercising coercive
control.

I find, on balance, that the son has grown up in a household where the
appellant was regularly violent to his wife. I am further satisfied that as
such violence was observed by all of the appellant's children, they
themselves would have regularly felt fear and intimidation consequent to
such observation. I take judicial notice that children who observe domestic
violence whilst school-aged regularly feel guilty about such abuse and
blame themselves. Such self-blame is evident in the statement of one of the
children, who seeks to diminish their father's actions by criticizing their
own behaviour observing, 'I realise I also hurt my father in the past
because I was resentful'. This is evidence from one of the three children
who left the family home consequent to physical assaults upon them by the
appellant.

I also note that the self-esteem of children who witness domestic violence
may be adversely impacted, and their school grades may suffer and they may
get into trouble. I observe that by 2002, when the two elder children were
aged approximately 6 and 7, they informed school authorities, no doubt as
articulately as they could, that their mother was being subjected to high
levels of domestic violence, including possible rape. I further observe
that at later times the three eldest children would fail to return home
when teenagers, two of the children were shoplifting at the age of 13 and
12, and several of the children had a poor history of school attendance and
were considered not to have achieved their full potential. The personal
histories of the children corroborate a dysfunctional family home.

As to the levels of domestic abuse inflicted within the family unit by the
appellant, I find that it was of a significant level and directed toward
both his wife and his children. I observe four instances that evidence this
significant level of violence. Firstly, when the appellant's wife fled the
family home in 1997 with three young children. She was clearly fearful of
her personal safety. Secondly, in 2008 when the appellant tied a cable
around the throat of his wife, tightened it and sought to choke her. This
was a serious assault. Thirdly, when the appellant attended the family home
contrary to bail conditions and a court order and proceeded to threatened
to kill his wife. I find that the appellant's attendance and accompanying
threats placed his wife in significant personal fear. Fourthly, in 2009
when three of his children disclosed that they had been subject to such
physical violence that they were placed by social services away from the
family home. The appellant is identified as using significant violence in
1997, 2008 and 2009 and I am satisfied that as confirmed by the appellant's
son these were not rare occasions. I find that the appellant consistently
used significant violence within the family home. I further find that such
violence was accompanied by emotional abuse and coercive control.

I find the appellant's assertion, identified at �11 of his March 2020
statement that he has been his wife's' backbone' throughout the years they
have lived together, 'always' supporting her emotionally and physically, to
be a blatant lie as evidenced by his regular bouts of domestic violence. I
am satisfied that he was fully aware that this was a lie when he signed his
statement. When asked at the hearing to explain what he meant by such
assertion I am satisfied that his answer, detailed above, clearly
established that he had no insight into how a loving husband would
emotionally and physically support his wife. Rather, the reply made brief
reference to his always looking after his family before veering into
concern for his own position. I observe how regularly the appellant's
answers before me were rooted in self-absorption, exhibiting concern only
as to his own position. I find that at �11 of his statement the appellant
engaged in a brazen lie, one that is easily identifiable not only by
reference to social services records but also by his conviction and
caution.

Does the appellant possess insight into his behaviour?

In the CYPS assessment the appellant is recorded as stating that he learned
so much from counselling that he undertook for a year and that he is a
changed man. No further details are provided as to such counselling.

I observe that there is no reference in the CYPS assessment as to the
appellant exhibiting an understanding as to why he acts violently towards
others. There is no express understanding that domestic violence often
flows from a desire to dominate a partner, to keep fixed an imbalance of
power. There is no identification that he appreciates the coercive control
that is exercised through domestic violence, seeking to promote sexual
inequality, such as by consigning his wife to the default position of
undertaking housework, child-care and sexual service. He took no steps in
his evidence to identify how he presently manages and controls his temper,
when I have found that he was unable to do from early on in his marriage in
1993 to at least 2013, a period of two decades. Rather, the appellant
simply informed the assessor that he had not hit or abused his wife for
three or four years. I note that he lived apart from his wife for
approximately two of these years and was subject to a non-molestation
order, so for periods of that time his wife was not living with him.

Upon considering the appellant's evidence presented over the years, before
various tribunals, by means of witness statements and in his oral evidence
before me I find to the requisite standard that he exhibits no true insight
into both the nature of his violent behaviour towards both his wife and his
children and the significance of the adverse impact such violence has upon
them. There is very little, if any, contrition to be observed in the
evidence before me. Throughout his evidence to me he spoke with no warmth
towards his wife. He only expressed concern when ruminating upon his own
position and the possibility of his returning to live in Bangladesh.

His silence on the issue of domestic violence in all three witness
statements is stark, as is his constant refrain that it is unjust for the
respondent to be pursuing his deportation. Such self-absorbed complaint
wholly fails to engage with his having been sentenced to a term of
imprisonment for a serious assault upon his wife. I find that the appellant
significantly underplays his history of inflicting violence upon his
family. Such minimization is identifiable by the reference in his 2015
statement that, 'We have had problems just like any other family'. I find
that this is strongly suggestive that he perceives others to be responsible
for problems within the family home and that his violent response is
acceptable in society. His identified concerns before me were predicated
upon his personal situation, primarily his desire to be cared for whilst
suffering ill health in addition to a real concern as to deportation. He
exhibits no understanding that his behaviour towards his wife and children
was wrong.

Ongoing violence and emotional abuse?

I am satisfied that physical violence no longer plays a part in the
appellant's relationship with his wife and children. I find both the
appellant and his wife not to be truthful as to when such violence came to
an end, the appellant suggesting 2012 and the appellant's wife struggling
to coherently identify a time between 2008 and 2013. I find that there was
sufficient evidence as to ongoing domestic violence and intimidation to
satisfy a District Judge in September 2013 that it was appropriate to issue
a non-molestation order. However, I am satisfied that social services would
have acted upon any further complaint of domestic violence after the
assessment conducted in October 2016. There were concerns expressed in the
CYPS assessment as to the wife becoming reconciled to the appellant and
though no safeguarding concerns were identified at the time, I am satisfied
that social services would have acted quickly thereafter if such concerns
were raised.

I also find that the appellant's son who attended the hearing has in recent
years physically reached a size and maturity, coupled with the
deterioration in the appellant's health, that he is now able to protect his
mother and siblings from any violence directed to them by the appellant,
and the appellant is aware of this.

Whilst the CYPS notes the children's observations as to there being less
shouting and fewer fights between their parents in 2016, they did not state
that it had ceased. Being mindful that the appellant is not being honest as
to how he conducts himself toward his wife, the limited engagement with his
anger problems in his evidence before the Tribunal, and his lack of
understanding as to his behaviour I am satisfied that he continues to have
anger issues. I find that expressions of anger would place those living
with him, particularly his wife, in fear consequent to historic memories of
his anger being accompanied by violence.

Is the appellant providing care to his wife?

The appellant's evidence as to his role in the family home was tainted by
exaggeration and outright lies.

The appellant was not found by JFtT Herlihy to be credible as to his
providing care for his wife in any meaningful way. His wife's primary carer
was established, on balance, to be an identified child, supported by other
adult children. Clear and cogent reasons were given for such finding. As
observed by JFtT Herlihy, the appellant's evidence as to how he supports
his wife was significantly at odds with the evidence of his PIP award. The
award of August 2017 that was filed with the Tribunal identified standard
rate payments for both daily living and mobility needs. The assessor
recorded the information provided by the applicant for the assessment as
follows, inter alia:

         'You said you have difficulties preparing food, taking nutrition,
         washing and bathing, managing toilet needs or incontinence and
         dressing and undressing. I decided you need an aid to prepare or
         cook a simple meal, eat and drink, wash and bathe, manage your
         toilet needs or incontinence, and dress and undress. I decided you
         can plan and follow the route of a journey unaided. You said you
         have difficulty moving around. I decided that you can stand and
         then move unaided more than 20 metres but no more than 50 metres.

The appellant has filed no subsequent award decision detailing amendments
to the assessment for daily living needs and mobility needs. There is no
evidence before me that his health has improved.

A letter from his GP, dated 12 February 2020, details the appellant
presenting with shortness of breath when walking and having restricted
movement in his shoulders.

I observe the finding of JFtT Herlihy that the appellant's wife was able to
rely upon the continuing support of her adult children following her stroke
as well as the support of the health authorities and social services.

Though the judicial finding of fact as to the appellant not providing care
for his wife in any meaningful way was preserved by UTJ Kekic in her
decision of March 2020, both the appellant and his wife again addressed
this issue in their supplementary witness statements. I have read the
statements carefully on this issue. I am satisfied that the assertion that
the appellant cares for his wife in any meaningful way is false. The
appellant has subjected both his wife and his children to violence over
many years and has shown no indication that he understands the effect of
his actions. I am satisfied that his primary purpose upon returning to the
family home in 2014 was to resume his position as head of the household and
to secure the care from his wife and family he believes he is entitled to.
I find that he is not providing loving care to his wife, leaving others in
the family to undertake that role. His evidence as to his actions is wholly
inconsistent with his physical capability as detailed to his PIP assessor.
I am satisfied that his wife's supportive evidence results from the
coercive environment in which she resides. In the circumstances, I find
that the appellant is lying as to his being the primary carer for his wife
following her stroke and he has pursued this false assertion because he
believes it the best way of defeating the respondent's intention to deport
him to Bangladesh.


Role in the house

I find that the appellant is not being truthful in his evidence as to his
purported role in the family home. I find that family meals are prepared by
the appellant's wife and elder children with little or no involvement from
the appellant, who has been assessed in relation to PIP as requiring aid in
preparing a simple meal, let alone meals for the eight people who reside in
the family home. I find that he does not massage his wife two times a day.
The appellant is too self-absorbed, coupled with a clear lack of empathy
for his wife, to undertake this task, which I find is undertaken by elder
children. I find that the appellant is untruthful as to his aiding his wife
when she suffers anxiety and panic attacks. I conclude that her mental
health concerns are more likely than not deeply rooted in her suffering at
his hands and not caused by the present deportation proceedings, which
commenced over a decade ago and have been a constant for the family ever
since. I find that his wife turns to her elder children for support when
she experiences anxiety and panic attacks.

The appellant's evidence as to his undertaking the grocery shopping,
usually on his own but on occasion with his son is contradicted by his
son's evidence that they shop together. This is an example of the appellant
seeking to exaggerate his positive actions within the family unit.

I further find the appellant's son to be truthful when confirming that his
mother undertakes a greater role in aiding his minor sibling with their
homework than the appellant.

I conclude that the appellant enjoys his self-identified role as head of
the household and expects his family to meet his genuine, and perceived,
care needs. He lacks sufficient empathy to provide such care to others. His
evidence as to his acts within the house is riddled with inconsistency and
consists of a mixture of exaggeration and barefaced lies.

Evidence of the wife and children

I am mindful that the appellant's wife and children support him in these
proceedings. I have taken their evidence into account when considering the
issues above. I observe that the respondent accepts that the appellant and
his wife are in a genuine, subsisting relationship. I further find that
several of the children were active in encouraging the appellant's return
to the family home in December 2014.

However, there are clear concerns as to the evidence presented by the
appellant's wife and children. I am satisfied that they are not being
truthful on several aspects of their lives with the appellant. In seeking
to support their husband and father, a number of 'blue lies' have been
advanced in this matter. The children are untruthful as to the extent of
their personal experiences of their father because they are united in
having identified as a common goal that he be permitted to remain in this
country. I am satisfied that their reasons for adopting such approach are
complex.

I find that the children are not truthful in their assertions that they are
emotionally and physically dependent upon their father. The children have
lived apart from their father on two occasions, amounting to close to five
years. During some of this time certain children resided away from the
family home consequent to their father's acts of violence upon them. Other
children were affected by the consequences of such violence upon their
mother's ability to care for them, resulting in neglect. As found above,
all of the children have experienced, or at the very least observed, their
father's violence. All of the children have relied upon their mother at
various parts of their lives, some for the majority of their lives, and as
found by JFtT Herlihy they have established reliance between themselves as
they have grown older. Seven of the eight children are now adults. I find
that the years of emotional and physical abuse have not been forgotten by
the children and whilst they may be content for their father to recover his
health at home, they are not dependent upon him emotionally. The children
are not financially dependent upon their father. He has not worked since
his heart surgery in 2014 and is in receipt of PIP. As found by JFtT
Herlihy, the appellant relies upon financial contributions from his
children.

I am satisfied that several of the children were concerned as to their
father's health following his heart surgery and wished for him to return to
the family home. I conclude, as referenced by a number of the children in
their statements, that they were horrified to see him in hospital and that
knowledge of his condition aroused their compassion. However, such
compassion does not by itself establish deep and enduring love and
affection between a father and his children. I find that the children were
not being honest when referring to their father as the 'backbone' of their
lives, that they are 'proud' of him, that he is a 'friend' to them and that
they would be 'heartbroken' if he were to be deported. I am satisfied that
the appellant's son exhibited the emotional scars that continue to affect
him as to his father's long-term violence when he gave evidence before me.
His honesty on this issue was clearly observable and I find that all of his
siblings are more likely than not to have similar emotional scars
consequent to their personal experiences at the hands of their father.

I observe that the appellant's son sought to exaggerate the role the
appellant occupies within the family home, though when gently pressed he
proved willing to be honest as to the true situation. An example is his
initial observation that his father was engaged in helping his minor
sibling with homework, and that his mother only helped 'sometimes'. He
quickly accepted in answer to a question from Ms. Cunha that the true
position was that his mother helps his sibling more than this father. The
initial approach adopted was consistent with the 'blue lies' advanced by
the children as part of a common approach in seeking to aid their father
with his appeal.

There are instances of deflection and half-truths in the evidence of the
children. One child refers in their witness statement to leaving the family
home for five years because of the 'situation at home and arguments amongst
the family'. Nothing more is said as to why they left home at the age of 11
and remained away until aged 16. This evidence suggests that both mother
and father had a responsibility in their departure. I have been required to
consider the CYPS assessment to establish that they left the family home
consequent to violence inflicted upon them by the appellant and that they
were the recipient of several local authority/court interventions before
returning home. The true position was not referenced in the relevant
witness statement. I am satisfied that this was because the child sought,
for the common good, to aid their father with his appeal and consequently
sought not to provide the full picture as to their father's role in their
life.

Another child who gave evidence against the appellant in the rape trial
makes no reference to such action. Rather, reference is simply made to the
appellant being wrongly accused and 'remanded due to some allegations my
mother made' and 'the charges were unfounded'. No explanation is given as
to why they were willing to present evidence against their father at a
criminal trial. Again, a half-truth is utilized in evidence so as to aid
the appellant.

I further find that the children are not being truthful when asserting that
the decision of the respondent to seek to deport their father is 'unjust'.
They are mature enough to understand that the attack upon their mother in
2008 was serious. I find that they are simply repeating their father's
personal view in support of his claim, without considering the requirement
that they provide truthful evidence to this Tribunal.

The most significant use of deflection and half-truth in the hearing before
me was that all of the witnesses glossed over the 2013 trial save for a
consistent reference to the charges being unfounded and the appellant being
found not guilty. The charges themselves were not referred to. During pre-
hearing reading, I noted reference within the COYS assessment to an
incident where the appellant forced himself upon his wife, leading to a
trial where the appellant was released but not permitted to return home. It
was not made clear as to whether the trial concerned an allegation of
assault. As detailed above, I only became aware that the appellant has
stood trial in relation to two counts of marital rape during Ms. Revill's
examination of the appellant.

The representatives addressed this matter in examination which led to the
appellant informing me that the Crown Court judge was 'angry' with his wife
at the conclusion of the no case to answer decision. His wife's evidence
was that she had no recall of the trial, not even the charges, nor as to
which of her children attended to give evidence in support of her. I find
that it would be very unusual for a Crown Court judge to express annoyance
at a rape complainant. The very limited documentary evidence before me as
to the trial itself, provided by Ms. Revill upon its receipt from her
instructing solicitors during the course of the hearing, establishes that
the no case to answer decision was reached consequent to contradictory and
unreliable evidence, not upon the allegation being clearly false from the
outset. I find that the Crown Court Judge did not direct anger towards the
appellant's wife. This is an example of the appellant's disparaging
attitude to his wife. He is perfectly happy to lie in order to denigrate
his wife at a time when she is supporting him in his appeal.

I am satisfied that the family members, including the appellant's wife,
intentionally decided to avoid giving relevant details on this issue in
their witness statements and in their oral evidence. I have considered
whether the decision was underpinned by shame and embarrassment, though I
observe that the trial was addressed in the COYS assessment and both
parents spoke to the assessor about it. Upon careful consideration I find
that the appellant, his wife and the five children who prepared witness
statements decided to seek to present the appellant in as good a light as
possible for the purpose of his deportation appeal and in doing so were
prepared to engage in half-truths and deflection.

A combined decision by members of the family not to present the true
situation is further evidenced by the silence as to the non-molestation
order secured by the appellant's wife in September 2013, several months
after the trial. The appellant claims even now not to know the basis upon
which his wife sought the order. I find that he is fully aware as to the
basis on which it was secured. I am satisfied that he has presented half-
truths as to having moved into a relative's house in London in January 2014
and having lived there until returning to the family home in December 2014.
He has done so to avoid having to engage with his wife securing the non-
molestation order in September 2013. I find that he deliberately failed to
detail within his evidence the fact that he resided with a relative in
Leeds following his release from custody early in 2013. He was deliberately
vague as to his movements at this time before me, as he sought to establish
that he was not aware as to the reasons upon which the non-molestation
order was granted. I find that his wife knew where he was living when the
order was applied for and the order was served upon him at the correct
address. He is untruthful as to such events. I find therefore that he was
aware of the nature and contents of the order very soon after it was
issued, and he has been untruthful on this matter before me. He seeks to
hide the reasons as to why the order was granted in favour of his wife.

The appellant's wife has presented herself as having virtually no
recollection of seeking and securing the order, beyond her reference to
their 'there having been an argument with the children'. This suggests, but
no more, that the appellant's anger was directed towards his children.
However, she is named in the order and the appellant was prohibited by the
order against using or threatening violence towards her. Being mindful that
she pursued the application and instructed legal representation, I find
that she is not truthful as to now having no recollection of the grounds on
which the non-molestation order was sought and secured. The order was
issued some eight or nine months after the conclusion of the rape trial and
the County Court must have been satisfied as to the existence of a risk of
significant harm to the appellant's wife, attributable to the conduct of
the appellant, if the order was not made immediately. I am satisfied that
by the end of 2013 there continued to be a real threat of violence, whether
through threats or harassment, even though the appellant was not residing
with his family. I conclude that the appellant's wife has lied as to her
recollection of events in order to support the appellant. Both have sought
to prevent me from understanding the reason for the order being sought and
the evidence presented to the County Court.

I find that the family's witness statements are an effort to whitewash the
years of domestic violence and emotional abuse, the fracturing of the
family unit for several years and the appellant's continuing anger. They
read as hagiographies, with no engagement with the true circumstances.

I am satisfied that both the appellant's wife and the children have decided
to act as best as they can to keep the family unit together and to prevent
the appellant's deportation. However, I bear in mind that members of the
family have experienced considerable violence at the hands of the
appellant. The social services records make unpleasant reading as to the
fractured nature of the family unit. In addition to the long-term domestic
violence endured by the appellant's wife, which the children observed, the
appellant subjected his children to significant violence. This led to minor
instances of criminality by some of the children, and occasions when at
least three of the children were reported missing from home. Interim care
orders were issued in respect of three children and interim supervision
orders made in respect of the others. The local authority involvement with
the children occurred over several years. During such time concerns were
raised as to the neglect of the children by their mother. I am satisfied
that her son before me accurately identified that his mother was suffering
mental health concerns because of the regular violence inflicted upon her
by the appellant. I am satisfied to the requisite standard that the
appellant's wife and children, having seen and experienced violence at his
hands, being aware of his ongoing anger issues, seek to aid the appellant
in preventing his deportation, as it brings short-term benefit to their own
well-being in the family home.

Balance sheet assessment

Sir Ernest Ryder confirmed in TZ (Pakistan) v. Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109; [2018] Imm. A.R. 1301 that although
there is no obligation for a Tribunal to structure its decision-making in
any particular way, the use of a structure is to be endorsed. After the
Tribunal has found the facts it should set out, in the form of a balance
sheet, those factors that weigh in favour of immigration control against
those weighing in favour of family and private life. It should use that
balance sheet to set out a reasoned conclusion within the framework of the
tests being applied within or outside the Rules. The factors are not
equally weighted, and the Tribunal must, in its reasoning, articulate the
weight to be attached to each factor.

When considering the public interest, an assessment as to the seriousness
of the appellant's offending is to be undertaken. The appellant relies upon
the judgment of Underhill LJ in HA (Iraq) v. Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, [2020] H.R.L.R. 21, at [146] - [149],
in particular [148}:

         146. There is, however, another criticism of the UT's reasoning as
             regards the seriousness of the offence which emerged during the
             oral argument. It says at para. 62 that it gives due weight to
             the fact that RA's sentence "is at the bottom of the range
             covered by section 117C (3) ". It was right to do so: see para.
             92 above. But it then notes as countervailing factors (a) that
             the Judge gave credit for a guilty plea and (b) that "as the
             sentencing judge pointed out, the offence was a serious one".
             It was submitted that it was wrong to treat those points as
             diminishing such weight as RA could otherwise put on the
             shortness of the sentence.


         147. As to (a), I appreciate the logic of the UT's point. If the
             importance of the sentence is as an indicator of the
             seriousness of the offence, then that is more accurately
             reflected in the level of sentence pre-discount. On the other
             hand, the statutory provisions themselves make no distinction
             between discounted and undiscounted sentences, which suggests
             that this degree of refinement is rather out of place. It might
             also be thought wrong that the fact that RA had acted
             responsibly and acknowledged his guilt was not allowed to be
             put into the proportionality balance. I think the UT should
             have proceeded without qualification on the basis that his
             sentence was at the very bottom of the relevant range.


         148. As to (b), I think that the observation that the offence was
             "serious" was inappropriate for the reasons given at para. 94
             above: of course offences of this kind are serious, but the
             authoritative measure of the degree of seriousness is the
             sentence imposed. I would add that the Tribunal was also wrong
             to say that the sentencing judge had himself described the
             offence as serious. We have seen the sentencing remarks, in
             which he says simply that an immediate custodial sentence is
             appropriate because travelling on false documents undermines
             "the immigration and travel pillars upon which this country is
             to a certain extent built". He added that the offence was not
             particularly sophisticated in its commission.


         149. Again, I do not wish to be understood as saying that the fact
             that RA's sentence was at the very bottom of the relevant range
             is capable by itself of outweighing the strong public interest
             in the deportation of foreign criminals. I say only that it is,
             as indeed the UT recognised, a material consideration in
             striking the relevant proportionality balance.

I place into the assessment the fact that the appellant received a 12-month
custodial sentence in 2008, and that he was found not guilty at the trial
held in 2013.

However, I am also permitted to place into the assessment my findings that
the appellant regularly assaulted his wife and children over many years to
levels that would have attracted criminal prosecution. I am satisfied
having heard the evidence of the appellant's son that several assaults
would have been established to the criminal standard. I therefore place
into my assessment that the appellant inflicted significant levels of
violence and threats of violence upon his wife from a date soon after their
marriage in 1993 and subsequently upon his children until at least
September 2013 when a non-molestation order was issued.

The appellant can rely upon his having lived lawfully in this country since
30 December 1992, a period of 28 years. He has enjoyed settled status since
June 1996. However, he has not been lawfully present in this country for
half of his life and there is no operation of 'a near miss' in relation to
section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act.

I find that much of the delay in these proceedings rests with the
appellant. Various Family Court proceedings concerning his children
ultimately arose because of his violence. Further, he failed to keep the
respondent notified as to the progress of such proceedings and I conclude
that the burden was upon him to take this step, rather than there being a
burden placed upon the respondent to constantly liaise with the Family
Court. Whilst acknowledging that the respondent took time to consider
further representations between Autumn 2015 and Spring 2018, I am satisfied
that the appellant cannot rely upon this period of delay in circumstances
where he has known for many years that the respondent seeks to deport him,
and previous appeals were concluded in his favour on the narrow ground that
the respondent was required to consider relevant Family Court decisions. In
any event, for the reasons detailed in this decision, the appellant has not
developed closer ties and deeper roots in this country. He continues not to
have insight into his long-standing offending behaviour and exhibits little
if any empathy to his wife and children. His outlook is a selfish one,
requiring personal attention from those around him. He is unemployed, is
medically unfit to work and so on his own evidence has limited interaction
with his community beyond sometimes shopping and his attendance at a
mosque.

The appellant can appropriately rely upon it being in the minor child's
best interests that they reside with both parents. The appellant has been a
continuous presence in the family home since December 2014, and so the
minor child has lived with their father for approximately ten of their
fifteen years. Further, reliance can be placed upon social services having
identified in 2016 that no safeguarding concerns arose in relation to the
appellant's return to the family home.

I have no written evidence from the minor child as to the relationship with
their father. I am satisfied that it is more likely than not that if such
evidence had been filed it would have been consistent with the evidence
relied upon by their siblings, and so would not have presented a frank and
complete picture of life in the family home. It is a preserved finding that
the siblings secure support from each other, and I find that the minor
child secures significant support from their mother and siblings, with
their father a peripheral figure in their day-to-day life. I further find
that the minor child is shielded from their father's anger and efforts to
dominate within the family home by elder siblings.

Upon considering the individual circumstances of the minor child, at their
highest, I observe as well-founded JFtT Herlihy's preserved finding that
whilst they would miss their father, the personal circumstances in being
separated from him would be far from being unduly harsh and I find that
they come no-where close to establishing very compelling circumstances,
either on their own or taken holistically. The minor child has close,
protective support from elder siblings, and it is this support, coupled
with that of their mother, which is of importance to their emotional and
educational development.

Consequently, the appellant enjoys limited weight in the assessment as to
it being in the best interests of his minor child that he remains in this
country.

The respondent has accepted, as do I, that the appellant is in a genuine
and subsisting marriage to his wife. She may miss him if he were to be
deported and may feel personal anguish as being known in the local
community to have been separated from her husband through deportation.
However, she has lived apart from her husband for several years and whilst
I find that she invited him to return to the family home in 2014, I am
satisfied that this decision was predicated upon the wishes of some of her
children. Her care needs are primarily met by her elder children and her
son confirmed to me that her elder children can accompany her to visit her
GP.

I do not accept, to the requisite standard, that her depression and
hypertension have deteriorated due to the anxiety and stress caused by the
ongoing deportation proceedings. Such proceedings have been running for
over a decade, and for several of those years she did not reside with the
appellant. I find that it is more likely than not that her present mental
health concerns are rooted in the long-term domestic violence to which she
was subjected and her continuing need not to exacerbate her husband's
anger.

Consequently, the wish of the appellant's wife that her husband remains in
this country enjoys some weight in the overall assessment, but it amounts
to limited weight.

No positive weight can be placed in the assessment upon the appellant's
health condition. His present medical treatment is primarily limited to
attending his GP. Appropriate care can be secured in Bangladesh, as
confirmed by the relevant preserved finding of fact.

Ms. Revill submitted on the appellant's behalf that he is rehabilitated.
Reliance was placed upon the applicant having only been convicted on three
counts in 2008. I place into my assessment that the offences in 2008 were
serious ones. The assault upon his wife involved the use of a cable to
choke her, and the appellant subsequently disregarded both bail conditions
and a court order secured by his wife when visiting the family home and
making threats to kill. The threats made to a relative of his wife that he
would kidnap their children must have been frightening.

Whilst giving some weight to the appellant as to the passage of time since
2008, I have found that the appellant has no insight into his violent
behaviour, and underplays his current issues of anger. Whilst I am
satisfied that the appellant has not committed domestic violence in recent
years, I am not satisfied that it is unlikely that he will offend in the
future. He remains indifferent to his anger and his coercive control, as
well as to his belief in his primacy within the home in relation to both
his wife and his children. I find that he has not rehabilitated, simply
that his health condition and the maturity of his son impacts upon his
ability to use violence to dominate those around him. I find that he is
capable of using other forms of coercion, being mindful that his wife and
his children are fearful of future violence.

I give weight to the appellant's significant and long-term history of
violence towards his wife and children. I also give some weight to the
considerable number of lies the appellant has given to this Tribunal, which
is strongly suggestive that he possesses little inclination to be truthful
to the authorities. I have found that he is a man who is generally a
stranger to the truth.

Contrary to the submission of Ms. Revill, I do not find that the appellant
provides ongoing, real, effective or committed support to his adult
children. He is reliant upon financial contributions from his children, and
I have further found that all of the children have been affected by the
years of violence that they have observed and suffered. I find the true
circumstances are that the appellant returned to the family home desirous
of being personally cared for whilst in ill-health and his primary interest
remains in the provision of such care by his family.

The children, both adult and minor, have a strong interdependent
relationships and whilst they may miss their father upon his return to
Bangladesh, they will not be denied substantive support. Their emotional
connection to their father can be satisfied by telephone and other means of
communication.

Further, I do not accept Ms. Revill's submission that the children will
lose the benefit of their father acting as a role model. I am satisfied
that the children are well aware of their father's violence and temper and
I find that they do not genuinely believe him to be a role-model. He has
been a long-standing source of considerable pain to each member of the
family, and whilst the violent outbursts may have diminished, those who
have experienced his behaviour over many years could not consider him a
role model.

Upon considering the evidence in the round I find that the public interest
in deportation has been clearly established and that the appellant's
circumstances come nowhere close to meeting the high threshold of
establishing very compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest
under paragraph 117C(6) of the 2002 Act.

I conclude by observing the aid I received from both representatives in
this matter. It is appropriate that I observe the skill with which Ms.
Revill represented the appellant, and I note the considerable effort that
went into her very helpful skeleton argument.

Postscript

The failings by the appellant's solicitors ultimately extended the resumed
hearing by approximately an hour as further information as to the rape
trial was sought from them as well as time being required to examine the
appellant and his wife as to the trial. I observe that neither the
representatives nor the Tribunal were aware as to the precise charges
advanced at the criminal trial until after the hearing of this matter
commenced. The examination of victims of domestic violence requires
appropriate pre-hearing preparation, and the requirement is the same in
respect of rape complainants, as the discussion of violence, both physical
and sexual, can be a traumatic experience. The failure of the appellant's
solicitors to clearly address events at the 2013 trial by means of the
witness statements is significant. At the hearing I was mindful that I may
have had to adjourn the hearing to ensure that the representatives had
adequate time to prepare careful examination. However, both
representatives, and in particular Ms. Cunha, handled examination of this
issue with great care and sensitivity. I note my gratitude in respect of
their skillful examination. I further observe that the solicitors' failures
as to this issue were significant. Not only did their failure result in the
appellant's wife, a supporting witness for their client, being cross-
examined on a sensitive matter by the representatives who enjoyed no prior
warning, but they failed to provide adequate instructions to their counsel
which resulted in a failure to address at the hearing the statutory
protection enjoyed by the appellant's wife under the 1992 Act.

I am further concerned as to the actions of the appellant's solicitors
consequent to their failure to abide by rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Rules and,
in particular, the introduction of evidence on issues upon which the
appellant had already been found incredible and in relation to which there
were preserved findings. In the absence of a rule 15(2A) notice, there was
no effort within the witness statement to clearly indicate what evidence
post-dated the First-tier Tribunal's decision in August 2019. Ms. Revill
wisely did not seek to rely in her submissions upon new evidence concerned
with the appellant's purported care of his wife at home.

A decision was taken by the appellant and his solicitors for the hearing of
this appeal to be conducted remotely at the appellant's home, not at the
representatives' office. Such decision resulted in the possibility that the
appellant's wife would be examined as to her history of domestic violence
and her rape complaint in the presence of her husband and son. I am
grateful to Ms. Revill who agreed to the appellant and the son being
requested to leave the room when the appellant's wife gave evidence. I am
satisfied that by leaving the issue of the rape trial to be addressed in
oral examination at the hearing and by no steps being taken prior to the
hearing to ensure that the appellant's wife gave evidence away from her
husband, preferably in the presence of a lawyer or a person able to provide
support, the solicitors wholly failed to have regard to her vulnerability.

The appellant's solicitors are reminded as to the Tribunal's inherent
jurisdiction to govern proceedings before it and to hold to account the
behaviour of lawyers whose conduct of litigation falls below the minimum
professional standards: R. (on the application of Hamid) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2012] EWHC 3070 (Admin). The Tribunal does
not expect such failings on the part of the Manchanda & Co to arise again
in future proceedings.



Notice of decision

By means of a decision dated 19 March 2020 this Tribunal set aside a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 14 October 2019 on one
issue alone, namely as to whether very compelling circumstances arose
reducing the public interest in the appellant's deportation, so that his
deportation would be a disproportionate interference with his protected
article 8 rights. The decision on this one issue was set aside pursuant to
section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

The decision on the appellant's appeal on this issue is re-made, and the
appeal is dismissed.

The anonymity direction is confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly
identify the appellant, his wife and their children. This direction applies
to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure to comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 28 December 2020





To the Respondent
Fee Award

As the appellant's appeal has been dismissed, there can be no fee award.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 28 December 2020


