
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04583/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 October 2017                        |On 20 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              AL RICHARDO GREEN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Waithe, Counsel instructed by Okafor & Co
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing to a limited extent an appeal brought  by  the
respondent (hereinafter the claimant) against the decision of the Secretary
of State refusing him leave to remain.

2. The short point is that the claimant is the father  of  a  child  but  he
does not have a good relationship with the child's mother and when the case
came before the First-tier Tribunal any  contact  between  the  father  and
child was extremely skimpy.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was concerned not to make a  decision  that
could be inappropriate  given  that  the  Family  Courts  might  have  been
involved in a process of encouraging contact  between  the  child  and  her
father.  That much I understand but the judge simply should not  have  done
what he did.  The judge suggested that the case should be  "remitted  back"
for the Secretary of State to review and  make  a  further  decision.   Put
simply there is no power to do  that.   The  judge's  job  was  to  make  a
decision on the Article 8 claim that was presented to  him.   It  may  have
been appropriate to involve the Family Court Protocol.  It  may  have  been
appropriate to have adjourned awaiting the further decisions of the  family
court but it was not appropriate to avoid making a decision and remit  back
in the way that the First-tribunal purported to have done.  There  is  just
no power to do that.  The First-tier Tribunal has  not  done  its  job.   I
therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4. I then have to decide what to do next.  I  am  told  by  Mr  Waithe  that
there is a hearing in the Family Court on 12 December of this year and that
is not very far away now.  It may be that that will introduce an element of
finality although one must not assume that that is right.  It would not  be
helpful for me to make a final  decision  today  knowing  that  the  family
courts are still involved and knowing that the situation might  be  clearer
in a few weeks time.  If I cannot deal with this sensibly today there is no
point in the Upper Tribunal dealing with it at all and having set aside the
decision I return the case to the First-tier Tribunal for it to be  decided
again.

5. I do not  propose  to  make  any  directions  about  how  the  First-tier
Tribunal goes about its business, even if I could, but I do draw  attention
to the fact that the situation is likely to be clearer  after  12  December
and it may be that the First-tier Tribunal will want  to  list  the  matter
after that date.

6. I respectfully remind the  appellant's  representatives,  although  I  am
sure that they know, that it may be appropriate to involve the Family Court
Protocol and it is certainly in everyone's interests, I would have thought,
for them to serve all the papers that they can about the Family Court  case
and evidence about the current position  in  time  for  the  next  hearing,
whenever it might be, but that is a matter that will probably be covered by
directions from the First-tier Tribunal.

7. I understand the judge's reasons for doing as  he  did  but  this  appeal
really should not have been decided in the way that it was.

8. I have not made an order restricting reporting in this case.  It  may  be
that such an order is appropriate in a future decision that deals with  the
child's welfare.

Notice of Decision

To the extend indicated above, this appeal is allowed.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 17 November 2017              |
|Judge                                |                                     |

