
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04414/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 November 2019                  |On 11 December 2019                  |
|Extempore Decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                          Ms Emelita Largo Quidlat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel, instructed by Vine Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who entered the UK on 19
August 2009.

On 21 June 2018 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of long
residency and her private life. The application was refused. In respect of
her long residency claim, the respondent stated that paragraph 276B of the
Immigration Rules could not be satisfied because the appellant had spent
less than 10 years in the UK.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert ("the judge") on 23 April 2019.
The judge dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that
decision.

Neither the appellant nor a representative on her behalf attended the
hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. The judge proceeded to consider and
determine the appeal nonetheless.

It is apparent from a review of the Court file that the notice of hearing
was sent to the incorrect address (for both the appellant and her
representative) and I accept the evidence of the appellant that she was not
aware of the hearing.

This is a clear case of procedural unfairness, as the appellant, through no
fault of her own, did not have notice of - and therefore did not attend,
despite wishing to do so -the hearing. I advised the parties that I would,
on this basis, set aside the decision and my preliminary view was that the
matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Mr Ume-Ezeoke, on behalf of the appellant, submitted that I should proceed
to remake the appeal on the basis that the appellant has accrued over ten
years of continuous lawful residence such that the requirements of
paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules are now satisfied.  Ms Jones
accepted that the appellant now satisfies the ten years' continuous
residence requirement under paragraph 276B and that, in the refusal letter,
length of residence was the only reason paragraph 276B was said to be not
satisfied. She could not identify any suitability or other reasons why the
appellant should not be granted leave on the basis of 10 years continuous
residence.

As explained in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34]:

         "where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to
         an article 8 informed requirement, then this will be positively
         determinative of that person's article 8 appeal, provided their
         case engages article 8(1), for the very reason that it would then
         be disproportionate for that person to be removed."

Given the time the appellant has spent in the UK, and the relationships she
has established, I am satisfied that article 8(1) is engaged. Ms Jones did
not contest this and I note that in the reasons for refusal letter the
respondent accepted that the appellant enjoys a degree of private life in
the UK.

Removal would be disproportionate under article 8(2) for the reason given
in TZ: as the appellant satisfies the requirements of the Rules (in this
case, the Rule at Paragraph 276B), it would be disproportionate for her to
be removed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

|                      |               |               |                   |
|Signed                |               |               |                   |
|                      |               |               |                   |
|                      |               |               |                   |
|                                     | |          |                       |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        | |          |Dated:  9 December 2019|

