
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04964/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Held at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 16th August 2021              |On the 11th October 2021             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'IM'
                    (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS ARE CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, instructed by Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are the reasons for the decision which I reserved following the
hearing on 16th August 2021.  I am remaking of the decision concerning
appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal, on 9th February 2018,
to allow him to remain on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds.  On the
same date, the respondent issued a notice of her to deport the appellant.
Ms Revill helpfully set out the appellant's immigration history in her
skeleton argument, which Ms Cunha accepted was correct.  I set out this
history below.

The appellant's immigration history



    |Date               |Event                                             |
|10th July 1961     |Appellant, a Bangladeshi national, is born in     |
|                   |Bangladesh.                                       |
|4th January 1974   |RB (appellant's future wife) born in Bangladesh.  |
|1982               |RB moves to the UK.                               |
|30th December 1992 |Appellant enters UK as a visitor.                 |
|3rd March 1993     |RB and the appellant marry in the UK.             |
|10th March 1994    |First of the couple's eight children are born.    |
|                   |The last of the appellant's eight children and the|
|                   |only one who remains a minor was born on 11th July|
|                   |2005.                                             |
|11th May 1994      |The appellant applies for leave to remain as RB's |
|                   |spouse.  This is initially refused but the        |
|                   |appellant's appeal is later allowed.              |
|11th June 1996     |The respondent grants the appellant indefinite    |
|                   |leave to remain.                                  |
|7th March 2008     |The appellant is sentenced to six months'         |
|                   |imprisonment for assault of RB occasioning ABH and|
|                   |three months' imprisonment for each of two counts |
|                   |of harassment, served consecutively.              |
|11th June 2008     |The appellant is notified of liability to         |
|                   |deportation.                                      |
|7th July 2008      |The respondent issues a decision to deport the    |
|                   |appellant.                                        |
|15th October 2008  |The appellant is released from prison.            |
|27th February 2009 |The appellant's initial statutory appeal is       |
|                   |dismissed.  The appellant makes further           |
|                   |submissions which are refused and the appellant's |
|                   |appeal is dismissed.  The First-tier Tribunal's   |
|                   |decision is found to contain a material error of  |
|                   |law and is set aside.                             |
|15th April 2010    |FtT Judge Wilson allows the appellant's appeal    |
|                   |under Article 8 ECHR, due to outstanding family   |
|                   |proceedings.                                      |
|8th April 2012     |Appellant applies for a No Time Limit ('NTL')     |
|                   |stamp for his visa.                               |
|9th September 2013 |The respondent invites the appellant to give      |
|                   |reasons why he should not be deported.            |
|18th September 2013|RB obtains a non-molestation order against the    |
|                   |appellant.                                        |
|5th February 2014  |Respondent issues a new decision to deport the    |
|                   |appellant.  The appellant subsequently appeals    |
|                   |that decision.                                    |
|March 2014         |The appellant suffers a heart attack and returns  |
|                   |to the family home.                               |
|25th September 2014|The First-tier Tribunal dismisses the appellant's |
|                   |appeal but this is set aside, on the basis of an  |
|                   |error of law, in 2015.                            |
|31st August 2016   |The appellant's children are referred to Social   |
|                   |Services by the respondent.                       |
|7th October 2016   |RB naturalised as a British citizen.              |
|31st October 2016  |The appellant's children's Social Services cases  |
|                   |are closed with no safeguarding concerns.         |
|9th February 2018  |The respondent makes a decision to refuse the     |
|                   |appellant's human rights claim and his NTL        |
|                   |application.  The appellant subsequently appeals. |
|21st August 2019   |First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy allows the      |
|                   |appellant's appeal.                               |
|18th March 2020    |Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? sets aside Judge       |
|                   |Herlihy's decision, with preserved findings.      |
|21st December 2020 |The remaking of the appellant's appeal is heard by|
|                   |Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan, who dismisses   |
|                   |the appellant's appeal on 7th January 2021.       |
|19th January 2021  |The appellant applies for permission to appeal to |
|                   |the Court of Appeal.                              |
|28th April 2021    |Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan directs that his |
|                   |decision should be set aside unless               |
|                   |representations against that course are filed.    |
|27th May 2021      |No representations are received within the        |
|                   |timeframe and the 7th January 2021 decision is    |
|                   |automatically set aside, albeit with preserved    |
|                   |findings.                                         |


The preserved findings

In his decision dated 28th April 2021, in which he confirmed that his
earlier decision of 7th January 2021 was set aside, at �19, Upper Tribunal
Judge O'Callaghan stated:

"19. As there is no challenge by the applicant to the findings of fact made
in the January decision, such findings are preserved in their entirety.
Also preserved are the findings of fact made by Judge Herlihy at ��29 to 33
and 36 to 37 of her decision, as per the decision of Judge Keki? at �20."

In summary, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan's findings were preserved, but
his analysis of "very compelling circumstances" over and above Exceptions 1
and 2 for the purposes of Section 117C(6) of the Nationality, Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002, was, he agreed, flawed as he had taken into account
claimed domestic violence of which the appellant had not been convicted and
which was not relied on in the decision to make a deportation order, as
increasing the public interest in deportation.  In particular, the
respondent had relied at the hearing upon a lengthy history of violence
aimed towards RB and their children and reliance was placed upon the non-
molestation order.  However, noting the Court of Appeal's decision in OH
(Algeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1763, because the sole basis for the
deportation order had been the convictions in 2008, Judge O'Callaghan's
analysis was accordingly flawed.

The preserved findings of Judge O'Callaghan are extensive and are included
in the Annex to this decision.  The appellant has subsequently adduced
additional evidence since Judge O'Callaghan's decision which I will set out
below, together with a very brief summary of Judge O'Callaghan's findings.
These include extracts from Ms Revill's skeleton argument which also
helpfully set out a number of points that are undisputed.  The following
facts are undisputed:

      1. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with his children, the youngest of whom is a minor, aged 16;

      2. the appellant's children are British citizens;

      3. it would be unduly harsh for those children to live in Bangladesh;

      4. the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with RB,
         who is a British citizen, and it would also be unduly harsh for her
         to live in Bangladesh.

Judge O'Callaghan dealt with the nature of the appellant's offences against
RB for which he was convicted at ��19 to 20 of his decision, as including
wrapping a cable around the neck of RB in anger and pulling it tight, in
front of his own children.  The appellant also stood trial for, but was
acquitted of, raping RB in 2013 (�24) but RB secured a non-molestation
order running for 12 months in 2013.  The appellant did not apply to set
aside that order but underwent heart surgery and subsequently returned to
the family home in 2014.

At �33, Judge O'Callaghan noted that Judge Herlihy did not accept that the
appellant was caring for his wife in any meaningful way and that her
primary carer was likely to be an older child supported by adult children
in the family.  Moreover, Judge Herlihy did not accept the evidence that
the appellant had no family connections in Bangladesh.  Judge Herlihy did
not regard the "stay" scenario, of the appellant being removed to
Bangladesh, whilst RB and her children remained in the UK, as unduly harsh.
 She noted that the appellant's children would continue to live with their
family members in the UK with whom they had lived all of their lives, in
the family home, attending the same schools, and continuing to see their
older siblings.  There was no evidence that RB had ever worked. RB relied
on state benefits, which she would continue to receive.  RB would also be
able to rely upon the support of her adult children, who were very
protective and supportive of her.  Judge Herlihy went on to conclude that
the appellant had downplayed his connections in Bangladesh and that he
would not be destitute, as claimed, because of his extended family members
there.   The appellant's health condition was not a bar to the appellant's
integration into Bangladesh.

Judge O'Callaghan considered and assessed the appellant's renewed claims
that he was primary carer for his children and also cared for RB, who had
suffered a stroke which affected the right side of her body. The appellant
claimed to care for RB, with that care including massaging her shoulders,
arms and feet as well as making lunch; and helping RB to wash, dry, and
change herself.  RB had given evidence that was corroborative of the
appellant's role in supporting her.  RB described the appellant as her
"backbone".  Judge O'Callaghan also assessed evidence from the appellant's
son, who was supportive of the appellant remaining in the UK. The son gave
evidence that the appellant played a crucial role in supporting the family
and there was evidence from four of the appellant's seven other children as
to the appellant's changed ways, but no witness statement from the minor
child.

Judge O'Callaghan was highly critical of the witnesses' credibility and
truthfulness for very different reasons.  At ��84 and 85 he explained why
different witnesses might be prepared not to be truthful and described the
appellant as being generally a "stranger to the truth" and a "most
unimpressive witness".  At �92, Judge O'Callaghan concluded that the
appellant had been engaged in long-term physical violence towards RB and
their children over many years, accompanied by emotional abuse.  By using
violence he adopted coercive and dominating behaviour to the personal
detriment of RB and their children.  The regularity of that violence was
observed by all of the appellant's children.  The appellant's assertion
that he had always supported his wife emotionally and physically was
described by Judge O'Callaghan at �98 as a "blatant lie" and that the
appellant's answers were rooted in self-absorption, exhibiting concern only
as to his own position.  He similarly lacked insight into his behaviour
(see ��99 to 102).  The appellant exhibited no understanding that his
behaviour towards RB and their children was wrong.  Nevertheless, at �103,
Judge O'Callaghan was satisfied that social services would have acted upon
any further complaint of domestic violence after their assessment in
October 2016.  The facts that the appellant's son, had in recent years,
physically reached a size and maturity, coupled with the deterioration in
the appellant's health, meant that the son was now able to protect RB and
his siblings from any violence directed to them by the appellant.   Judge
O'Callaghan did not accept, and regarded as outright lies, the appellant's
evidence as to his role in the family home and supporting or caring for RB
in any meaningful way.  Whilst the appellant enjoyed his self-identified
role as head of the household and expected his family to meet his genuine
and perceived care needs, he lacked sufficient empathy to provide care for
others (�115).

The hearing

In his review decision, Judge O'Callaghan had directed that the respondent
had leave to file an addendum decision letter, addressing all issues on
which she wished to rely in respect of very compelling circumstances.  The
appellant also had the opportunity to adduce further evidence if he wished,
provided he gave relevant notification.

In response, the appellant provided a further supplementary bundle
including new witness statements of the appellant, RB and one of their
older daughters, TB, together with correspondence from the minor child's
school; the local Children's Mental Health Services; and a social worker.
The respondent did not file any addendum decision letter.  Ms Cunha
confirmed that the respondent was content to rely upon the original
decision which, in terms of the appellant's treatment of RB, focussed
solely upon his 2008 conviction, but was nevertheless sufficient, she
asserted, for the purposes of the public interest in the appellant's
deportation.

The appellant, RB and TB gave oral evidence in addition to their brief
written witness statements.  The appellant and RB gave evidence with the
benefit of a Bangladeshi (Sylheti) interpreter whilst TB gave evidence in
English.  All three gave evidence in respect of a new matter, namely the
minor child's history of obsessive compulsive disorder, or OCD, which had
worsened from January 2021.  Whilst Judge O'Callaghan had been highly
critical of the witnesses' credibility and I bear this in mind when I
considered the witnesses' new evidence, there was nevertheless objective
evidence from third parties which confirmed the minor daughter's condition
and its severity.

The written witness statements

I summarise the written witness statements of the appellant, RB and TB.  In
summary, the appellant described his youngest daughter as becoming obsessed
with hygiene, constantly cleaning herself.  She regularly locked herself in
the bathroom for 12 to 18 hours at a time and as the OCD took over she
could not touch anything in the bathroom. She refused to use the toilet as
she said it was dirty and instead defecated in the bath.  She would require
assistance having showers as she would not touch soap, shower or shampoo.
She would start shouting or crying and banging her head if her needs were
not met.  The emergency services were called to the family home on at least
one occasion during January 2021 and the appellant and RB accompanied their
youngest daughter to hospital.

The appellant described needing to repair his boiler, which had broken down
because of the excessive use of hot water.  There was also an occasion when
the daughter had panicked, grabbed a knife and this had resulted in the
couple having to remove all sharp objects but nevertheless the youngest
daughter had managed to cut her arms several times.  Fortunately the knife
had been blunt and she was unable to harm herself significantly but this
was another incidence of the need to call emergency services.

The appellant described RB needing to assist their youngest child with
showers, which had had a worsening effect on her health, and he gave as an
example the fact that RB had had to clean the youngest child's excrement
from the middle of the bath as the daughter would not use the toilet for
fear of touching anything.

The appellant reiterated his previous assertions of supporting RB
throughout, including massaging oil into her leg and providing her constant
support.  The appellant described mopping and disinfecting the floor, which
could be twice in one day, calming down his daughter, preparing meals and
cleaning up after everybody; taking his daughter to hospital as RB was too
unwell to travel; and making sure that the daughter had taken her
medication twice a day. He also described washing clothes, sometimes as
many as four to five times in one day.  He would also take his daughter
outside the family home, with family members, on picnics.

RB's and TB's witness statements were in broadly in similar terms to the
appellants.

The appellant's oral evidence

The appellant clarified, when challenged, as to how he had taken his
youngest daughter to hospital, that sometimes one of his daughters who had
a car would help and sometimes his son would also accompany him.  He would
also sometimes take a cab.  In relation to whether he did the washing for
everyone, he indicated that his children would help as well, but they also
were busy with their homework.  He confirmed that the youngest daughter had
access to therapy via Zoom calls and also by telephone and that there had
been two or three visits to the house by social services and from the
school.  When asked, however, whether he had been spoken to directly about
the daughter's prognosis specifically, the appellant was unable to add
anything more than he had been told to do everything with his daughter.  He
asserted that he had a close relationship with her and was responsible for
ensuring she had taken her medicine.  However, he was unable to confirm how
many tablets she was required to take each day and in fact confirmed that
she had not recently taken her medication, because she did not believe that
it worked.  This was in contrast to the TB's oral evidence that as far as
she was aware (and she was aware of the precise number of tablets that her
sister was prescribed to take) her sister was compliant in taking her
medicine.

When asked about the specific professional advice he had been given to
support his daughter, the appellant said he had been told to do things
slowly with her and not rush tasks, for example, in showering.  He said
that "we" had contacted social services and the hospital when his daughter
had self-harmed, although when asked to clarify who was "we", he said that
sometimes he was the one to make contact; and sometimes RB or their
children.  He accepted that RB and their daughters helped the youngest
daughter with showering but asserted that he was able to ensure her
compliance with medication by offering her gifts such as food or a mobile
telephone.  He disputed that she was prompted to comply with taking
medication because she was afraid of him.  She was stronger mentally than
her siblings and no-one could force her to take medicine.

When challenged as to whether he massaged or cared for RB in other ways,
when there were a number of RB's adult children living at home, he said
that because they were all grown up, he had to care for RB.  He was asked
about the youngest daughter's exams; her recent GCSE results and her school
attendance.  In his oral evidence, he was vague as to when the daughter had
restarted physical school attendance, following her illness.  He added that
she had not attended school in the period just before her GCSE exams,
because of coronavirus.  He was also vague about whether she would continue
her studies by attending a sixth-form college, having completed her GCSEs.
This lack of knowledge was despite this hearing being held in August, so
not far off the start of the new educational year.  He was unable to name
any sixth-form college that his daughter might wish to attend. He suggested
that the daughter might not pursue further studies, as she had not
submitted an application form. The family had had discussions with social
services, but he was unclear on the outcome of those discussions.

RB's evidence

RB was noticeably clearer in oral evidence than the appellant about the
practical impact of her youngest daughter's condition.  The daughter had
attended school for around two weeks just before her GCSE exams.  RB had
not been able to help her daughter with her school work, as the daughter
was reluctant to pick up books because of her phobia about hygiene.  The
appellant had been unable to help the daughter because he had no education.


The youngest daughter had had assistance from her school, as well as a
counsellor.  RB was also able to give specific evidence about their
daughter's condition.  The daughter suffered from OCD.  The strategy for
trying to help her included trying to encourage her to wash less
frequently, for a shorter period.  RB intervened by asking her to come out,
and stay out, of the bathroom, which the daughter would sometimes challenge
and become angry.

RB suggested that it was the appellant who ensured that their daughter took
her medicine, but in contrast to the appellant, she was aware of the
prescription detail, namely a single tablet, twice a day, the effect of
which was to relax the daughter.

The appellant helped with the family cooking, albeit helped by TB.  When
asked whether external agencies could help the family in the event of the
appellant's removal, RB confirmed that social services were helping the
family. They were willing to make daytime home visits, but there was the
problem at night-time, for example, with the daughter soiling the bath.

RB was aware of the youngest daughter's exam results in very broad terms
(once again, with a level of detail which contrasted to the appellant's
evidence). RB was aware that the daughter had GCSE passes including in
maths and English, wanted to study health and social care at sixth-form
college in September and wanted to become a teacher.  RB, the appellant and
children had all discussed the potential sixth-firm course together, as a
family.  The daughter has a place at college, which RB was able to name
(the appellant was not even certain that the daughter was enrolled at a
college, let alone name it).

RB was aware that the youngest daughter was currently refusing to take her
medicine because she felt that the medication was not working for her.

TB's evidence

TB was now an adult, having been born on 23rd February 1997.  She was now
married, but due to COVID she had not yet had a civil wedding and so she
continued to live at home with the appellant, RB and her six siblings, but
she also visited her husband's family regularly.  TB described at �13 of
her witness statement that she and two of her sisters would help RB in
helping the youngest daughter, who could be anxious about who she would
allow into the bathroom.  TB asserted that it was the appellant who
supported and cared for RB and ensured the smooth running of the family
home.

TB reiterated that it was the appellant who ensured that her younger sister
took her medicine and as far as she was aware, her sister was compliant,
even as recently as the day before this hearing.

TB did her fair share of helping with the household chores and both of her
parents cooked.  The appellant alone took her younger sister to hospital,
but TB clarified that her brother also attended hospital, by way of moral
support.  TB explained that her father had limited English, so he might
make call the hospital in broken English and further information would be
provided by family members.

In terms of her sister's school attendance, she had missed the majority of
her recent schooling.   She would go to school for one day, feel better but
then not go in for a number of days.  Her school attendance since April
2021 was not consistent, but she had passed her GCSE exams and the family
had discussed her potential college course. TB confirmed that her sister
was considering studying the same course as she had, in health and social
care. TB had helped her sister with schoolwork and everybody in the family
played a different part in supporting her sister.

Findings

I share Judge O'Callaghan's concerns about the appellant's honesty in his
evidence and RB's and TB's motives in exaggerating the role that he plays
in supporting the youngest daughter.  In particular, whilst all three have
emphasised the appellant's role in ensuring that the youngest daughter
takes her medication, to the extent that TB gave evidence that her sister
was compliant in taking her medication, I am not satisfied that he plays
such a role.  Notably, he is not even aware of the dose of medication, in
contrast to RB and TB.  Whilst the appellant may self-identify as head of
the household and regards himself as intervening to ensure his daughter
takes her medication (even convincing her to do so with the promise of
gifts such as a mobile phone), I find this assertion is unreliable, given
his basic lack of knowledge about her medication regime.  Moreover, his
assertion about the pivotal role he plays in her other life choices, for
example her choice of college, is belied by the fact that he is unaware of
whether she has a place at college, in contrast to RB's awareness.

Even on the appellant's own account, he is not involved in assisting the
youngest child in her washing herself, although I accept that he has had
some role possibly in cleaning, albeit not exclusively, and taking the
youngest child to hospital.

Were it not for the objective external evidence, I would have significant
doubts that the appellant plays any meaningful role in supporting his
daughter at all.  However, there are three important documents that were
also adduced.

The first, at page [E1] of the supplementary bundle, is a letter from the
youngest daughter's school dated 14th June 2021.  The letter confirms that
in March 2020 both parents had come to the school as they were concerned
about the daughter's behaviour and she had been displaying signs of OCD at
home.  They had both taken her to the GP, who suggested counselling, and
this was before the first national lockdown and the child had been classed
as vulnerable.  The school had taken advice from the Child and Adolescent
Mental Health Service (CAMHS) education outreach worker and agreed with the
family to make a referral for the daughter to CAMHS for their services.  It
was difficult for the child to engage with the school safeguarding officer,
but the officer discussed and agreed arrangements with both RB and the
appellant.  RB had explained to the safeguarding officer about the strain
it was putting on her and needing support from the appellant.  On a
positive note, the school correspondence referred to the child attending
school on 19th April 2021, completing all of her internal assessments and
coping well at school during this time, albeit not always compliant with
her medication.  The letter concluded:

"I feel that if the appellant is deported this will have a detrimental
effect on the family as [RB] is unable to manage [the child's]
behaviour/mental health alone due to her own health problems.  I'm sure it
will also have a huge negative impact on [the child's] mental health."

Of note, the correspondence is not simply from a general teacher but from a
safeguarding officer at the school.  It is also consistent with the second
piece of evidence, a letter from CAMHS dated 14th July 2021, at pages [F1]
to [F3].  That letter confirmed that the youngest child had been seen by
CAMHS in June 2020, following referral by her GP and school and that the
child's symptoms had become progressively worse.  There was a diagnosis of
OCD in the form of repeated washing, which had progressed to showering for
hours at a time, multiple times each day, food restriction and not using
the toilet, because of a repulsion of toilets.

The letter confirmed the child's medication, sertraline, an antidepressant.
In a passage headed "risk assessment", the letter described the child as
expressing the view that sometimes she would feel better if she were dead.
She had, in the past, taken an overdose of prescribed medication, for which
she had had to be hospitalised. She had taken a knife from the home kitchen
and threatened to harm herself with it.  Her parents had ensured that all
sharps in the home had been removed and there was someone with her at all
times.  They had been able to make use of the crisis line and attend
hospital when the child was unwell.

The letter also described the impact on family life. As of July 2021, the
child's condition meant that either her mother or her father needed to be
with her constantly.  RB had to wash her, sometimes up to 10 times a day.
The bathroom had to be cleaned with bleach before the child would use it.
RB had had a stroke, which meant that she herself was often exhausted and
in pain, but continued to support her daughter.  The appellant was
described as an essential support both to RB and children, ensuring that
food and chores were completed,  and an essential part of his daughter's
safety plan, albeit in oral evidence, the appellant was vague as to hat the
safety plan was.  The letter nevertheless concluded that the child was also
close to her father and it was likely that his deportation would lead to a
further deterioration in her symptoms.  Due to the child's current risk on
presentation, history of overdosing and self-harming, social services are
involved in the family.

From the assessments that had been carried out it, the view of CAMHS was
clear that in spite of both parents supporting their daughter, more support
was needed.  If the appellant were deported, it was likely that more
intensive social care support would be needed, as RB would not be able to
cope with the child's issues, as she had her own significant disabilities.

The final letter was from the local authority social worker, who was
allocated to the youngest child.  She confirmed, in correspondence dated
16th July 2021, that the Council's intervention team had received a
referral in November 2020 highlighting concerns of the risk of harm to the
youngest daughter because of diagnosis of the OCD and that they were
working with the family as having a "child in need".  The child was
reported as improving, but with fluctuations and this meant that the child
was carrying out certain rituals in order to ensure cleanliness and that
leaving the home could be difficult.  Whilst the letter acknowledged that
there was an extensive history of domestic violence between RB and the
appellant (more properly described as the appellant perpetrating violence
on RB), but there had been no further disclosures of domestic violence
since 2013.  The local authority's view was that any significant change to
the family dynamic would impact the family, particularly as the youngest
child would not otherwise then have the care and support of the appellant,
which would have a significant impact on her mental and emotional
wellbeing.

It is in the context of the powerful evidence from these three sources, all
consistent with one another, that despite the witness evidence of the
appellant, RB and TB overstating the precise practical support that the
appellant might play (for example being unaware of whether his youngest
daughter was in fact enrolled in college and unaware of her medication
regime), I am prepared to accept that the appellant has played and
currently plays an important role in providing emotional support to his
youngest daughter in her battle with OCD.  This is notwithstanding the
prolonged period of domestic violence to which he has subjected RB and
which their youngest daughter may have witnessed.  The views of the
assigned social worker and CAMHS are unequivocal, that there is a real risk
of a deterioration in the health of a minor child who, on any view, is
acutely unwell, highly vulnerable, and is at real risk of harm from
herself.  The improvements in the child's health are fragile, to say the
least, with the child currently not taking her medication and improvements
often only being described as sporadic.  The same agencies support the view
that the appellant's removal would take away an important source of support
for the minor daughter, and that this has implications for management of
her condition, in circumstances where she needs someone with her at all
times.

In these circumstances, in light of this new evidence, I am prepared to
find that the appellant's removal from the UK would have a significant
material impact on his youngest child's health and indeed could positively
harm her.  I am satisfied that even with the intervention of CAMHS and the
support from the child's siblings in supporting RB as a lone mother, that
on the current facts, the effect of deportation could cause real harm to
the child, in terms of risk to her.

Discussion and conclusions

I do not recite the law that was already referred to by Judge O'Callaghan
in his decision, except to say that first, I note, without gloss, the
statutory provisions of sections of sections 117A to D of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The appellant is a foreign criminal, by
virtue of an offence that has caused serious harm, and I start from the
presumption that deportation is in the public interest.

I also take into account that for the purposes of the appellant's family
life, there is a preserved finding that the effect of the "stay" scenario
(i.e. the appellant being removed to Bangladesh while RB and their children
remain in the UK), for the purposes of Exception 2, under section 117C(5),
was found not to be unduly harsh, and Ms Revill does not seek to disturb
that previous decision.  Instead, she argues that I should nevertheless
consider, afresh, the circumstances as now known in relation to the
youngest daughter for the purposes of "very compelling circumstances, over
and above Exception 2".  In doing so, I adopt a "balance-sheet" approach
(see: Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60).

Second, when  undertaking the holistic proportionality exercise, I do not
count against the appellant the allegations of, as opposed to convictions
for, violence over a sustained period, when the respondent had relied
solely on the appellant's conviction on 7th March 2008 of 3 counts (ABH and
two counts of putting persons in fear of violence), as opposed to any wider
alleged offending, when reaching her decision on 9th February 2018 to
refuse his human rights claim.

Continuing the balance sheet assessment in terms of right to respect for
the appellant's family life (for none of the new evidence is relevant to
private life), I conclude that on the basis of the minor child's medical
condition as it remains currently, it is in her bests interests that she
resides with RB and the appellant, which Ms Cunha rightly accepted.  That
is consistent with the advice from the child's school, CAMHS and the local
authority. The appellant has been a continuous presence in the family home
since he returned to it following the expiry of the non-molestation order
in December 2014 and no further safeguarding issues have been identified in
the 2016 review.

Moreover, in considering whether there are very compelling circumstances, I
am conscious that the child is highly vulnerable because of her OCD. The
objective evidence from three sources, untainted by the appellant's lack of
truthfulness, is consistent that the appellant's physical presence in the
child's life plays an important part in mitigating the risk of a
deterioration in her health, even if his practical assistance is
overstated, and TB and her siblings can and will continue to provide much
help to RB.   Also, in the appellant's favour, the sole offending on which
the respondent has relied in her decision is the 2008 conviction.  She has
been given the opportunity to issue a fresh decision taking into account
any other wider pattern of behaviour and has chosen not to do so.  The
appellant is unlikely to re-offend, for the practical reasons of his ill-
health and the ability of his son to protect RB and the son's other
siblings, now that he is older.

Taking the starting point of the public interest in deportation; the
serious harm caused by the offences for the appellant was convicted in 2008
and his lack of any insight or remorse on the one hand; and the
overstatement of the practical help he provides to his daughter; and on the
other hand, his lack of further offending since 2008 on which there is
reliance; the low likelihood of further offending; and the important effect
his physical presence has in mitigating the risks to his daughter, whose
condition is so serious; and who is currently at so fragile a stage in her
recovery, this is one of the rare cases where there are, in my view,  very
compelling circumstances over and above even the high standard of unduly
harsh effects of the appellant's deportation.

My decision has been a finely balanced one and might otherwise have been
different, had the respondent issued an addendum decision based on wider
circumstances of behaviour, or if the daughter were in a more sustained
period of recovery.  However, I must consider the circumstances on the
basis of the respondent's decision before me and the circumstances as they
currently exist.

For the above reasons, the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
refusal of his application for leave to remain on the basis of human rights
succeeds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   J Keith                        Date     6th September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have decided to make a whole  fee  award  of
�140.



Signed        J Keith                   Date     6th September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


ANNEX - PRESERVED  FINDINGS  FROM  THE  DECISION  OF  UPPER  TRIBUNAL  JUDGE
O'CALLAGHAN PROMULGATED ON 7TH JANUARY 2021

"Background

15. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in 1992 and married  his  wife
    in 1993. She enjoyed settled status at the time  of  marriage  and  was
    naturalised as a British citizen in October 2016.

16. The appellant was subsequently granted leave to remain in this  country
    as a spouse and secured indefinite leave to remain on 11 June 1996.

17. The couple have eight children, all of whom are British  citizens,  and
    only the last child is presently a minor. At the date of this  decision
    the children are aged: 26, 24, 23, 22, 20, 19, 18 and 15.

Criminal caution

18. The appellant has a caution in respect of common assault upon his wife,
    which pre-dates the conviction detailed below.

Criminal convictions

19. The appellant was convicted at a Crown Court in 2008 on  one  count  of
    assault occasioning actual bodily harm and two counts of putting people
    in fear of violence.  He  was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  12  months'
    imprisonment, with 6 months imposed for the ABH conviction and  2  x  3
    months' imprisonment consecutive in  relation  to  the  two  counts  of
    putting people in fear of violence.

20. By means of her sentencing remarks, the  Crown  Court  Judge  observed,
    inter alia:

         'The fact that [the assault] was committed in a domestic  situation
         in the context of an unhappy marriage makes  the  offence  no  less
         serious. In fact, the aggravating features of this offence are that
         it was the culmination of  a  disagreement  between  you  and  [the
         appellant's  wife]  during  the  afternoon,  and  what   makes   it
         particularly bad is that it occurred in the presence of your  young
         family. They saw you wrap a cable round the neck of  your  wife  in
         anger and pull it tight. That must have been a horrifying  incident
         for children so young to witness, happening to  their  mother,  and
         indeed it must have been a very  frightening  experience  for  [the
         appellant's wife] as she was choking before she was  released  from
         the constraint.

         This is not the first time you have come to the  attention  of  the
         police in a  domestic  violence  situation.  You  have  a  previous
         caution in respect of a common assault upon her. The fact that your
         anger is  prompted  by  money  worries  and  stress  is  no  excuse
         whatsoever.

         ...

         However, these offences, these two offences, were committed  whilst
         on bail in respect of the assault on  [the  appellant's  wife]  and
         arise out of that matter. I granted you  conditional  bail,  and  I
         rather recollect  that  it  was  made  clear  to  you  about  those
         conditions, and not contacting  [the  appellant's  wife]  or  going
         around to her address. Yet, in flagrant breach of those conditions,
         you did go round to her address and you threatened the children  in
         her presence, or you threatened to hurt the children, and you  also
         threatened to kill her uncle, and in the context  of  the  violence
         you had already shown to her back in October, no doubt that  was  a
         very frightening experience for her.

         Not satisfied with that, later that afternoon, you  telephoned  her
         uncle and you threatened to kill him and kidnap his children.  Then
         an hour and 40 minutes later you threatened him again in  the  same
         terms. As I say these are very serious matters and  you  knew  full
         well, or you certainly should have done, what you  were  doing  was
         totally contrary to the bail  you  had  been  given,  and,  in  the
         context  of  the  previous  assault,  as  I  say,  a  very  serious
         interference by way of harassment of your wife and her cousin.'

Deportation proceedings

21. On 7 July 2008 the respondent issued a 'reasons for deportation' letter
    and a decision to make a deportation order. The appellant appealed  and
    his appeal was allowed by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (DIJ  Wilson)  to  the
    limited extent that the respondent was to  reconsider  the  appellant's
    case following the conclusion of Family Court proceedings. The decision
    of DIJ Wilson was dated 21 April 2010.

22. During the course of those proceedings  (IA/24119/2009)  the  appellant
    and his wife gave evidence that they were in  communication  with  each
    following the appellant's release from prison and were reconciled.  The
    appellant had returned to  the  family  home  in  August  2009.  Social
    services subsequently directed that he leave the property in  September
    2009 and he acted upon such instruction.

23. DIJ Wilson noted at [19]-[20]:

         '19. In oral evidence he told me that it  was  due  to  frustration
             resulting from gambling problems. He then went on to state, 'I
             didn't threaten my uncle. I just went there. My root cause was
             gambling. I have got rid of that.  I will be able to  save.  I
             have not gambled  since  I  have  left  the  prison'.  In  re-
             examination the  point  was  revisited,  the  Appellant  again
             confirming he did  not  threaten  his  uncle.  He  was  gently
             reminded that he had pleaded guilty  to  two  counts,  one  of
             which was violence, to which he replied, 'Yes sir,  I  pleaded
             guilty actually in our culture it is different  so  I  pleaded
             guilty to these offences. I said that if you do  that  I  will
             kill you but I  didn't  mean  that'.  The  judge's  sentencing
             remarks were then read out to him that I have set  out  above,
             the Appellant then stating 'What it is if your uncle  does  it
             to me I think I will kill him, I meant  that',  the  Appellant
             then accepted he did threaten his wife and uncle, going on  to
             say why he had earlier said he  had  not  threated,  'Actually
             when I was speaking it came out of my mouth now I'm  saying  I
             am pleading guilty I accept that'.

         20.  I find on the evidence before me the Appellant  has  developed
             little if  any  awareness  of  the  impact  of  his  violence,
             primarily directed at his wife, had either on his children  or
             on his children's uncle.'

Trial in 2013

24. The appellant stood trial in early 2013 having been  charged  with  two
    counts of raping his wife. The prosecution called as witnesses  to  the
    events two of the appellant's children who were aged around 14  and  13
    at the time of the trial. The Crown Court Judge accepted there  was  no
    case to answer at the conclusion of the prosecution case on the  ground
    that the evidence of the witnesses was so contradictory and  unreliable
    that it would not be safe to  leave  it  to  a  jury  to  consider  the
    verdict. A direction was made that the  jury  find  the  appellant  not
    guilty on both counts.

Non-molestation order

25. In the late summer  of  2013,  the  appellant's  wife  secured  a  non-
    molestation order under section 42 of the Family Law Act  1996  from  a
    County Court that ran for 12 months. The appellant was forbidden, inter
    alia, from using or threatening any unlawful violence towards his  wife
    and going within 100 metres of the family home.

26. The appellant did not apply to set aside this order.

Heart surgery

27. The appellant underwent heart surgery in 2014.

Deportation proceedings (continuing)

28. Further to the decision of DIJ Wilson the respondent was not made aware
    by the appellant as to  the  conclusion  of  Family  Court  proceedings
    despite a number of requests seeking information. A fresh liability  to
    deport notice was served on the appellant on 7 June 2013. The appellant
    exercised his statutory right of appeal and by a decision dated 30 July
    2015 the First-tier Tribunal (JFtT Meah)  allowed  his  appeal  to  the
    limited  extent  that  his  matter  was  to  be  reconsidered  by   the
    respondent:  (DA/00322/2014).  By  means  of  these   proceedings   the
    appellant confirmed that he had been reconciled with his wife  and  had
    returned to the family home.

29. The appellant submitted representations to  the  respondent  on  6  May
    2015, 3 September 2015, 25 January 2016, 21 December 2016 and  10  July
    2017.

30. The respondent refused the appellant's human rights representations  on
    9 February 2018 and issued the appellant with a notice to deport  under
    section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

31. It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant enjoyed a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his wife. It was further accepted that
    it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  to  relocate  to
    Bangladesh as she was caring for their,  then,  three  minor  children.
    However, it was decided that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's wife and minor children to remain in this  country  in  the
    absence of the appellant.

32. The appellant exercised his statutory right of  appeal,  which  is  now
    before this Tribunal.

Preserved findings of fact

33. UTJ Kekic set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
    extent that a finding is to be  made  as  to  whether  very  compelling
    circumstances  arise  in  this  matter.  She  preserved  the  following
    findings of fact made by JFtT Herlihy:

         '29. In considering the evidence before me I did  not  accept  that
             the appellant is caring for his wife in any meaningful way and
             I find that her primary carer is likely to be [an older child]
             supported by the other adult children in the family.  I  found
             that the appellant's claim that he is his wife's carer not  to
             be supported by the medical evidence relating to the award  of
             Personal Independence Payment to him which  was  made  on  the
             basis that he needed aids  or  supervision  in  providing  and
             preparing food, washing and bathing, managing his toilet needs
             and dressing and undressing. If the appellant is restricted to
             the extent disclosed in the  PIP  award,  I  do  not  find  it
             credible that he can be providing care  to  his  wife  to  the
             extent which he claims.

         30.  Further I did not find the evidence of the appellant  and  his
             brother credible  to  the  claim  that  they  have  no  family
             connections in Bangladesh. The evidence that  the  appellant's
             mother is not living in Bangladesh was clearly contradicted by
             the evidence of the appellant's wife. There appeared to  be  a
             contradiction between the evidence of the  appellant  and  his
             brother as to who the appellant's mother was  living  with  in
             Saudi Arabia. I do not find it credible that  the  appellant's
             brother would have visited Bangladesh on two occasions in  the
             last 5 years for a holiday to be credible and I find it likely
             that the appellant's mother does live in Bangladesh  and  that
             there are  extended  family  members  also  living  there.  My
             findings  are  supported  by  the  evidence  of  the   wedding
             invitation at [page] 11 of the appeal bundle relating to  [an]
             invitation to the wedding of the appellant's [named child] (to
             take place on 21 August  2019)  which  contains  addresses  in
             Bangladesh both for the bride and groom. It  is  not  credible
             that [the] wedding invitation  would  contain  an  address  in
             Bangladesh which is different  from  [the  intended  spouse's]
             address in Bangladesh if the [...] family had no connection in
             terms of extended family in Bangladesh.

         31.  In considering the claim that the deportation of the appellant
             would be unduly harsh for his minor children  and  wife,  both
             representatives referred to the decision in  KO  (Nigeria)  v.
             SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 and it was submitted by  the  respondent's
             representative that this was concerned solely with the  effect
             on individuals affected by [a] decision to deport and  not  on
             the appellant and that it  went  beyond  more  than  harshness
             caused by  separation.  In  KO  (Nigeria)  it  was  also  Lord
             Carnwath's view that it does not suffice that the  outcome  is
             'severe' or 'bleak' and the  adverb  'unduly'  must  be  given
             proper effect and so the position is quite  distant  from  the
             test of 'unreasonableness' set out in section 117B(6)(b).

         32.  In examining the totality of the evidence it is clear that the
             appellant's minor children have lived apart from the appellant
             on two separate occasions and each time remained in  the  care
             of their mother and have at all times lived with their  mother
             and siblings and I note that the social workers report  refers
             to the reliance which the  children  have  upon  one  another.
             There was no evidence before me that the  two  minor  children
             suffered any  educational  difficulties  or  had  any  medical
             conditions such that removing  the  appellant  from  the  home
             would give rise  to  unduly  harsh  consequences.  The  social
             worker found that the children were independent and  supported
             one another.

         33.  If the appellant were deported, life for the appellant's  wife
             and minor children would change and they  would  clearly  miss
             their father, but I find it would however be  far  from  being
             unduly harsh. The appellant's wife and children would continue
             to live with their family members (the  older  siblings)  with
             whom they have lived  all  their  lives,  they  will  continue
             living in the family home and attending the same  schools  and
             will continue to see their older siblings who have  left  home
             and who already provide assistance and who can be expected  to
             help  the  appellant's  wife  with  the  consequences  of  the
             appellant's  removal.  There  was  no  evidence   that   [the]
             appellant's wife worked, and it appears that she is  supported
             by the State and has recourse to benefits, that would not be a
             matter that will cause or contribute to undue  harshness.  The
             appellant's wife will be able  to  continue  to  rely  on  the
             support of her adult children following her recent stroke  and
             the support of the health authorities and social  services.  I
             note that the social worker  in  the  report  found  that  the
             children were very protective and supportive of their  mother.
             I do accept that reliance upon modern means of  communication,
             such as Skype, is no substitute for physical presence and face-
             to-face contact. However, in the event  of  deportation,  such
             face-to-face contact would be possible. The  appellant's  wife
             has made visits to Bangladesh in the past as  have  the  three
             oldest adult children and the appellant's minor children  have
             grown up in a home with both parents who  are  of  Bangladeshi
             origin and I find they  are  not  estranged  from  Bangladeshi
             culture. There is no suggestion that  the  family's  financial
             circumstances were markedly better than they are at present or
             would likely be in the  future  given  the  appellant  is  not
             working due to ill health.

         34.  I find it would be possible for the Appellant to see both  his
             wife and children in Bangladesh and find that Exception 2 does
             not apply ...

         ...

         36.  I did not accept the appellant was without family  connections
             in Bangladesh but I  do  accept  that  he  has  not  lived  in
             Bangladesh since 1992 and his links to that country are likely
             to have diminished over time. I accept that the appellant  has
             clearly attempted to downplay his  connections  to  Bangladesh
             having initially said that his brother  had  not  visited  for
             many years when clearly his brother had visited twice  in  the
             last 5 years and he denied having a mother in Bangladesh which
             was contradicted by the evidence of his wife. I did  not  find
             the appellant was acting as a carer for his wife as the  claim
             clearly conflicts with the evidence  of  the  PIP  award.  The
             appellant says that he relies on financial  support  from  his
             children and I see no reason why this would not continue if he
             were to return to Bangladesh. I  do  not  find  the  appellant
             would in any event be destitute in Bangladesh as he is  likely
             to have extended family connections for the  reasons  which  I
             have given.

         37.  With regard to the appellant's health there  was  no  evidence
             that treatment for his diabetes and heart condition would  not
             be possible in Bangladesh  nor  would  his  health  conditions
             prevent his integration into that country. The appellant would
             be returning to Bangladesh at the age of 58, to a  country  he
             left at the age of 31 and would be returning with some  health
             problems. It is apparent that he  is  clearly  able  to  speak
             Bengali and his evidence is that he has worked in  the  United
             Kingdom for very many years but  says  that  he  is  currently
             unable to work due to  his  health  problems.  The  respondent
             noted that the award of PIP was not  indefinite,  and  I  note
             that the award was at the standard rate rather than the higher
             rate and is due to expire in August 2021.'

84. This matter has required me to consider the various and differing forms
    of a 'lie' or 'untruth'; a statement made by one who does  not  believe
    it with the intention that someone else shall be led to believe it. The
    scope of a 'lie' is wide. It can  range  from  a  harmless  or  trivial
    untruth, told to avoid hurting someone's feelings, to a bold-faced lie.
    It can encompass a half-truth, a deceptive statement that includes some
    element of truth. A lie can be the consequence of  minimization,  where
    denial is coupled with rationalization  in  situations  where  complete
    denial is implausible. I also observe a blue lie, a falsehood, told  on
    behalf of a group, promoted to strengthen bonds among  the  members  of
    that group. Lies can be brazen or told to protect others. They  can  be
    the result of fear and coercion or offered to protect another.  In  the
    evidence before me, I am satisfied that I have  been  faced  with  many
    lies, covering the range identified above. They have mainly been  crude
    in form, unable to sustain even gentle forensic examination.  The  task
    for me has been in identifying their form,  and  the  rationale  behind
    them.

85. For the reasons  given  below,  and  observing  the  findings  of  JFtT
    Herlihy, I am satisfied that the appellant is generally a  stranger  to
    the truth.  His  evidence  is  often  riddled  with  lies  that  cannot
    withstand even gentle scrutiny. He is a most unimpressive witness.

86. I observe at this juncture that the telling of a lie  or  a  series  of
    lies, whatever their underlying rationale, does  not  necessarily  mean
    that very compelling circumstances cannot arise to  reduce  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminal.

Preserved findings of fact

88. I return to the preserved findings  of  fact.  The  appellant  and  his
    brother were found incredible as to their assertion that they  have  no
    family  connections  in  Bangladesh.  JFtT   Herlihy   observed   clear
    contradictions in the evidence presented, including  the  fact  that  a
    wedding invite for one of the appellant's United Kingdom-based children
    detailed  an  address  for  them  in  Bangladesh.  This  was   strongly
    suggestive of relatives residing at that address. It is apparent to  me
    that the evidence provided by the brothers was a crude effort  to  hide
    the true position as  to  close  familial  links  in  Bangladesh.  Both
    brothers decided to lie to the Tribunal.

89. As to the impact of deportation upon the three  younger  children,  who
    were minors at the  time  of  the  hearing  before  her,  JFtT  Herlihy
    concluded that all of the siblings were able to secure support from one
    another. She observed that the children had been separated  from  their
    father  on  two  separate  occasions:  for  several  months  after  his
    conviction in 2008 and for between five to six months whilst on  remand
    from 2012 to 2013. Consequent to consideration of the  evidence  placed
    before me it is possible to be clearer as to  the  time  the  appellant
    spent away from the family home. The first  period  of  separation  ran
    from the time of his arrest, in  October  2007,  to  some  unidentified
    point  in  2010  as  confirmed  by  the  children  in  various  witness
    statements, with a short period of time  when  the  appellant  returned
    home between August and September 2009. The appellant's wife secured  a
    non-molestation order for some period of this time. The  second  period
    of separation ran from a time in the late summer/early autumn  of  2012
    to 14 December 2014 and again  the  appellant's  wife  secured  a  non-
    molestation order for a period of this time.

90. Throughout the time that the appellant was absent from the family home,
    several of the children remained in the care of  their  mother,  whilst
    others lived elsewhere. Over time, seven of the  eight  children  again
    resided together at the family home.

91. JFtT Herlihy determined that whilst  the  children  will  clearly  miss
    their father upon his being deported the circumstances  were  far  from
    establishing the required undue harshness. I conclude that such finding
    is unimpeachable. She futhrt found that the appellant's health concerns
    could properly be treated in Bangladesh and that the appellant will  be
    able to integrate upon his return as he resided in Bangladesh until the
    age of 31 and speaks Bengali.

Domestic violence

92. I find that contrary to the appellant's evidence he was engaged in long-
    term physical violence towards his wife and children over  many  years,
    accompanied by emotional abuse. By using violence, he adopted  coercive
    and dominating behaviour to the personal  detriment  of  his  wife  and
    children.

93. The appellant was married in 1993 and I am satisfied that it was not  a
    happy marriage from its early days. Social services have  a  record  of
    concerns as to domestic violence arising in the marriage going back  to
    1997. The severity of the violence in April 1997 was such as to require
    the appellant's wife to flee the family home accompanied by a two-month-
    old baby, a thirteen-month-old toddler and  her  three-year-old  eldest
    child. I find that it is more likely than not that  such  violence  was
    being inflicted by the appellant upon his wife from  an  earlier  date,
    with the incident in April 1997  being  a  crisis  point  on  her  part
    arising from real fears  as  to  her  safety  and  the  safety  of  her
    children.

94. I accept the evidence of the appellant's son that his father engaged in
    repetitive  domestic  violence  against  his  mother   throughout   his
    childhood and that it was common for him to watch his father  beat  his
    mother. I note that often physical  abuse  in  a  relationship  is  not
    simply confined to inflicting pain but also  a  means  of  establishing
    dominance. I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  intended  the  use  of
    violence towards his wife not only to exude  dominance  over  her,  but
    also upon the children whom he regularly ensured were witnesses to  his
    acts. The appellant was exercising coercive control.

95. I find, on balance, that the son has grown up in a household where  the
    appellant was regularly violent to his wife.  I  am  further  satisfied
    that as such violence was observed by all of the appellant's  children,
    they  themselves  would  have  regularly  felt  fear  and  intimidation
    consequent to such observation. I take judicial  notice  that  children
    who observe domestic violence whilst school-aged regularly feel  guilty
    about such abuse and blame themselves. Such self-blame  is  evident  in
    the statement of one of the  children,  who  seeks  to  diminish  their
    father's actions by  criticizing  their  own  behaviour  observing,  'I
    realise I also hurt my father in the past  because  I  was  resentful'.
    This is evidence from one of the three children  who  left  the  family
    home consequent to physical assaults upon them by the appellant.

96. I also note that the  self-esteem  of  children  who  witness  domestic
    violence may be adversely impacted, and their school grades may  suffer
    and they may get into trouble. I observe that by  2002,  when  the  two
    elder children were aged approximately 6 and 7,  they  informed  school
    authorities, no doubt as articulately as they could, that their  mother
    was being subjected to high  levels  of  domestic  violence,  including
    possible rape. I further observe that at later times the  three  eldest
    children would fail to return home when teenagers, two of the  children
    were shoplifting at the age of 13 and 12, and several of  the  children
    had a poor history of school attendance and were considered not to have
    achieved their full potential. The personal histories of  the  children
    corroborate a dysfunctional family home.

97. As to the levels of domestic abuse inflicted within the family unit  by
    the appellant, I find that it was of a significant level  and  directed
    toward both his wife and his children. I observe  four  instances  that
    evidence  this  significant  level  of  violence.  Firstly,  when   the
    appellant's wife  fled  the  family  home  in  1997  with  three  young
    children. She was clearly fearful of her personal safety. Secondly,  in
    2008 when the appellant tied a cable around the  throat  of  his  wife,
    tightened it and sought to choke  her.  This  was  a  serious  assault.
    Thirdly, when the appellant attended the family home contrary  to  bail
    conditions and a court order and proceeded to threatened  to  kill  his
    wife. I find that the appellant's attendance and  accompanying  threats
    placed his wife in significant personal fear. Fourthly,  in  2009  when
    three of his children disclosed that they  had  been  subject  to  such
    physical violence that they were placed by social  services  away  from
    the family home. The  appellant  is  identified  as  using  significant
    violence in 1997, 2008 and 2009 and I am satisfied that as confirmed by
    the appellant's son these were not rare  occasions.  I  find  that  the
    appellant consistently used  significant  violence  within  the  family
    home. I further find that such violence was  accompanied  by  emotional
    abuse and coercive control.

98. I find the appellant's assertion, identified at �11 of his  March  2020
    statement that he has been his wife's' backbone' throughout  the  years
    they have lived  together,  'always'  supporting  her  emotionally  and
    physically, to be a blatant lie as evidenced by his  regular  bouts  of
    domestic violence. I am satisfied that he was fully aware that this was
    a lie when he signed his  statement.  When  asked  at  the  hearing  to
    explain what he meant by such assertion I am satisfied that his answer,
    detailed above, clearly established that he had no insight into  how  a
    loving husband would  emotionally  and  physically  support  his  wife.
    Rather, the reply made brief reference to his always looking after  his
    family before veering into concern for his own position. I observe  how
    regularly the appellant's  answers  before  me  were  rooted  in  self-
    absorption, exhibiting concern only as to his own position. I find that
    at �11 of his statement the appellant engaged in a brazen lie, one that
    is easily identifiable not only by reference to social services records
    but also by his conviction and caution.

Does the appellant possess insight into his behaviour?

99. In the CYPS assessment the appellant is recorded  as  stating  that  he
    learned so much from counselling that he undertook for a year and  that
    he is a changed man.  No  further  details  are  provided  as  to  such
    counselling.

100. I observe that there is no reference in the CYPS assessment as  to  the
    appellant exhibiting an understanding  as  to  why  he  acts  violently
    towards  others.  There  is  no  express  understanding  that  domestic
    violence often flows from a desire to dominate a partner, to keep fixed
    an imbalance of power. There is no identification that  he  appreciates
    the coercive control  that  is  exercised  through  domestic  violence,
    seeking to promote sexual inequality, such as by consigning his wife to
    the default position of undertaking housework,  child-care  and  sexual
    service. He took no steps in his evidence to identify how he  presently
    manages and controls his temper, when I have found that he  was  unable
    to do from early on in his marriage in 1993 to at least 2013, a  period
    of two decades. Rather, the appellant simply informed the assessor that
    he had not hit or abused his wife for three or four years. I note  that
    he lived apart from his wife for approximately two of these  years  and
    was subject to a non-molestation order, so for periods of that time his
    wife was not living with him.

101. Upon considering the appellant's evidence  presented  over  the  years,
    before various tribunals, by means of witness  statements  and  in  his
    oral evidence before me I  find  to  the  requisite  standard  that  he
    exhibits no true insight into both the nature of his violent  behaviour
    towards both his wife and his children  and  the  significance  of  the
    adverse impact such violence has upon them. There is  very  little,  if
    any, contrition to be observed in the evidence  before  me.  Throughout
    his evidence to me he spoke with no warmth towards his  wife.  He  only
    expressed concern  when  ruminating  upon  his  own  position  and  the
    possibility of his returning to live in Bangladesh.

102. His silence on the issue of domestic  violence  in  all  three  witness
    statements is stark, as is his constant refrain that it is  unjust  for
    the respondent to  be  pursuing  his  deportation.  Such  self-absorbed
    complaint wholly fails to engage with his having been  sentenced  to  a
    term of imprisonment for a serious assault upon his wife. I  find  that
    the  appellant  significantly  underplays  his  history  of  inflicting
    violence upon his family. Such  minimization  is  identifiable  by  the
    reference in his 2015 statement that, 'We have had problems  just  like
    any other family'. I find that this  is  strongly  suggestive  that  he
    perceives others to be responsible for problems within the family  home
    and that his violent response is acceptable in society. His  identified
    concerns  before  me  were  predicated  upon  his  personal  situation,
    primarily his desire to be cared for whilst  suffering  ill  health  in
    addition  to  a  real  concern  as  to  deportation.  He  exhibits   no
    understanding that his behaviour towards  his  wife  and  children  was
    wrong.

Ongoing violence and emotional abuse?

103. I am satisfied that physical violence no longer plays  a  part  in  the
    appellant's relationship with his wife and children. I  find  both  the
    appellant and his wife not to be truthful as to when such violence came
    to an end, the appellant  suggesting  2012  and  the  appellant's  wife
    struggling to coherently identify a time between 2008 and 2013. I  find
    that there was sufficient evidence as to ongoing domestic violence  and
    intimidation to satisfy a District Judge in September 2013 that it  was
    appropriate to issue a non-molestation order. However, I  am  satisfied
    that social services would have acted upon  any  further  complaint  of
    domestic violence after the assessment conducted in October 2016. There
    were concerns expressed in the CYPS assessment as to the wife  becoming
    reconciled to the appellant and though no  safeguarding  concerns  were
    identified at the time, I am satisfied that social services would  have
    acted quickly thereafter if such concerns were raised.

104. I also find that the appellant's son who attended the  hearing  has  in
    recent years physically reached a size and maturity, coupled  with  the
    deterioration in the appellant's health, that he is now able to protect
    his mother and siblings from any  violence  directed  to  them  by  the
    appellant, and the appellant is aware of this.

105. Whilst the CYPS notes the children's observations  as  to  there  being
    less shouting and fewer fights between their parents in 2016, they  did
    not state that it had ceased. Being mindful that the appellant  is  not
    being honest as to how he conducts himself toward his wife, the limited
    engagement with his anger problems in his evidence before the Tribunal,
    and his lack of understanding as to his behaviour I am  satisfied  that
    he continues to have anger issues. I find  that  expressions  of  anger
    would place those living with  him,  particularly  his  wife,  in  fear
    consequent to historic memories  of  his  anger  being  accompanied  by
    violence.

Is the appellant providing care to his wife?

106. The appellant's evidence as to his role in the family home was  tainted
    by exaggeration and outright lies.

107. The appellant was not found by JFtT Herlihy to be credible  as  to  his
    providing care for his wife in any meaningful way. His  wife's  primary
    carer was established, on balance, to be an identified child, supported
    by other adult children. Clear and cogent reasons were given  for  such
    finding. As observed by JFtT Herlihy, the appellant's  evidence  as  to
    how he supports his wife was significantly at odds with the evidence of
    his PIP award. The award  of  August  2017  that  was  filed  with  the
    Tribunal identified standard rate payments for both  daily  living  and
    mobility needs. The assessor recorded the information provided  by  the
    applicant for the assessment as follows, inter alia:

         'You said you have difficulties preparing food,  taking  nutrition,
         washing and bathing, managing  toilet  needs  or  incontinence  and
         dressing and undressing. I decided you need an aid  to  prepare  or
         cook a simple meal, eat and drink,  wash  and  bathe,  manage  your
         toilet needs or incontinence, and dress and undress. I decided  you
         can plan and follow the route of a journey unaided.  You  said  you
         have difficulty moving around. I decided that  you  can  stand  and
         then move unaided more than 20 metres but no more than 50 metres.

108.  The  appellant  has  filed  no  subsequent  award  decision  detailing
    amendments to the assessment for daily living needs and mobility needs.
    There is no evidence before me that his health has improved.

109. A letter from his GP, dated 12 February  2020,  details  the  appellant
    presenting with shortness of breath when walking and having  restricted
    movement in his shoulders.

110. I observe the finding of JFtT Herlihy that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    able to  rely  upon  the  continuing  support  of  her  adult  children
    following her stroke as well as the support of the  health  authorities
    and social services.

111. Though the judicial finding of fact as to the appellant  not  providing
    care for his wife in any meaningful way was preserved by UTJ  Kekic  in
    her decision of March 2020, both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  again
    addressed this issue in their supplementary witness statements. I  have
    read the statements carefully on this issue. I am  satisfied  that  the
    assertion that the appellant cares for his wife in any  meaningful  way
    is false. The appellant has subjected both his wife and his children to
    violence  over  many  years  and  has  shown  no  indication  that   he
    understands the effect of his actions. I am satisfied that his  primary
    purpose upon returning to the family home in 2014  was  to  resume  his
    position as head of the household and to secure the care from his  wife
    and family he believes he is  entitled  to.  I  find  that  he  is  not
    providing loving care to his wife, leaving  others  in  the  family  to
    undertake  that  role.  His  evidence  as  to  his  actions  is  wholly
    inconsistent with his  physical  capability  as  detailed  to  his  PIP
    assessor. I am satisfied that his wife's  supportive  evidence  results
    from  the  coercive  environment  in  which   she   resides.   In   the
    circumstances, I find that the appellant is lying as to his  being  the
    primary carer for his wife following her stroke and he has pursued this
    false assertion because he believes it the best way  of  defeating  the
    respondent's intention to deport him to Bangladesh.

Role in the house

112. I find that the appellant is not being truthful in his evidence  as  to
    his purported role in the family home. I find  that  family  meals  are
    prepared by the appellant's wife and elder children with little  or  no
    involvement from the appellant, who has been assessed  in  relation  to
    PIP as requiring aid in preparing a simple meal, let  alone  meals  for
    the eight people who reside in the family home. I find that he does not
    massage his wife two times a day. The appellant is  too  self-absorbed,
    coupled with a clear lack of empathy for his wife,  to  undertake  this
    task, which I find is undertaken by elder children.  I  find  that  the
    appellant is untruthful as to his aiding  his  wife  when  she  suffers
    anxiety and panic attacks. I conclude that her mental  health  concerns
    are more likely than not deeply rooted in her suffering  at  his  hands
    and not caused by the present deportation proceedings, which  commenced
    over a decade ago and have been a constant for the family ever since. I
    find that his wife turns to her elder children  for  support  when  she
    experiences anxiety and panic attacks.

113. The appellant's evidence as to his undertaking  the  grocery  shopping,
    usually on his own but on occasion with his son is contradicted by  his
    son's evidence that they shop together.  This  is  an  example  of  the
    appellant seeking to exaggerate his positive actions within the  family
    unit.

114. I further find the appellant's son to be truthful when confirming  that
    his mother undertakes a greater role in aiding his minor  sibling  with
    their homework than the appellant.

115. I conclude that the appellant enjoys his self-identified role  as  head
    of the household and expects  his  family  to  meet  his  genuine,  and
    perceived, care needs. He lacks sufficient empathy to provide such care
    to others. His evidence as to his acts within the house is riddled with
    inconsistency and consists of a mixture of exaggeration  and  barefaced
    lies.

Evidence of the wife and children

116. I am mindful that the appellant's wife  and  children  support  him  in
    these proceedings. I  have  taken  their  evidence  into  account  when
    considering the issues above. I observe  that  the  respondent  accepts
    that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  are  in  a  genuine,   subsisting
    relationship. I further find that several of the children  were  active
    in encouraging the appellant's return to the family  home  in  December
    2014.

117. However, there are clear concerns as to the evidence presented  by  the
    appellant's wife and children. I am satisfied that they are  not  being
    truthful on several aspects of  their  lives  with  the  appellant.  In
    seeking to support their husband and father, a number  of  'blue  lies'
    have been advanced in this matter. The children are  untruthful  as  to
    the extent of their personal experiences of their father  because  they
    are united in having identified as a common goal that he  be  permitted
    to remain in this country.  I  am  satisfied  that  their  reasons  for
    adopting such approach are complex.

118. I find that the children are not  truthful  in  their  assertions  that
    they are emotionally and physically dependent upon  their  father.  The
    children have lived apart from their father on two occasions, amounting
    to close to five years. During  some  of  this  time  certain  children
    resided away from the family home consequent to their father's acts  of
    violence upon them. Other children were affected by the consequences of
    such violence upon their mother's ability to care for  them,  resulting
    in neglect. As found above, all of the children have experienced, or at
    the very least observed, their father's violence. All of  the  children
    have relied upon their mother at various parts of their lives, some for
    the majority of their lives, and as found by  JFtT  Herlihy  they  have
    established reliance between themselves as they have grown older. Seven
    of the eight children  are  now  adults.  I  find  that  the  years  of
    emotional and physical abuse have not been forgotten  by  the  children
    and whilst they may be content for their father to recover  his  health
    at home, they are not dependent upon him emotionally. The children  are
    not financially dependent upon their father. He has  not  worked  since
    his heart surgery in 2014 and is in receipt of PIP. As  found  by  JFtT
    Herlihy, the appellant relies upon  financial  contributions  from  his
    children.

119. I am satisfied that several of the children were concerned as to  their
    father's health following his heart  surgery  and  wished  for  him  to
    return to the family home. I conclude, as referenced by a number of the
    children in their statements, that they were horrified to  see  him  in
    hospital and that knowledge of his condition aroused their  compassion.
    However, such compassion does not by itself establish deep and enduring
    love and affection between a father and his children. I find  that  the
    children were not being honest when referring to their  father  as  the
    'backbone' of their lives, that they are 'proud' of him, that he  is  a
    'friend' to them and that they would be 'heartbroken' if he were to  be
    deported. I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  son  exhibited  the
    emotional scars that continue to affect him as to  his  father's  long-
    term violence when he gave evidence before  me.  His  honesty  on  this
    issue was clearly observable and I find that all of  his  siblings  are
    more likely than not to have  similar  emotional  scars  consequent  to
    their personal experiences at the hands of their father.

120. I observe that the appellant's son sought to exaggerate  the  role  the
    appellant occupies within the family home, though when  gently  pressed
    he proved willing to be honest as to the true situation. An example  is
    his initial observation that his father  was  engaged  in  helping  his
    minor  sibling  with  homework,  and  that  his  mother   only   helped
    'sometimes'. He quickly accepted in answer to a question from Ms. Cunha
    that the true position was that his mother helps his sibling more  than
    this father. The initial approach adopted was consistent with the 'blue
    lies' advanced by the children as part of a common approach in  seeking
    to aid their father with his appeal.

121. There are instances of deflection and half-truths in  the  evidence  of
    the children. One child refers in their witness  statement  to  leaving
    the family home for five years because of the 'situation  at  home  and
    arguments amongst the family'. Nothing more is said as to why they left
    home at the age of 11 and remained away until aged  16.  This  evidence
    suggests that both mother and father  had  a  responsibility  in  their
    departure. I have been required to  consider  the  CYPS  assessment  to
    establish that  they  left  the  family  home  consequent  to  violence
    inflicted upon them by the appellant and that they were  the  recipient
    of several local authority/court interventions before  returning  home.
    The true position was not referenced in the relevant witness statement.
    I am satisfied that this was because the child sought, for  the  common
    good, to aid their father with his appeal and consequently  sought  not
    to provide the full picture as to their father's role in their life.

122. Another child who gave evidence  against  the  appellant  in  the  rape
    trial makes no reference to such action. Rather,  reference  is  simply
    made to the appellant being wrongly accused and 'remanded due  to  some
    allegations my mother  made'  and  'the  charges  were  unfounded'.  No
    explanation is given as to why they were willing  to  present  evidence
    against their father at  a  criminal  trial.  Again,  a  half-truth  is
    utilized in evidence so as to aid the appellant.

123. I further find that the children are not being truthful when  asserting
    that the decision of the respondent to seek to deport their  father  is
    'unjust'. They are mature enough to understand  that  the  attack  upon
    their mother in 2008 was serious. I find that they are simply repeating
    their  father's  personal  view  in  support  of  his  claim,   without
    considering the requirement that they provide truthful evidence to this
    Tribunal.

124. The most significant use of deflection and half-truth  in  the  hearing
    before me was that all of the witnesses glossed  over  the  2013  trial
    save for a consistent reference to the charges being unfounded and  the
    appellant being found not  guilty.  The  charges  themselves  were  not
    referred to. During pre-hearing reading, I noted reference  within  the
    COYS assessment to an incident where the appellant forced himself  upon
    his wife, leading to a trial where the appellant was released  but  not
    permitted to return home. It was not made clear as to whether the trial
    concerned an allegation of assault. As detailed above,  I  only  became
    aware that the appellant has stood trial in relation to two  counts  of
    marital rape during Ms. Revill's examination of the appellant.

125. The representatives addressed this matter in examination which  led  to
    the appellant informing me that the Crown Court judge was 'angry'  with
    his wife at the conclusion of the  no  case  to  answer  decision.  His
    wife's evidence was that she had no recall of the trial, not  even  the
    charges, nor as to which of her children attended to give  evidence  in
    support of her. I find that it would be very unusual for a Crown  Court
    judge to express annoyance at a  rape  complainant.  The  very  limited
    documentary evidence before me as to the trial itself, provided by  Ms.
    Revill upon its receipt from  her  instructing  solicitors  during  the
    course of the hearing, establishes that the no case to answer  decision
    was reached consequent to contradictory and  unreliable  evidence,  not
    upon the allegation being clearly false from the outset.  I  find  that
    the Crown Court Judge did not  direct  anger  towards  the  appellant's
    wife. This is an example of the appellant's disparaging attitude to his
    wife. He is perfectly happy to lie in order to denigrate his wife at  a
    time when she is supporting him in his appeal.

126. I am satisfied that  the  family  members,  including  the  appellant's
    wife, intentionally decided to avoid giving relevant  details  on  this
    issue in their witness statements and in their oral  evidence.  I  have
    considered  whether  the  decision  was  underpinned   by   shame   and
    embarrassment, though I observe that the trial  was  addressed  in  the
    COYS assessment and both parents spoke to the assessor about  it.  Upon
    careful consideration I find that the appellant, his wife and the  five
    children who prepared witness statements decided to seek to present the
    appellant in as good a  light  as  possible  for  the  purpose  of  his
    deportation appeal and in doing so were prepared  to  engage  in  half-
    truths and deflection.

127. A combined decision by members of the family not to  present  the  true
    situation is further evidenced by the silence as to the non-molestation
    order secured by the appellant's wife in September 2013, several months
    after the trial. The appellant claims even now not to  know  the  basis
    upon which his wife sought the order. I find that he is fully aware  as
    to the basis on which it was  secured.  I  am  satisfied  that  he  has
    presented half-truths as to having moved into  a  relative's  house  in
    London in January 2014 and having lived there until  returning  to  the
    family home in December 2014. He has done so to avoid having to  engage
    with his wife securing the non-molestation order in September  2013.  I
    find that he deliberately failed to detail within his evidence the fact
    that he resided with a relative in Leeds  following  his  release  from
    custody early in 2013. He was deliberately vague as to his movements at
    this time before me, as he sought to establish that he was not aware as
    to the reasons upon which the non-molestation order was granted. I find
    that his wife knew where he was living when the order was  applied  for
    and the order was served  upon  him  at  the  correct  address.  He  is
    untruthful as to such events. I find therefore that he was aware of the
    nature and contents of the order very soon after it was issued, and  he
    has been untruthful on this matter before me.  He  seeks  to  hide  the
    reasons as to why the order was granted in favour of his wife.

128. The appellant's wife has  presented  herself  as  having  virtually  no
    recollection of seeking and securing the order, beyond her reference to
    their 'there having been an argument with the children'. This suggests,
    but no more, that  the  appellant's  anger  was  directed  towards  his
    children. However, she is named in the  order  and  the  appellant  was
    prohibited by the order against using or threatening  violence  towards
    her. Being mindful that she  pursued  the  application  and  instructed
    legal representation, I find that she is not truthful as to now  having
    no recollection of the grounds on which the non-molestation  order  was
    sought and secured. The order was issued  some  eight  or  nine  months
    after the conclusion of the rape trial and the County Court  must  have
    been satisfied as to the existence of a risk of significant harm to the
    appellant's wife, attributable to the conduct of the appellant, if  the
    order was not made immediately. I am satisfied that by the end of  2013
    there continued to be  a  real  threat  of  violence,  whether  through
    threats or harassment, even though the appellant was not residing  with
    his family. I conclude that the appellant's wife has  lied  as  to  her
    recollection of events in order to support  the  appellant.  Both  have
    sought to prevent me from understanding the reason for the order  being
    sought and the evidence presented to the County Court.

129. I find that the family's witness statements are an effort to  whitewash
    the years of domestic violence and emotional abuse, the  fracturing  of
    the family unit for several years and the appellant's continuing anger.
    They  read  as  hagiographies,  with  no  engagement  with   the   true
    circumstances.

130. I am satisfied that both the appellant's wife  and  the  children  have
    decided to act as best as they can to keep the family unit together and
    to prevent the appellant's deportation. However, I bear  in  mind  that
    members of the family have experienced  considerable  violence  at  the
    hands of the appellant. The social  services  records  make  unpleasant
    reading as to the fractured nature of the family unit. In  addition  to
    the long-term domestic violence endured by the appellant's wife,  which
    the  children  observed,  the  appellant  subjected  his  children   to
    significant violence. This led to minor  instances  of  criminality  by
    some of the children, and occasions when at least three of the children
    were reported missing from home. Interim care  orders  were  issued  in
    respect of three  children  and  interim  supervision  orders  made  in
    respect of  the  others.  The  local  authority  involvement  with  the
    children occurred over several years. During such  time  concerns  were
    raised as to the  neglect  of  the  children  by  their  mother.  I  am
    satisfied that her son before me accurately identified that his  mother
    was suffering mental health concerns because of  the  regular  violence
    inflicted upon her by the appellant. I am satisfied  to  the  requisite
    standard that the  appellant's  wife  and  children,  having  seen  and
    experienced violence at his hands, being aware  of  his  ongoing  anger
    issues, seek to aid the appellant in preventing his deportation, as  it
    brings short-term benefit to their own well-being in the family home."
