
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05330/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                              Mr Akmal Shahzad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Legal Representative, Lincolns Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 September 1983.  He
appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Rose sent on 11 September 2019.  Permission to this Tribunal was granted on
30 December 2019 by Resident Judge Phillips.

Appellant's Background

The appellant has a lengthy immigration history.  In summary, he entered
the United Kingdom on 17 December 2009 with Tier 4 Student leave valid
until 28 June 2011.  His Tier 4 (General) Student leave was subsequently
extended until 31 July 2014.  On 31 July 2014 the appellant submitted an
application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student which was
refused with no right of appeal on the basis that the appellant had used a
proxy test taker in order to obtain a TOEIC certificate from  Education
Testing Services (ETS).  The appellant subsequently lodged a pre-action
Protocol letter challenging the decision of 10 September 2014 and was
informed that his letter would be treated as an Article 8 ECHR claim.  An
application for Judicial Review was closed by the court for failure to
comply with the Procedure Rules.  On 5 December 2018 the appellant
submitted further evidence in support of his human rights claim.  On 6
March 2019 the respondent refused the appellant's human rights claim on the
basis that the suitability criteria applied to the appellant because his
presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose found that the appellant had not used fraud
in obtaining the TOEIC certificate. The appellant was completely exonerated
of the allegation of wrongdoing with respect to obtaining his English
language qualifications.  Nevertheless, in considering whether the
appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would constitute a
disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR, the Judge concluded that the
appellant would not encounter very significant obstacles on returning to
Pakistan and that, when considering his application outside of the
Immigration Rules, the appellant's removal from the UK would not be unduly
harsh despite his disability.

The Grounds of Challenge

It is asserted that the Judge misdirected himself and erred in law in
failing to take into consideration the guidance in TOEIC cases given in
Khan, Islam and Hossain v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
EWCA 1684 by Lord Justice Singh, who held that the respondent would follow
the guidance given in Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009. Where an
appellant's original application had been refused as a result of a false
TOEIC allegation which was subsequently shown to be erroneous, the
respondent gave an undertaking to withdraw the refusal and place the
appellant in the situation in which he would have been had his application
not been refused on the ETS grounds in order that the appellant would not
be disadvantaged in any way.

Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that, having found that the
appellant had provided an innocent explanation and that the respondent had
not proven fraud, the Judge had not taken into consideration the authority
of Khan.

Decision

Ms Everett for the respondent indicated at the outset of the appeal that
she would not seek to go behind the concession in Khan.  The grounds are
made out in that the Judge has misapplied the law.  Since the appellant has
prevailed on the ETS point the Secretary of State must grant limited leave
for 60 days in order for the appellant to be placed in a position where he
would not be disadvantaged. Ms Everett conceded that the Article 8 ECHR
private life point was not cross-appealed and that the appellant should be
put back to the position in which he would have been had the allegation not
been made. I am in agreement.

On this basis, I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Rose as the
decision is vitiated by a material error of law in that the Judge has
misapplied the guidance given in Khan and failed to take into consideration
this guidance in carrying out the Article 8 ECHR proportionality exercise.


There was some discussion about the appropriate way in which to proceed.
It was agreed that I should remake the decision, allowing the appeal on the
basis that since the Secretary of State is obliged to grant the appellant a
period of 60 days' leave in order for him to make a further application to
remain in the United Kingdom as a student and to remedy the prejudice
caused to him by the erroneous allegation, it would be a disproportionate
breach of his Article 8 ECHR right to private life for the appellant to be
removed from the United Kingdom.

I therefore find that the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
is a disproportionate breach of his Article 8 ECHR right to private life
and remake the decision to allow this appeal.

Notice of Decision



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law.

The decision is set aside and I re-make the decision.

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        R J Owens                          Date 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

