
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
HU/05269/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2018                   |  On 01 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Gulzaman Khan Rind Baloch
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M C Afzal, Legal Representative, Lords Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
Pakistan born on 23 August 1985.  He entered the UK lawfully on 12
September 2007 and had valid leave to remain until the expiry of his visa
on 6 January 2018 by which time he had achieved a period of ten years'
continuous lawful residence.

On 4 September 2017, the Claimant made a human rights claim on the basis of
his long residence.  This was refused in a decision dated 11 February 2018
on the basis that his tax returns to HMRC for the years 2010 to 2011 and
2013 to 2014 were incorrect and he had been required to repay tax
altogether in the sum of ï¿½6,894.68.

The Secretary of State refused the application with reference to paragraph
322(5) of the Immigration Rules, viz. it was "undesirable to permit the
Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom in light of his conduct,
character or associations." The Claimant appealed against this decision and
his appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge I Ross for hearing on 12
October 2018.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 26 October 2018 the
judge allowed the appeal, finding that in the absence of any criminal
conduct, proven dishonesty or deception the application should not have
been refused pursuant to paragraph 322(5), which is discretionary.  The
judge then allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

The Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal in time
on the basis of two grounds: firstly, that the judge had materially
misdirected himself in law in relying on two unreported decisions of the
Upper Tribunal that have no binding effect, those decisions being the case
of Kadian (6 April 2018) and MMS (2 November 2017).  It was further
submitted, pursuant to the same ground of appeal, that in any event the
approach taken by the judge to paragraph 322(5) was wrong in law in light
of reported judicial review decisions, in particular Khan JR/3097/2017 and
Chowdhury JR/7/2018, which found that the Secretary of State is entitled to
invoke paragraph 322(5) in cases where the applicant has employed
dishonesty in dealings with HMRC or UKVI.  Thus, the judge had materially
erred in finding that paragraph 322(5) has no application in this case.

Secondly, it was asserted that the judge had failed to make findings that
resolved the view of the Secretary of State that the claimant had employed
dishonesty in his dealings with HMRC or UKVI when declaring his self-
employed income and that the judge's findings failed to adequately resolve
this issue and the judge had made no findings that resolved the key
conflict in the evidence, i.e. whether or not the claimant has acted
dishonestly.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker in a
decision dated 13 November 2018 for the reasons set out in the grounds of
appeal.

     Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I indicated at the outset that I
took the preliminary view that the grounds of appeal had merit and that in
addition to the grounds specifically raised, it was clear, given the nature
of the issue to be determined, that the decision lacked proper or adequate
reasoning, given that it amounted to only three paragraphs which are as
follows:

"8.  The Appellant gave oral evidence and explained how the discrepancies
arose when he switched to new accountants.  He apologised and has repaid
the whole amount of the tax due.  The Appellant is not in any relationship
and has no children.  He has two brothers who are British citizens and a
British citizen nephew.

9.   In the case of Kadian the Upper Tribunal referred to the Respondent's
guidance on the discretionary refusal in relation to a person's conduct,
character and associations." At paragraph 17 of the judgment the following
is stated:

     "17.     Nevertheless, not declaring all relevant income, whilst
highly regrettable, cannot properly be described as conduct such as that
set out in the policy guidance.  The Appellant has not been involved in any
criminality.  It cannot properly be said that his failure to disclose calls
into question his character, conduct and associations.  There is no
suggestion that he has been or is a threat to national security or subject
to a travel ban or has been involved in a sham marriage.

10.  It is accepted that the Appellant meets the requirements for a grant
of indefinite leave to remain.  In my judgment, in the absence of any
criminal conduct, proven dishonesty or deception the application ought not
to have been refused under paragraph 322(5), which is discretionary.

11.  For all the above reasons I find that this appeal should be allowed
under human rights grounds."

Mr Afzal took me through the judge's findings.  He placed weight on the
fact that at [7] of the decision the judge recorded that Ms Sulieman (the
Presenting Officer) was content for the appeal to be dealt with by
submissions only.  I pointed out that this conflicted with the fact that at
[8] the judge recorded that the Claimant gave oral evidence.  I asked Mr
Mills to check the case minute drafted by the Presenting Officer, which he
did.  This confirmed that the Claimant gave evidence in English.

Mr Afzal sought to argue that the judge had taken into account the evidence
that was before him, including the letter from the accountant and that
essentially, he found the Claimant's explanation to be plausible and that
was a question of fact.  He endeavoured to argue that the Home Office were
stopped from going behind the concession recorded at [7] that the
Presenting Officer was content for the appeal to be dealt with on the basis
of submissions only.

In his submissions, Mr Mills asserted that the reported decision in the
case of Khan, [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC), before the Honourable Mr Justice
Martin Spencer, makes clear that even where there has been repayment of tax
and an accountant's letter, there is still the need to consider whether
there has been dishonesty and whether the Claimant has discharged the
burden of showing that he has not acted dishonestly.  The judge's approach
was clearly wrong in relying on an unreported decision and thus, following
that decision, to substantiate his finding that the case did not engage
paragraph 322(5) when clearly this aspect, which was the issue in the case,
required a further consideration.  He submitted that at [7] the Presenting
Officer was not conceding that the Claimant's explanation had been accepted
but simply that the matter could be dealt with in respect of submissions,
albeit the Claimant gave evidence.

     Findings and Reasons

I find material errors of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Ross for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.  I find that the
Judge erred in taking account of two unreported Upper Tribunal decisions
without attempting to verify whether there were any reported decisions on
the point.  It is clear that there are, in fact, reported decisions which
would have assisted him more, i.e. the case of Khan [2018] UKUT 00384
(IAC), and also the case of R on the application of Sheik JR/8324/2017
before Judge Canavan.

The entirety of the appeal essentially comes down to whether or not the
Secretary of State was correct to invoke paragraph 322(5) of the Rules.
Thus, it is necessary to engage with the key issue of whether or not the
Claimant has acted honestly in light of the Supreme Court judgment in Ivey
v Genting Casino Limited [2017] UKSC 67 at  [74] where it was said:


         "When dishonesty is in question the fact-finding Tribunal must
         first ascertain (subjectively) the actual state of the
         individual's knowledge or belief as to the acts. ... when once his
         actual state of mind as to knowledge or belief as to facts is
         established, the question whether his conduct was honest or
         dishonest is to be determined by the fact-finder by applying the
         (objective) standards of ordinary decent people."

This the judge failed to do. As a result of his reliance on the unreported
cases he was under the misapprehension that paragraph 322(5) of the Rules
simply did not apply.  I set the decision aside and remit the appeal for a
hearing de novo before a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal at
Taylor House.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed, with the  effect  that  the
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de  novo  before
any Judge of the First tier Tribunal other than Judge I Ross.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 15 January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
