
            [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05429/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2017                        |On 11 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                             MRS TASHIN SULTANA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Sharma, counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appeal came before me for an error of law hearing on 4 May 2017. In
a decision dated 8 June 2017, I found an error of law and adjourned the
appeal for a resumed hearing, confined to consideration of Article 8
outside the Rules. A copy of that decision is appended.

Hearing

2. At the outset of the hearing I established who was in attendance and
whether it was proposed to call any oral evidence. Mr Sharma informed me
that the Appellant and her friend were in attendance but no other family
members as it was not proposed to call any evidence. Nor did he propose to
rely on any further evidence. Mr Melvin stated that no application had been
received by the Home Office of any application to renew his leave to remain
by the Appellant's husband.

3. Mr Sharma sought to rely on his written submissions dated 18 July 2017.
He stated that his starting point was that the Appellant does not meet the
suitability requirements of the Rules. He submitted that the Appellant
seeks to rely on the contents of two witness statements - hers and her
husband's - in relation to her witness statement in her amended bundle at
pages 6-7 at [22]-[24] she addresses the serious medical conditions of her
husband and explains it has essentially rendered her husband disabled. He
is also suffering from depression. At [23] she also explains her husband is
forgetful and sometimes suffers from erroneous thoughts and ideas and is
not able to maintain himself and she has provided him with care and
support.

4. Mr Sharma submitted that the Appellant's husband remains dependant on
his extended family members but they also have their own responsibilities.
He stated that the Appellant, sponsor and his mother live under one roof
and the Sponsor's siblings live separately. He drew attention to the fact
that at [24] the Appellant addresses the issue of separation from the
husband which would permanently damage any relationship she has with him.
At [25] she states that the sponsor is required to take medication and both
to manage his depression and other medical conditions from which he
suffers. At [26] she makes reference to the Sponsor's witness statement and
supports what is said therein in relation to the relationship between them.
The Appellant also has a strong and profound relationship with her mother
in law and siblings and these would be damaged by her removal. The evidence
from the Sponsor is at page 9 onwards - see [9] page 11 and the fact that
any decision requiring the Appellant to leave would require him to leave.
Mr Sharma submitted that the evidence points to a strong and loving
relationship between these two individuals and if the Appellant were to
leave the UK the Sponsor would follow her to Bangladesh due to the effect
of separation and the background to the relationship.

5. In respect of article 8 outside the Rules, Mr Sharma sought to rely on
[9]-[12] of his skeleton argument and submitted that the question is
whether a family life exists that needs to be considered and whether the
effect of the decision would be disproportionate. He submitted that the
balance is just struck in favour of her husband but it was sufficient for
the grant of leave and the Appellant does not meet requirements of the
Rules. The Judge at [54] found that the Sponsor was a particularly
vulnerable individual and found he should not be removed from family
members and the Upper Tribunal can uphold this decision, notwithstanding
that the application falls foul of the Rules.

6. Mr Sharma submitted that there were sufficient reasons for the Sponsor
not be required to speak English. He submitted that the Sponsor also has
close family ties with his mother and siblings and they are integrally
involved in his recovery process. The Sponsor is entitled to remain in the
UK on the basis of his family life, which would be permanently damaged if
he had to leave and thus the only option is to remain with his wife. He
submitted that the fact the Sponsor only has leave until September 2017 is
not fatal and it was open to the Respondent to grant a further period of
discretionary leave to remain.

7. Mr Melvin sought to rely on his written submissions. He submitted that
it was necessary for the Upper Tribunal to deal with the question of
whether or not there are compelling circumstances not addressed in the
Rules. He submitted that it was almost inconceivable in an appeal involving
article 8 outside the Rules that no updated evidence has been produced in
terms of any medical conditions that the Appellant seeks to rely on in
relation to her husband, with the result that the Upper Tribunal is simply
unaware of current medical condition. He accepted that three years ago the
Judge accepted the medical condition of the sponsor but there is no
evidence before the Upper Tribunal that there are severe medical
difficulties and little weight should be attached to the assertions of
forgetfulness. Mr Melvin submitted that there was little in the way of
evidence outside the bold assertion that the Appellant's husband is taking
any medication or being treated for depression.

8. Mr Melvin submitted that there was no evidence before the Upper Tribunal
of the family situation vis a vis the family members and the fact that the
Appellant asserts she is living together with the husband and his mother
and the siblings are elsewhere and it was unclear whether this is the same
situation as in 2014, regarding emotional ties going over and above normal
ties and he was not prepared to accept that 3 years later. He submitted
that any application by her husband is purely speculative as no application
has been made as yet. There was no witness statement from the mother or
siblings that reveals to the court the current circumstances.

9. Relying on his written submissions Mr Melvin submitted that there is
insufficient evidence to find compelling circumstances that outweigh the
public interest in immigration control, particularly when she has been
found to be dishonest. Without updated medical evidence he submitted that
little weight can be placed on the 2014 decision and Devaseelan does not
apply in this particular case. He sought to rely on the judgments of the
Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah and that of the Supreme Court in Agyarko. He
accepted that the Appellant speaks English but this cannot be taken as a
positive cf. Rhuppiah. She is not financially independent but dependent on
family members in the UK and this is a negative under section 117B(1) and
(2) of the NIAA 2002. Mr Melvin submitted that the circumstances on the
facts do not warrant a finding that requiring the Appellant to return to
Bangladesh would be contrary to Article 8.

10. In reply, Mr Sharma submitted that in respect of updating evidence,
all the points upon which the Appellant seeks to rely are contained in the
2014 decision and her claim to be part of an extended family assisting with
the Sponsor's care. Page 4 at [17] refers to the evidence of the Sponsor's
sister and position as a carer but she cannot do everything for him, which
the Appellant can. She was living separately at that time. See also [22]
where the Judge refers to medical reports and there is reference to
depression at [25] and at [26] to his prognosis and the fact that the
medical team are focused in managing his condition for which there is no
cure. The Respondent was unsuccessful in attempting to appeal the
Appellant's husband's decision and whilst Devaseelan does not apply
strictly, it merits weight being attached to it in respect of the findings
of fact in relation to Sponsor. Mr Sharma asked me to allow the appeal.

11. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Decision and reasons

12. I should state at the outset that I was not assisted by the fact that
neither the Appellant's husband nor any members of his family attended to
give evidence before me nor were there any updating statements as to the
current family circumstances. I note that this was also the position before
the First tier Tribunal Judge, who found at [23] this to be indicative of
the fact that the connections between the appellant, her husband and in-
laws are not as close as has been indicated.

13. I have taken full account of the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge
Boyes, who in a determination promulgated on 17 September 2014, allowed the
Appellant's husband's appeal with regard to Article 8 outside the Rules.
However, it is clear from that decision that it was predicated upon Mr
Rahman's high level of dependency on his family members in the UK and the
fact that they are integrally involved in his recovery process and that he
is a particularly vulnerable individual [54] refers. The Judge further
found at [49] that "he needs the emotional and psychological support only
his close family can provide." Whilst the Appellant gave evidence at her
husband's appeal, her role in supporting her husband was not part of the
Judge's reasoning in allowing her husband's appeal. Whilst this may be
because the Appellant did not have any form of settled status whereas her
husband's family members are British citizens, it is also the case that Mr
Rahman came to the United Kingdom on 22 October 2009 and the Appellant did
not arrive until 28 January 2010, thus he was cared for by his mother and
siblings in the absence of his wife, prior to his arrival.

14. I have concluded that whilst I can attach some weight to the decision
and reasons of Judge Boyes as to the circumstances of the family as a whole
up to August 2014, I have to consider the current position. The most recent
evidence is that before First tier Tribunal Judge Cohen on 28 September
2016. In the Appellant's statement dated 28 September 2016 she states at
[23]-[24]: "I have always assisted my husband to do and manage his daily
life activities. I have always provided my husband with important care and
support. Due to their own responsibilities, my mother in law, my brother in
law and my sisters in law are not able to help and support my husband....My
husband would be substantially affected if I was separated from him." There
is also a statement from Mr Rahman dated 26 September 2016 which is in very
similar terms [at 12] and [13]. There is also a psychological report from
Kevin O'Doherty dated 24 August 2016, which records that the Appellant "is
a full time carer for her husband that she helps him with the following
daily activities: showering, toilet, making food, changing clothes and
other aspects of personal care. The client apparently cannot travel by
himself and needs to be accompanied." Mr O'Doherty diagnosed the
Appellant's husband as suffering from a moderate level of depression and
the existence of a severe level of anxiety related symptoms. A letter from
the Appellant's GP, Dr Alam, dated 21 July 2016 states that the Appellant
is the carer of her husband and helps him with his day to day activities.

15. First tier Tribunal Judge Cohen found at [21] that the Appellant's
presence was not essential for her husband's health and that he could
return to Bangladesh with her. Whilst the second of those findings was
tainted by error of law, in light of the decision of First tier Tribunal
Judge Boyes and the Devaseelan principle, the first of those findings -
that the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom is not essential to her
husband's health - was not challenged and is thus maintained. Therefore, I
proceed to determine Article 8 on the basis that the Appellant's husband
would remain in the United Kingdom, pursuant to the grant of discretionary
leave to remain.

16. I find that there are compelling reasons to consider Article 8 outside
the Rules, given that the Appellant does not qualify for leave within the
Rules on the basis of her private or family life with her husband, who has
discretionary leave and is thus not obliged to leave the United Kingdom. I
find, applying the Razgar tests, that the Appellant has established and
family and private life in the United Kingdom, the decision to remove her
to Bangladesh would constitute an interference with her family and private
life, the question is whether this would be proportionate.

17. I take account of the public interest, set out at section 117B of the
NIAA 2002. I am unable to make a clear finding as to whether or not the
Appellant speaks English, given that the First tier Tribunal Judge found
that there was no evidence that the Appellant actually took an English
test; there was no other evidence before me as to her English language
ability and I did not hear evidence from her. There is also an absence of
evidence as to how the Appellant is financially supported, apart from an
unspecified reference in her statement to being financially supported by
her husband's family. Consequently, I cannot find in the Appellant's favour
in respect of section 117B (2) and (3). Nor is it in doubt that the
Appellant's private life has been formed at a time when her immigration
status has been precarious: section 117B(5). Consequently, the public
interest would weigh in favour of the Respondent's maintenance of
immigration controls. I also take into account that the Appellant is unable
to meet the suitability requirements of the Rules [S-LTR 1.6], due to the
fact that the First tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant had used
deception to fraudulently obtain an English language test certificate which
is contrary to the public interest.

18. Whilst I accept that the Appellant has established a private life since
her arrival in the United Kingdom on 28 January 2010, the primary factor in
the assessment of proportionality is her family life with her husband and
the fact that, in light of the evidence summarised at [14] above, she is
his primary carer. I accept that if the Appellant is required to leave the
United Kingdom this will have a negative impact on her husband. However, I
also take account of the fact that he is not settled in the United Kingdom
but has discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom only until
September 2017, albeit it is open to him to seek to extend his leave to
remain. I also take account of the fact that the Appellant and her husband
reside with his mother and that his siblings reside elsewhere, however, it
was the clear finding of First tier Tribunal Judge Boyes that Mr Rahman is
dependant on his mother and siblings, financially and emotionally and that
they assist in his care and were his only carers for several months prior
to the arrival of his wife on 28 January 2010.

19. I have taken full account of the submissions of both parties and the
material jurisprudence. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 their Lordships
considered appeals by foreign nationals and set out and endorsed the
decision of the ECtHR in Jeunesse v Netherlands at [108]:

      "whether family life was created at a time when the persons involved
were  aware that the immigration status of one of them was such that the
persistence      of that family life within the host state would from the
outset be "precarious".      Where this is the case, the court said, "it is
likely only to be in exceptional  circumstances that the removal of the non-
national family member will  constitute a violation of article 8"

Their Lordships concluded at [60]:

      "60. It remains the position that the ultimate question is how a fair
balance     should be struck between the competing public and individual
interests   involved, applying a proportionality test. The Rules and
Instructions in issue  in the present case do not depart from that
position. The Secretary of State has    not imposed a test of
exceptionality, in the sense which Lord Bingham had in   mind: that is to
say, a requirement that the case should exhibit some highly   unusual
feature, over and above the application of the test of proportionality.
On the contrary, she has defined the word "exceptional", as already
explained,  as meaning "circumstances in which refusal would result in
unjustifiably    harsh consequences for the individual such that the
refusal of the application   would not be proportionate". So understood,
the provision in the Instructions       that leave can be granted outside
the Rules where exceptional circumstances    apply involves the application
of the test of proportionality to the   circumstances of the individual
case, and cannot be regarded as incompatible       with article 8."

20. Applying Agyarko, I find that whilst family life was established
between the Appellant and her husband in Bangladesh, it was then maintained
whilst both parties had a precarious immigration status, which remains the
position. The starting point is that "it is likely only to be in
exceptional circumstances that the removal of the non-national family
member will      constitute a violation of article 8." Exceptional
circumstances have been defined as "unjustifiably harsh consequences for
the individual such that the refusal of the application would not be
proportionate."

21. I have concluded in light of the evidence and jurisprudence set out
above that removal of the Appellant does not reach the exceptional
circumstances threshold and that a fair balance favours the public
interest. Whilst the consequences for the Appellant may be harsh and may be
harsher for her husband, his mother and siblings are British and are
willing and able to care for him in all material respects thus removal of
the Appellant would not be unjustifiably harsh. Moreover, given that his
status in the United Kingdom is not settled, it is open to him to return to
Bangladesh with his wife in order to continue family life.

Decision

22. The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

10 August 2017

Annex

                                       [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU054292015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2017                                 |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                             Mrs tashin sultana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Balroop, counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 7 January 1988. She
entered the United Kingdom on 28 January 2010 with entry clearance as a
Tier 4 student and was subsequently granted an extension of stay. She made
an in-time application for an extension of stay on human rights grounds
outside the Rules on 8 April 2015 and this application was refused on 18
August 2015 on the basis that the Appellant did not meet the requirements
of S-LTR 1.6 of the Rules in that her presence in the United Kingdom was
not conducive to the public good. This assertion was based on reports that
indicated that the Appellant had relied on a proxy test taker in respect of
a TOEIC relied upon in a previous application for leave to remain made on
19 October 2012.

2. The Appellant's appeal against this decision came before First tier
Tribunal Judge Cohen for hearing on 28 September 2016. In a decision
promulgated on 7 October 2016, he dismissed the appeal on human rights
grounds.

3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time on 20 October 2016, on the basis that the First tier Tribunal Judge
made perverse or irrational findings on matters material to the outcome and
erred in his approach to the burden of proof and erred in the approach to
Article 8.

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted in a decision
dated 14 March 2017 by Judge of the First tier Tribunal Chohan, for the
following reasons:

      "3. At paragraph 16 of the decision, the judge concludes that the
respondent  had discharged the burden of proof in respect of
dishonesty/fraud and went on      to state that there was a burden of proof
on the appellant to establish that she  had undertaken the English test.

      4. In cases of dishonesty, fraud or deception, there is an evidential
burden on   the respondent to establish the same. Although the overall
burden of proof is     on the appellant however, there is no evidential
burden on the appellant to   establish her innocence. Having said that,
that does not mean that the  appellant is not free to submit evidence to
establish that she had taken the test   and not by a proxy. It does seem
that the judge may have confused the burden  of proof, which in turn, had a
significant bearing on the article 8 assessment."

      5. Accordingly there is an arguable error of law."

5. The Respondent filed a rule 24 response on 28 March 2017, opposing the
appeal.

Hearing

6. At the hearing before me, Mr Balroop submitted that the Judge applied
the incorrect test in respect of the burden of proof in that, whilst the
initial burden of proof is placed on the Respondent, this requires
sufficient evidence to be adduced to raise an issue as to the existence or
non-existence of a fact in issue. The Appellant denied the accusations put
against her which then shifts the burden of proof back on to the Respondent
and it is then for the Respondent to prove that the Appellant's innocent
explanation is to be rejected cf. Shen (paper appeals; proving dishonesty)
[2014] 00236 UKUT (IAC).


7. Mr Balroop submitted that the Judge took the position that the Appellant
has not discharged the burden of proof and that her evidence was vague and
unconvincing. It appears the Judge has taken this view due to the
discrepancy in the number of test takers that day, as is set out at [16]
viz 128 people undertook tests rather than the 8 to 12 stated by the
Appellant and recorded by the Judge at [9]. The Judge also placed reliance
on the fact that despite scoring highly, the Appellant required an
interpreter, however, his instructions are that an interpreter was present
but not used and the Appellant answered in English. The Judge's finding
that the Appellant failed to submit any cohesive evidence that she failed
to take the test is erroneous in the context. Consequently, his argument
regarding the burden of proof has more merit when looked at in that
context.

8. In respect of Article 8, Mr Balroop submitted that the Appellant's
husband won his appeal so it is not proportionate for him to be removed,
given that he has been granted 3 years leave to remain by the Home Office.
At [21] the Judge found it would not be disproportionate to return him to
Bangladesh, but more would be needed to justify this given that a
(different) Judge has already said he should not be removed cf. Devaseelan
[2002] UKAIT 00702.

9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Norton submitted that in respect
of the test result at D1 of the Respondent's bundle, there was no
indication that it was wrong and it specifically relates to the Appellant
and her test was invalid. The test must also be considered in conjunction
with the statements from Ms Collins and Mr Millington. The Appellant's
explanation is that she took the test and the Respondent is wrong. Mr
Norton submitted that the Judge cannot be criticized given that the
Appellant has not taken any further steps as to why that particular result
is recorded and the Judge simply decided the Respondent's evidence is
better than the Appellant's.

10. In respect of the second ground of appeal, that undue reliance was
placed on the Appellant's deception in light of the public interest, it has
to be remembered that the Appellant's husband is not someone regarded
legally as present and settled as he has only 30 months leave.

11. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings and reasons

12. In respect of the first ground of appeal, that the First tier Tribunal
Judge misapplied the burden of proof, I find no material error of law in
his decision. At [16] the Judge correctly identified that the burden of
proof was upon the Respondent and this has been discharged in light of the
evidence submitted regarding the test taken by the Appellant and the
result. The Judge then correctly considered whether the Appellant had
discharged the burden of proving that she actually took the test and found
her evidence on this issue to be vague and unconvincing.

13. In Shen (paper appeals; proving dishonesty) [2014] 00236 UKUT (IAC) the
Upper Tribunal held as follows:

"(2) Where an application form etc is false in a material way, this may be
relied on by the Secretary of State as prima facie evidence establishing
dishonesty. The inference of deliberate deception can be strengthened by
other facts: eg if a criminal conviction (not disclosed in an application)
occurred shortly before completion of the application form. Here, the
conviction must have been high in the applicant's mind and any explanation
based on oversight would carry little weight. But it is always open to an
appellant to proffer an innocent explanation and if that explanation meets
a basic level of plausibility, the burden switches back to the Secretary of
State to answer that evidence. At the end of the day the Secretary of State
bears the burden of proving dishonesty."

14. However, on the facts of this case, the Judge considered the
Appellant's explanation but found at [16] that it did not meet a basic
level of plausibility, thus he was not then required to go on to the third
stage viz whether the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of
disproving the Appellant's explanation. Consequently, there is no error of
law in his finding that the Appellant had acted dishonestly in respect of
her English language test at Synergy Business College.

15. However, the Judge's findings in respect of his consideration of
Article 8 of ECHR outside the Immigration Rules were also challenged on the
basis of the weight he attached to the test results in his Article 8
assessment and the failure to consider the impact of the decision on the
Appellant and her family. Whilst the Appellant has resided in the United
Kingdom with leave to remain since 28 January 2010, the current application
underlying this appeal was for leave to remain outside the Rules on the
basis of her family life with her husband, Mr Ziaur Rahman. The marriage
took place in Bangladesh on 9 March 2007 and both the Appellant and her
husband came to the United Kingdom to study.  Prior to coming to the United
Kingdom Mr Rahman suffered a car accident as a consequence of which he was
seriously injured viz he was admitted to hospital unconscious on 4 August
2006 with a severe head injury, multiple cerebral, cerebellar and brainstem
contusions and a broken arm. As a consequence of his injuries he requires
ongoing care.

16. Mr Rahman's appeal came before Judge of the First tier Tribunal Boyes
for hearing on 1 August 2014 when he, his wife, his brother, sister and
mother all gave evidence. In a very detailed and careful decision, Judge
Boyes made inter alia the following material findings:

      "43. I accept the Appellant has been living in his mother's household
since       2009 and that he is dependent upon his wife and his mother and
siblings. In     addition, because of that degree of dependency, I consider
that removal of the    Appellant would be likely to have a serious adverse
effect on his psychological  state and mental health...

      "47. If he were to be removed to Bangladesh he would not be able to
access the  day to day support of his mother and siblings. He would be with
his wife in      Bangladesh but this cannot replace the support that he
also receives from his       mother and siblings."

      48. The Appellant suffers from poor anger control, amongst other
symptoms,   as a direct consequence of his disability ... I am aware that
traumatic brain  injuries can result in difficulties in controlling
emotions and rapid mood      changes which may lead to outbursts of anger.
Because of this I accept the oral       evidence that I have heard that his
wife would find it difficult to manage his   condition on her own."

17. However, First tier Tribunal Judge Cohen held at [21]:

      "In light of the totality of the circumstances I do not find that the
appellant's      presence in the UK is essential to her husband's health.
Furthermore, the       appellant confirmed that her husband received
adequate medical treatment in     Bangladesh for his physical and mental
health prior to him coming to the UK.   In these circumstances, I do not
find that there are sufficient exceptional   circumstances meaning that the
appellant's husband could not return with    her to Bangladesh and be cared
for by the appellant and access adequate     medical facilities. The
previous Immigration Judge found that the appellant      provided
assistance for her husband and both and she and her husband have    family
members remaining in Bangladesh who can provide additional support  if
required. Family members in the UK can provide financial support if
required."

18. There is no consideration by the First tier Tribunal Judge of the
decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 and the fact that, albeit the
decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Boyes concerned the Appellant's
husband rather than the Appellant herself, she made findings with regard to
this Appellant, as well as her husband, which should have been taken into
account by Judge Cohen in consideration of Article 8 in the Appellant's
appeal. Whilst Judge Cohen was, of course, not bound to follow the findings
of Judge Boyes, given that he reached a conclusion in respect of the
Appellant's husband that was entirely contrary to her findings and decision
on the basis of the evidence, I consider that he should have provided
reasons for reaching a different conclusion at [21] above that the
Appellant's husband could return with her to Bangladesh.  I find that the
Judge materially erred in this respect.

19. Moreover, whilst the Judge at [26] made reference to removal of the
Appellant being in the public interest in light of the fraudulent English
test results, there is no reference to or consideration of the wider public
interest considerations set out at section 117B of the Nationality,
Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 either directly or by implication. This too
is a material error of law.



Decision

20. For the reasons set out at [18] and [19] above, I find that the First
tier Tribunal Judge erred materially in law in his consideration of Article
8 outside the Immigration Rules. I adjourn the appeal for a resumed hearing
before me, confined to this issue. Directions are appended.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

8 June 2017







                             _______________

                                DIRECTIONS
                             _______________

1. The appeal is adjourned to a date to be fixed for a resumed hearing in
the Upper Tribunal to be listed for 1 hour for consideration of Article 8
only.

2. If the Appellant's solicitors intend to call oral evidence at the
resumed hearing then it is incumbent upon them to request that an
interpreter be booked.

3. Any request to adduce further evidence should be made in accordance with
paragraph 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

8 June 2017


