
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06432/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2019                   |On 28 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                KARAMDEEP [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     The appellant represented himself.
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's refusal of his human rights claim.  These are the approved
record of the decision and written reasons which were given orally at the
end of the hearing on 16 October 2019.




The appellant, an Indian citizen, previously appealed against the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 23
October 2019, by which she dismissed his appeal against the respondent's
refusal on 26 February 2018 of his human rights claims.  That decision had
in turn refused the appellant's application for leave to remain, based on
his family life with his son, born on 21 February 2018.  The son, who does
not need to be named for the purposes of these proceedings, is a British
citizen, being born to a British citizen mother in the UK. The appellant is
no longer in a relationship with his son's mother.

The respondent rejected the appellant's application, first, on the basis of
the appellant's suitability, specifically because of his criminal
conviction for violence against his son's mother, for which he was
sentenced to six months in prison on 5 July 2016 and was the subject of a
restraining order, which was due to expire after the respondent's decision.
 Second, the respondent did not accept that the appellant played an active
role in the upbringing of his son; or had a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with him. The respondent also did not accept that there would
be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in India, his
country of origin.

The FtT's decision

The FtT identified the sole issue under appeal as being the nature of the
appellant's relationship with his son.  She considered section EX.1.(a) of
appendix FM of the Immigration Rules; and section 117B(6) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and in particular, whether
the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son, who
was a 'qualifying child' for the purposes of those provisions.

Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT found that while the
appellant had last seen his son in January 2018, and while he did not have
an active role in his son's upbringing, nevertheless the appellant had a
genuine and subsisting relationship with his son, via social media up to
March 2018 and was a party to family court proceedings to gain further
access to his son. The FtT concluded that it would not be reasonable to
expect the appellant's son to leave the UK.  Noting that family court
proceedings were continuing and referring herself to RS (Immigration and
family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT 218 (IAC), the FtT concluded
that the proceedings were not intended to frustrate the appellant's
removal; that the appellant has a family relationship with his son, so that
his article 8 rights would be engaged for at least the duration of the
family court proceedings and, at [64], 'further, if contact is ordered'.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on 30 November 2018. The gist of
these was that: (1) the FtT should have adjourned the hearing pending a
conclusion of the family court proceedings; (2) the FtT had erred in
concluding that there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship in
the absence of contact between father and son after April 2018; (3) the
FtT's reasoning was inadequate as to how family life could be interfered
with in circumstances of the existing limited contact; (4) the FtT had
ignored the appellant's criminal offending in a proportionality assessment
of the appellant's article 8 rights, noting that this was not a deportation
case; (5) the FtT had not considered whether refusal of leave to remain
would be unjustifiably harsh for the appellant's son, for the purposes of
GEN.3.2 of appendix FM.

First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies initially refused permission on 12
November 2018.  He regarded the respondent's grounds as merely a
disagreement with the FtT's decision and findings, which were unarguably
open to her to make on the evidence before her.  Upper Tribunal Judge King
granted permission on a renewed application on 28 December 2018, observing
that there was no subsisting parental relationship and he regarded the
basis of the FtT's decision to allow the appeal as unclear.  At a hearing
on 22 March 2019, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan concluded that the FtT
had erred in law in appearing to have granted indeterminate leave, prior to
the conclusion of family court proceedings.  DUT Judge Jordan set aside the
FtT's decision and regarded it as appropriate that the Upper Tribunal
should remake the decision, in light of developments in the family court
proceedings.  There were no preserved findings.  These reasons are to
remake the  decision.

The hearing before us

The appellant was not legally represented, but we ensured that he was able
to engage in the proceedings, by checking his understanding of the issues
and process.  We confirmed our understanding of the issues before us, with
which Mr Kotas also agreed, which were as set out by the Court of Appeal in
MA (Pakistan) and others [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and in particular, the
questions outlined by Lord Justice Elias ([19] and [20]):

         "[19]    The only questions which courts and tribunals need to ask
             when applying section 117B(6) are the following:

                  (1)  Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so,
                  section 117B is inapplicable and instead the relevant code
                  will usually be found in section 117C.

                  (2)  Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting
                  parental relationship with the child?

                  (3)  Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section
                  117D?

                  (4)  Is it unreasonable to expect the child to leave the
                  United Kingdom?

[20] If the answer to the first question is no, and to the other three
questions is yes, the conclusion must be that article 8 is infringed."

In this regard, we also considered the authority of SR (subsisting parental
relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC) and noted that
even a limited parental relationship may be genuine and subsisting ([40]).
Whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's son to leave the
UK should be answered without any consideration of the appellant's poor
immigration history: KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  It is a
hypothetical question, which needs to be asked even if, on a 'real world'
analysis, there is no prospect of the appellant's son leaving the UK.

The respondent's submissions

Mr Kotas's submissions focussed on whether the appellant had a genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with his son.  What was said was that if
the appellant had not seen his child since January 2018 and had not even
spoke to him or had any form of social media contact after April 2018,
there could not possibly be a parental relationship between the two.

We asked Mr Kotas if he had any submissions in light of the authority of SR
(subsisting parental relationship, s117B(6)), to which we have already
referred.  In that case, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer had considered the
circumstances of contested parental access to a child, albeit in that case,
the appellant father had been able to re-establish face-to-face contact,
following family court proceedings, around five months prior to the hearing
before Judge Plimmer, whereas here we were at an earlier stage in family
court proceedings.  Judge Plimmer had concluded that there was a genuine
and subsisting parental relationship with the appellant and his child,
whereas Mr Kotas sought to distinguish that case because face-to-face
contact between the father and the child had been re-established, but it
has not been re-established yet between the appellant and his son.

The appellant's evidence and our findings

The appellant showed us family court documents on his mobile phone, the
contents of which we accepted as reliable and accurate, and which Mr Kotas
did not dispute.  We also had disclosure of additional family court
documents.  In the context of the stringent requirements prohibiting the
disclosure of family court documents without that court's approval,
approval had previously been sought and given.

The Swansea Family Court had previously made orders following a hearing on
16 November 2018, providing for the appellant to have staged access to his
son, while the son continued to live with his mother, as follows:

"Contact order

Contact via post ('Stage 1')

(3)  The [appellant, referred to as the 'respondent in the family court
proceedings] must send the child a letter and/or a parcel each month for a
period of three months:

(i)  including photographs of the [appellant]

(ii) demonstrating an interest in the child's life, in an age-appropriate
manner; and,

(iii)    the child is expected to reply.

Upon the [appellant] fully committing to Stage 1, Stage 2 will commence.

Telephone contact ('Stage 2')

The [appellant] must phone the child each week for a period of eight weeks.

Upon the [appellant] fully committing to Stage 2, Stage 3 will commence.

Supervised contact ('Stage 3').

The child's mother must make the child available to spend time with [the
appellant] on a supervised basis once a fortnight initially.  Contact must
be supervised by a professional.

There is no timeframe in respect of Stage 3 and any further progression of
contact is subject to the [appellant's] commitment and the child's response
to the [appellant]."

The appellant's evidence, which we accept as truthful, was that whilst he
had complied with both Stages 1 and 2 and had last been in telephone
contact with his son around three weeks ago, ie. in September 2019, rather
than April 2018, his former partner was not co-operating with access at
Stage 3.  He showed us a contact centre referral form arranged via Cafcass
for a supervised meeting under Stage 3 on 22 May 2019, which supported his
evidence that he had complied with Stages 1 and 2 by that date, but his
son's mother had failed, in breach of the family court order, to arrange
for his son to attend the supervised meeting.  Consequently, the appellant
had applied for an enforcement order.  A hearing to consider that
application had been scheduled for 8 October 2019 but that hearing was
adjourned, because of the late-stage pregnancy of his current partner. His
evidence of that hearing, its adjournment and rescheduling for 11 November
2019 was corroborated by correspondence from the family court.

We find that the appellant has complied with Stages 1 and 2 of the staged
contact process and that without any fault or criticism of the appellant,
he has attempted to engage in Stage 3, with the meeting in May 2019. We
find that he is attempting to remedy the breach of his right to do so in
the court; and that those legal proceedings are active and are current with
a hearing due to take place on 11 November 2019.  Considering those facts
in the context of the authority of RS (Immigration and family court
proceedings) India, we find that the family court proceedings are not
contrived for the purpose of frustrating the appellant's removal and
instead, the facts are consistent with a sustained commitment by the
appellant to have a parental relationship with his son, over a period of
time, such that contact is ready begin at 'Stage 3' of the contact order
process.

Applying the law to the facts

It is accepted that the appellant's son is a qualifying child for the
purposes of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  The appellant is not liable
to deportation. The remaining questions asked in MA (Pakistan) and others
are first, whether the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with his son, and second, whether, noting that child's best
interests, it would be reasonable to expect that son to leave the UK.  Lord
Justice Elias had indicated that if there were such a relationship and it
would not be reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK, then the
appellant's article 8 rights would be infringed.

Based on our findings of fact, we had no hesitation in concluding that the
appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son,
for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  The appellant has
engaged in access with his son at both Stages 1 and 2, showing a consistent
pattern of recent, reciprocal involvement with his son, including telephone
contact as recently as three weeks ago. The fact that he has not reached
Stage 3 is not for want of his trying, and his application for an
enforcement order is further evidence of the development of that
relationship. While the family proceedings are not as far advanced as those
which were before Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer SR (subsisting parental
relationship, s117B(6)), and while we are conscious not to treat the facts
before her as precedent facts which bind us, we reflected on that case as
authority for the principle that even where a parental relationship is a
narrow one based on limited contact, it may nevertheless be genuine and
subsisting.  Applying that principle here, it is clear that progression
through the staged contact process, supervised by the court, with the aim
being face-to-face contact between the appellant and his son, does amount
to a genuine and subsisting parental relationship. These circumstances are
entirely different from where the family court never envisages any form of
direct contact or involvement in a child's life.  The fact that Stage 3 has
not yet been reached does not make that conclusion premature; rather, it is
the final stage in a lengthy process, which has already involved regular
reciprocal engagement.   Had we considered the question of whether the
appellant had a family life with his son for the purposes of article 8 of
the ECHR regardless of the test under section 117B(6), we would have
concluded, based on the same facts, that family life did exist, and indeed
it was the very purpose of the staged contact process to protect and
nurture that family life.  We refer to that because of a suggestion by Mr
Kotas that the provisions in section 117B(6) did not reflect the test for a
family life under article 8.

Mr Kotas suggested that we could not speculate on the appellant's son's
best interests in considering whether it would be reasonable to expect him
to leave the UK.  We do not accept that submission.  The child's best
interests are of paramount interest to the Swansea Family Court, which has
regarded a continuing parental relationship between the appellant and his
son to be sufficiently important to make stage contact orders, with the
very aim of progressing to face-to-face contact.  We regard those orders as
reflecting the starting point for the son's bests interests, namely to have
a meaningful parental relationship with the appellant.  Adopting a 'real
world' analysis of that child's best interests, he is a British national,
whose mother is also a British national and who has had sole residential
custody of him for the entirely of his life.  It is highly unlikely that
she would be willing to relocate to India, the appellant's country of
origin, particularly in the context of her estrangement from him and her
previously being the victim of his domestic violence.  It would
unquestionably be in the child's best interests to remain in the
residential custody of his mother, who lives in the UK, while continuing to
have a parental relationship with the appellant, leading to regular face-to-
face contact, not via social media.

We consider more widely, beyond the son's best interests, whether it would
be reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.  The facts weighing
against it being reasonable are clear. The child is a British national, who
has lived in the UK for the entirety of his life, which is a weighty
consideration, as is the fact that his mother has sole residential custody
of him. While in the UK, he has the benefit of his interests being
supervised by the English Courts.  It could not be reasonable to expect his
mother, the victim of previous domestic violence by the appellant, to
relocate to the appellant's country of origin, a country with which she has
to familiarity or connections.  In the circumstances, to expect the
appellant's son to leave the UK would either result in his separation from
his mother, and to expect him to live with his father in India; or to
expect the mother to transfer the entirety of her life to India.  Neither
proposition is reasonable. In the circumstances, it would be unreasonable
to expect the appellant's son to leave the UK.

In the circumstances, the appellant meets the requirements of section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act. As a consequence, the public interest does not
require his removal.   As made clear in MA (Pakistan) and others, the
effect is that the appellant's rights under article 8 are infringed.  He
has a family life with his son, which would be interfered with by his
removal, and there is no public interest in that removal, so that it must
breach his rights under article 8.

In reaching these conclusions, we do not have any view on what form of
leave the respondent should permit the appellant to have in the UK.  That
is a matter for the respondent.  We conclude that the appellant's removal
in consequence of the decision would be unlawful under section 6 of the
Human Rights Act 1998.

Decision

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  25 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has succeeded. We regarded it as appropriate to make a fee  award
of �140.


Signed J Keith                  Date:  25 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
