
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06363/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                              Josphat Mushongah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Genesis Law
Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Given orally on 23 November 2018)

Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born 7 March 1966.  His application
for a entry clearance to visit his spouse and children in the UK, who at
that time had Discretionary Leave to Remain, was refused by an Entry
Clearance Officer in a decision dated 27 October 2016.

Entry Clearance Officer's Decision

The ECO's decision relevantly states:

"In your application form you state that you applied for leave to remain in
2010 and I note this is the case and that it was granted.  You also stated
you had never been required to leave the UK.  However, I note that you also
submitted an application for leave to remain outside of the Rules in 2011.
As you did not submit this application upon arrival in the UK you were
therefore an illegal entrant who had used verbal deception and committed an
offence in breach of the 1971 Immigration Act.  You subsequently departed
the UK before a decision on this application was made.  At the date of your
departure you did not hold valid leave to remain and I am therefore
satisfied that you were required to leave the UK.

In light of the above I am satisfied that you have not disclosed material
facts in your current application and that you have made a false statement.
 Your application is therefore refused..."

First-tier Tribunal's Decision

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") on human rights
grounds (Article 8 ECHR). The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
Robertson on 1 May 2018 and was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 17
May.

In its decision the FtT engaged with the ECO's assertion of deception, at
[21]:

"As to the first issue, I do not accept the assertion in the Notice that
the appellant used verbal deception to gain entry to the UK, because he was
in the UK with lawful leave before his leave expired and he submitted an
asylum claim.  He was already in the UK when he made his application for
leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules in 2011.  Whilst he was an
overstayer by this time, he had not used verbal deception to gain entry to
the UK."

Ultimately, however, the FtT concluded that the appellant did not meet the
requirements of the Immigration Rules, for the following reasons:

          "[25] ... the appellant did overstay for more than 90 days after
         the refusal of his 2011 application on 4 January 2012.  He did not
         leave the UK until 12 April 2012.  However, he was not removed; he
         departed voluntarily."

    And then:

"[28] ... This is sufficient to find that between 4 January 2012 and 20
April 2012, when he was in the UK without leave, the appellant knew that he
was required to leave the UK pursuant to the terms of the decision letter
of 4 January 2012 and the respondent has discharged the evidential burden.

[29] I find that the appellant has not offered an innocent explanation.
..."

When considering whether the ECO's decision would breach the appellant's
human rights, the FtT found that:

         "The consequences of the decision are therefore that they [the
         appellant and his family] would continue to meet abroad as they
         have done in the past and are therefore not so grave as to
         potentially engage the operation of Article 8."

The FtT also concluded in the alternative (at [32] to [34]) that even if
Article 8 was engaged then the decision not to grant entry clearance was,
nevertheless, proportionate.

Discussion and Decision

The grounds of challenge, which were not drafted by Mr Brown, assert (i)
that the FtT made a mistake of fact when concluding that the appellant had
overstayed in the UK for longer than 90 days and (ii) that the FtT erred in
concluding that Article 8 was not engaged.

It is prudent for me to initially consider the second of the grounds. The
appellant was only entitled to pursue human rights grounds before the FtT
and, consequently, the issue of whether the appellant met the requirements
of the Rules was relevant to but not determinative of the appeal.

The appellant had to first demonstrate that Article 8 was engaged.  After
giving careful consideration to all the relevant matters, the FtT concluded
against the appellant on this point.  The appellant's challenge to this
finding, in reality, amounts to an assertion that the FtT's decision on
this issue was irrational.

In my conclusion, on the limited evidence made available to the FtT, it was
entirely open to it to conclude that Article 8 was not engaged, for the
reasons it gave - indeed I would have come to the same conclusion on the
available evidence. This conclusion disposes of the appellant's appeal to
the Upper Tribunal, irrespective of my conclusion on the second of the
grounds which, if made out, would necessarily have infected the FtT's
proportionality assessment but does not impinge upon the assessment of
whether Article 8 is engaged.

Nevertheless, for completion I will go on and make observations in relation
to the challenge to the FtT's finding that the appellant overstayed in the
UK for a period of over 90 days. In this regard, I have been provided with
a number of documents which ought to have been put before the First-tier
Tribunal - certainly by the Secretary of State pursuant to his duty of
candour and, if the appellant had access to them, by the appellant as well
- but were not.

It is clear from these documents that the appellant previously claimed
asylum in the UK. This claim appears to have been made on 20 November 2011.
I have been provided with a copy of Form IS.151A in the appellant's name,
dated 20 November 2011. This form provides notice to the appellant that he
is a person liable to removal, and it also identifies that he is being
treated as an illegal entrant. This form does not state on its face when it
was served.  In addition, I have been provided with a notice dated 4
January 2012 which records that it was served on the appellant on 6 January
2012.  This notice is headed "Variation of Leave to Enter or Remain". In
its body it identifies that the appellant's asylum claim was refused on 30
December 2011, and it states thereafter:

"The leave to enter or remain you had at the time you made this application
[20 November 2011] is statutorily extended for the period when you can
appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002, or until an appeal brought under that Section is finally determined,
withdrawn or abandoned."

This latter notice (which generated a right of appeal to the FtT) is
mutually inconsistent with the IS151A. The fact that the First-tier
Tribunal did not have this document before it has, in my conclusion, led to
it misunderstanding the material circumstances prevailing in the period
immediately prior to the appellant departing the UK in 2012.  In
particular, it appears that the FtT were unaware that the appellant had
appealed against the decision served on the 6 January 2012.

Applying the terms of the 6 January 2012 notice, the applicant had section
3C leave during the period from 6 January until the exhaustion of the
appeal process, which was on 11 April 2012.  The applicant, having lost his
appeal and not having pursued matters further, left the United Kingdom on
29 April 2012, which, by my calculation means he remained in the UK as an
overstayer for a period of only 18 days - not in excess of 90 days As a
consequence, the appellant is not excluded from obtaining entry clearance
as a visitor by operation of paragraph 3.9(a) of Appendix V of the Rules.

I make one further observation.  The FtT found at [21] of its decision that
the appellant had not engaged in deception. Despite Mr Mills submission to
the contrary, I conclude that the FtT was entitled to make such a finding
on the available evidence.

For the reasons given above, I find that the FtT's decision does not
contain an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and,
consequently, the decision of the FtT must stand.


    Signed:
    [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor       Date 7 January 2019

