
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07164/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2020                           |On 26 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       AOUMKUMAR BHUPATKUMAR SIDAPARA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Westend
Consultants UK Ltd
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant" refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2. For the purpose of introduction, it is  the  Secretary  of  State's  case
that the claimant was  unsuitable  for  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
because  he  had  been  untruthful  with  the  authorities.    There   were
discrepancies between the money  declared  to  HMRC  for  the  purposes  of
assessing his tax liability and the money  declared  to  the  Secretary  of
State for the purpose of supporting applications for continuing leave.

3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided, having heard  the  evidence,  that
the Secretary of State had not shown the claimant to  have  been  dishonest
and allowed the appeal.

4. I have the grounds of appeal from the Secretary of State and  a  detailed
Rule 24 reply from Mr Muquit which I have considered with the  written  and
oral submissions before me.

5. Mr Whitwell began by distancing himself from  ground  1  which  said  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge had made a mistake about a  material  fact.   The
contention in ground 1 is that the claimant had inflated  his  income.   If
there was any fault it lay in underdeclaring income  for  the  purposes  of
tax, not overclaiming for the  purposes  of  pursuing  an  application  for
leave.  Mr Whitwell described ground 1 as "slightly at cross-purposes".

6. He concentrated on ground 2 which he said is a failure to  give  adequate
reasons.

7. There are many cases that touch on scenarios such as  this.   The  First-
tier Tribunal, appropriately, directed itself to the decision in Balajigari
v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673 and there is no suggestion that  the  First-tier
Tribunal  did  other  than  direct  itself  appropriately  and  follow  the
directions given.

8. Mr Whitwell's argument was that the judge  had  accepted  an  explanation
for  underdeclaring  to  HMRC  without  giving  adequate  reasons  for  the
decision.  As I am sure Mr Whitwell will accept the Secretary of  State  is
on rather thin ice if she seeks to show that an explanation which has  been
given is inadequate in law.  However, it is also right to say that such  an
explanation could be inadequate and I have taken Mr  Whitwell's  submission
entirely seriously.  The fundamental problem, as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge recognised, related particularly to a declaration  in  February  2011
where the sum of �4,334.09 was underdeclared.  Some of this was  attributed
to  overlooking  a  dividend  receipt  but  there   was   still   �2,112.09
unexplained.

9. It was the claimant's case that he had declared the  income  through  the
company  that  paid  the  dividends.   As  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
explained it is not for the claimant to decide how to  declare  income  but
for the claimant to declare the income in the way required. However, it  is
important that this is a case where the sum was not hidden away  in  secret
books  but  were  disclosed,  albeit  inappropriately.   This  is   clearly
pertinent to the issue of whether dishonesty was involved.  The judge found
the explanation for omitting the declaration of �2,222 to be sufficient  to
dispel the inference of dishonesty.

10. At paragraph 23 of his witness statement  the  claimant  said  that,  in
addition to wrongly declaring a sum he forgot about a "first  dividend"  of
�2000 net. At paragraph 37 of the Decision and Reasons the judge found that
the claimant had made tax declarations for two years  without  professional
help and that it was "plausible" that he had made an innocent mistake.

11. In making this  assessment  the  judge  had  regard  to  the  claimant's
willingness to correct the error when it came to his attention and the fact
that there is no known criticism of his conduct since 2011  concerning  his
tax affairs (or at all although that is not what I have  to  consider)  and
that he made the declaration with the benefit of advice.

12. I have considered Mr Whitwell's reference  to  the  decision  of  Martin
Spencer J in R (Khan) v SSHD [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC) particularly  paragraphs
32 to 37 but these are illustrative rather than  mandatory  indications  of
the kind of requirements that can be expected.  The simple  point  is  that
the judge believed the witness.  That much is clear  and  he  has  set  the
finding against the background of the case having regard to the  relatively
small amount of money involved, the explanation given for not declaring  it
and the plausibility of that explanation, albeit wrong  in  law,  with  the
apparently good payment record since and decided that  dishonesty  had  not
been proved.

13. This was clearly open to the judge and was a permissible conclusion.

14. In short, whilst the decision might seem generous  to  someone  who  has
not heard the claimant it is neither unexplained nor perverse.

15. There is no  material  error  of  law  established  and  I  dismiss  the
Secretary of State's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 February 2021               |



