
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07320/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2020                  |On 07 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TROWLER


                                   Between

                   Mr Dharmendrakumar Ghanshyambhai Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a citizen of India and his date of birth is 30 May 1983.

The Appellant was granted a multi visit student visa in 2009. He came to
the UK on 9 February 2010.  Thereafter he made a number of unsuccessful
applications including an application for leave as a student which was
refused by the Secretary of State.   The Appellant appealed against this
decision. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal on 26 August 2012.
Applications to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal were
refused.  The Appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 8 February 2013.
Since that time he has remained in the UK without leave.

On 17 August 2018 the Appellant made an application on Article 8 grounds on
the basis of private life.  The application was refused by the Secretary of
State on 8 April 2019.  The Appellant appealed.  His appeal was dismissed
by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rose in a decision promulgated on 5
December 2019 following a hearing on 8 November 2019.  The Appellant was
granted permission on 14 April 2020.  Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson took a
provisional view that the error of law matter could be determined on the
papers.  The matter then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith. She
decided that the matter should be listed for a face-to-face hearing.  The
Appellant had not responded to Judge Hanson's directions. She took into
account that the Appellant, though represented before the First-tier
Tribunal, is now a litigant in person.

The matter came before us to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal made
an error of law. The Appellant did not attend the hearing. The last
communication from the Appellant was a letter from him on 17 January 2020
informing the Upper Tribunal of a change of address.  A notice of hearing
was sent to the Appellant from the Upper Tribunal by post on 7 October 2020
to this address.  Judge Hanson and Judge Smith's decisions were also sent
to the Appellant. We were satisfied that the Appellant has been notified of
the hearing before us. Properly applying Rule 2 of The Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the 2008 Rules") we decided that it was in
the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in accordance with
Rule 38 of the 2008 Rules.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant.  There were no
other witnesses.  The judge set out the law at paragraphs 3, 4 and 5
including the five- step approach to follow in Article 8 cases set out in
Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. She also set out the relevant parts of s.117 of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and paragraph
276ADE (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The judge said as follows:-

"6.  I had the benefit of bundles for the Appellant and the Respondent.
The Appellant gave evidence before me.  He told me that, contrary to the
findings of IJ Flynn in 2012, the documents he had supplied from the
Jalandhar Central Co-operative Bank were genuine.

7.   In cross-examination, he told me that he had worked in the UK as a
shopkeeper.  He also told me that he had been financially supported by two
friends.  He said that he was no longer supported by his father and did not
have any relationship with him or his family in India.  They all lived
together in India but he had not spoken to them for about a year.  However,
he also said that he had not spoken to his Father about whether he could
return to live with him.  He said that, when in India, he worked as a
mechanic, however he said that it had been too long for him to go back to
that.

8.   Thereafter I heard helpful submissions from both parties."

The judge made conclusions at paragraphs 9 and 10 which read as follows:

"9.  The principle issue in this case is whether or not the Appellant would
encounter very significant obstacles in returning to India.  I find, on the
balance of probabilities, that he would not.  While he has undoubtedly had
a strained relationship with his Father, he has made no efforts to see if
he could return to live with his family and there is nothing to suggest
that his relationship with his family has reached the point that they would
not welcome him back into the home.  In any event, he is experienced in
mechanics and in retail and therefore is employable.

10.  Looking at his case outside of the rules, it is clear that he has
minimal private life in the UK and no family life.  It follows that there
is no basis for the Appellant arguing that his removal would be a breach of
his Art. 8 ECHR rights."

The grounds of appeal

The grounds of appeal can be summarised.  The judge failed to make adequate
findings of fact.  There is reference to the Appellant having not attended
a hearing and the judge not considering the provenance of bank statements.
(It is clear to us that this relates to the 2012 decision of the First-tier
Tribunal and not the decision which was the subject of the appeal before
Judge Rose).

The Appellant relies on MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10.  He concedes in the
grounds of appeal that he would have an "uphill struggle justifying leave
outside of the Rules." However, his submission is that a finding against
him is not inevitable.  It is asserted that the judge did not carry out the
five- step approach in Razgar and did not take account of the Appellant's
lengthy residence in the UK.

Submissions

Ms Cunha conceded that the judge made an error of law in respect of the
finding that there were no very significant obstacles to integration under
paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and
Article 8 outside of the Rules. However, she said that the error is not
material to the outcome.  Ms Cunha submitted that the Appellant's private
life does not engage Article 8 (1) and therefore does not get past the
first Razgar step.

Error of law

The judge correctly directed herself on the law at paragraphs 3, 4 and 5.
However, she did not apply her self-direction.  It was incumbent on the
First-tier Tribunal to make a full assessment of Article 8 outside of the
Rules in accordance with Razgar. Paragraph 10 of the decision discloses
that it did not do so. This is a material error of law.

Insofar as the grounds seek to challenge the 2012 decision of the First-
tier Tribunal that the Appellant had exercised deception, there is no right
of appeal against that decision.

In the grounds of appeal the Appellant did not specifically challenge the
decision that there would not be very significant obstacles to integration.
However, in the light of Ms Cunha's concession we conclude that the judge
materially erred in the assessment of very significant obstacles to
integration and Article 8 generally.  We are unable to say with certainty
that should the judge have properly considered Article 8 the appeal would
have been dismissed.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the
Appellant's appeal pursuant to s12 (2) (a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007. We remake the decision pursuant to s12 (2) (b) of the
same Act properly applying paragraphs 7.2 and 7.3 of the Practice Statement
of the Senior President of Tribunals of 25 September 2012 and the
overriding objective at Rule 2 of the 2008 Rules.  The Appellant had
decided not to participate in the proceedings and had not submitted any
further evidence. We could fairly remake the decision on the evidence
before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant relied on a witness statement dated 4 November 2019.  He
submitted a statement with his application in 2018.  We have taken account
of both documents. His evidence can be summarised. He does not have ties in
India.  His family (including his wife and children) has disowned him.  He
has wasted a lot of money on education here. The thrust of his evidence is
that he is integrated and considers the UK his home.  He has many social
ties here.  He has friends here and has been away from India (at the time
of making his witness statement) for a period of ten years.  He has skills
and expertise as a shopkeeper. He has not claimed public funds.

The Appellant in his witness statement refers to friends here in the UK and
relationships that he has developed here.  However, there was no evidence
before the First-tier Tribunal from any of these people.  It is asserted by
the Appellant that witnesses were not prepared to come forward and give
evidence because they feared losing British citizenship.

Findings and reasons

The challenge to the judge's decision in the grounds of appeal in so far as
the Rules are concerned is not easy to follow. However, Ms Cunha conceded
an error of law in relation to the very significant obstacles decision. We
should determine whether the Appellant's appeal can succeed under Article 8
as informed by the Rules before moving on, if necessary, to consider the
appeal outside of the Rules. Properly applying the guidance in the case of
The Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ
813. The Appellant has failed to establish that there are very significant
obstacles to integration. While he has been away for a significant period,
he left India as an adult.  He is employable and will be able to assimilate
and integrate on his return.  The Appellant would not be an outsider
returning to India. He would be able to properly participate in society
there. Taking a broad evaluative judgment, the Appellant has not
established, taking his evidence at the highest, that there would be very
significant obstacles on return to India.

From the evidence before us we conclude that the Appellant has a private
life here. While the evidence as to the substance of this is thin on the
ground, the Appellant has now been here for eleven years. We reject Ms
Cunha's submission and accept that his private life engages Article 8 (1).
The determinative question is whether his removal is proportionate.

There are a number of matters that weigh in favour of the Appellant.  He
had been here for over ten years.  He does not have family in the UK.  His
evidence is that he is estranged from family in India.  However, there is
some contradiction in his evidence about the relationship that he has with
his father.  His evidence in his witness statement was that he provided
support to an elderly father in India.  However, this was not entirely
consistent with his evidence that he has been disowned.  Nevertheless, we
find that the Appellant as a single male who is (on his own evidence)
employable. It can be reasonably inferred that he would be able to return
to India and find employment. He could develop a private life in a similar
way to how he has developed a private life here in the UK.  It is likely
that he has made friendships here; however, the evidence does not support
that these are significant. We do not accept that potential witnesses
feared deprivation of British citizenship should they support the Appellant
which explains why they did not give evidence. The Appellant was
represented before the First-tier Tribunal. In any event there is no
support for the Secretary of State depriving citizenship on this basis or
for anyone fearing this as a possibility.

The Appellant's evidence is that he has been targeted by his family in
India.  There is nothing to support this.  He has not made a claim under
Article 3 or on protection grounds nor were these issues raised in the
grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  If the Appellant is of
the view that he is at risk on return it is open to him to make such an
application.

The evidence before us does not establish that the Appellant would be
targeted by his family. When considering proportionality, it does not
assist the Appellant that there has been a finding by the First-tier
Tribunal in 2012 that he engaged in deception.   It is a lawful and
sustainable finding and there is no reason for us to go behind it.
However, that finding is not material as far as the outcome of this appeal
is concerned because there is very little that is capable of tipping the
balance of the scales in the Appellant's favour in this case. He has not
had leave since 2013.  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
in the public interest (see s.117 B (2)).  Section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act
provides that little weight should be attached to private life established
when the person has been in the UK unlawfully.  The Appellant has been here
unlawfully since 2013. At that point in time he had been here for only
three years. All in all, considering the evidence in the round, the
interference to the Appellant's private life is not such that it outweighs
the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control having
properly applied Razgar and the statutory regime.

We remake the decision and dismiss the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam               Date 30 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam






