
                   [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU071822015
      HU071832015
      HU071842015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 July 2017                     |On 14 August 2017                     |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               mrS NAJMA KIANI
                             MISS FAZEELA KIANI
                           MR MOAZAM SULTAN KIANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented. The Sponsor attended in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This appeal came before me for an error of law hearing on 19 July 2017.
I found an error of law in the decision of the First tier Tribunal, which I
append. The parties agreed I could re-make the decision without the need
for an oral hearing, but with the assistance of written submissions, which
I have now received.

2. The only issue outstanding, it now being accepted that the Appellants
meet the financial requirements of the Rules, is whether the Entry
Clearance Officer erred in failing to contact the first Appellant to
request an English language certificate from an approved provider, in line
with the principle of evidential flexibility. This is now set out in
Appendix FM SE, the relevant provisions of which are as follows:

"Family Members - Specified Evidence

   A. This Appendix sets out the specified evidence applicants need to
   provide to meet the requirements of rules contained in Appendix FM and,
   where those requirements are also contained in other rules, including
   Appendix Armed Forces, and unless otherwise stated, the specified
   evidence applicants need to provide to meet the requirements of those
   rules.
   B. Where evidence is not specified by Appendix FM, but is of a type
   covered by this Appendix, the requirements of this Appendix shall apply.
   C. In this Appendix references to paragraphs are to paragraphs of this
   Appendix unless the context otherwise requires.
   D. (a) In deciding an application in relation to which this Appendix
   states that specified documents must be provided, the Entry Clearance
   Officer or Secretary of State ("the decision-maker") will consider
   documents that have been submitted with the application, and will only
   consider documents submitted after the application where sub-paragraph
   (b), (e) or (f) applies.
   (b) If the applicant:
   (i) Has submitted:
   (aa) A sequence of documents and some of the documents in the sequence
   have been omitted (e.g. if one bank statement from a series is missing);
   (bb) A document in the wrong format (for example, if a letter is not on
   letterhead paper as specified); or
   (cc) A document that is a copy and not an original document; or
   (dd) A document which does not contain all of the specified information;
   or
   (ii) Has not submitted a specified document, the decision-maker may
   contact the applicant or his representative in writing or otherwise, and
   request the document(s) or the correct version(s). The material requested
   must be received at the address specified in the request within a
   reasonable timescale specified in the request.
   (c) The decision-maker will not request documents where he or she does
   not anticipate that addressing the error or omission referred to in sub-
   paragraph (b) will lead to a grant because the application will be
   refused for other reasons...
   (f) Before making a decision under Appendix FM or this Appendix, the
   decision-maker may contact the applicant or their representative in
   writing or otherwise to request further information or documents. The
   material requested must be received at the address specified in the
   request within a reasonable timescale specified in the request."
   3. In his submissions of 20 July 2017, at inter alia [10]-[14] Mr Melvin
   submitted that: '10....if the ECO had contacted the appellant on receipt
   of the application to request within 7 days , as is customary, a valid
   English language certificate one still would not have been available. The
   Court of Appeal considers the evidential flexibility policy in SoS V
   Rodriquez EWCA CIv.2 [2014] below is an excerpt from paragraph 48
      The instruction enabled caseworkers "to query details or request
      further information, such as a missing wage slip or bank statement
      from a sequence". Following analysis and review, as it was said, there
      had been "two significant changes" to the original Evidential
      Flexibility instruction. These were identified as follows:
   1. The time given to applicants to produce additional evidence has been
      increased from three working days to seven working days; and
   2. There is now no limit on the amount of information that can be
      requested from the applicant. However, requests for information should
      not be speculative, we must have sufficient reason to believe that any
      evidence requested exists."


   11. It is submitted that it is trite law that only documents submitted
   with the application would be considered and that the "evidential
   flexibility policy" applies only to documents that are in existence as at
   the date of application.


   13 ... the facts of this appeal do not show that any of the exceptions
   referred to in D (underlined (b)(e)(f)) above apply to this appeal.


   14. By analogy, in relation to PBS etc appeals it will be submitted that
   the Upper Tribunal have made it abundantly clear that; per paragraph
   245AA(c) of the Rules, there is no obligation on UKBA to request
   documents in circumstances where "a specified document has not been
   submitted". The assertion is to the effect that an "evidential
   flexibility" policy of sorts survived the introduction of paragraph
   245AA. The latter provision of the Rules came into operation on 06
   September 2012."
4. In his response of 3 August 2017, Mr Kiani submitted:

(i) Rodriquez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 which does not apply to the appellant's
case because the above decision deals with the applications made under the
provisions of part 6 of the immigration rules which is about the points
based system;

(ii) The judgement of the Court of Appeal in Rodriguez has been overruled
by the Supreme Court in the decision of the case of Mandalia  [2015] UKSC
59;

(iii) Section 245AA of the part 6 of the immigration Rules quoted by the
respondent in paragraph 14 of the written response also does not apply to
the appellants case because this part of the rules deals with the
applications made under points based system.

5. Rodriquez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 was in fact linked to the case of Mandalia,
which was successfully appealed to the Supreme Court. Consequently, I
accept Mr Kiani's submission that Rodriguez has been overturned by the
subsequent judgment of Lord Wilson in the Supreme Court.

6. In Mandalia [2015] UKSC 59, their Lordships held at [35]-[36]:

"35. In one sense every request by a caseworker for further evidence would
have been "speculative" but what was there in Mr Mandalia's application to
render a request to him more "speculative" than any other? Was there not,
at the very least, doubt, the benefit of which should have been given to
him?

Answer
36.     I conclude that the answer to the question identified in para 1
above is "yes": the agency's refusal of Mr Mandalia's application was
unlawful because, properly interpreted, the process instruction obliged it
first to have invited him to repair the deficit in his evidence."

7. I have further had regard to the post Mandalia jurisprudence. In SH
(Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 426, a case involving a Tier 1 Entrepreneur
whose application was refused on the basis that he did not meet the English
language requirement. Lord Justice Elias, with whom Lords Justices Beatson
& Vos agreed, held at [21]-[23]  follows in respect of the evidential
flexibility policy in play in that case, that it was not circumscribed by
paragraph 245AA of the Rules  and was indeed much wider than the very
particular circumstances set out in the Rules.

8. I have further taken account of the contents of paragraph 32D of
Appendix FM SE which provides:

 "If an applicant applying for limited leave to enter or remain under Part
8 or Appendix FM submits an English language test certificate or result and
the Home Office has already accepted it as part of a successful previous
partner or parent application (but not where the application was refused,
even if on grounds other than the English language requirement), the
decision-maker will accept that certificate or result as valid if it is:
(a) from a provider which is no longer approved ..."

9. I am bound to observe that it would be odd, having succeeded in a
previous partner or parent application, for an applicant to subsequently
have to apply for limited leave. Whilst the Appellants were not successful
in their previous entry clearance application it is the case that that
application was refused on the basis of the financial requirements only,
owing to the fact that the English language test certificate provider was
on the approved list at that time. However, between February 2014 and April
2015, when the second application was made, the test provider was no longer
approved. I further find as a fact that the only reason that a new English
language test certificate was required was due to the delay in making entry
clearance decisions in light of the pending judgment in MM (Lebanon) in the
Court of Appeal.

10. I have given careful consideration to the terms of the evidential
flexibility policy, in particular DA viz the Entry Clearance Officer ...
will consider documents that have been submitted with the application, and
will only consider documents submitted after the application where sub-
paragraph (b), (e) or (f) applies ...(b) If the applicant:(ii) Has not
submitted a specified document, the decision-maker may contact the
applicant or his representative in writing or otherwise, and request the
document(s) or the correct version(s). The material requested must be
received at the address specified in the request within a reasonable
timescale specified in the request.

11. I find that an English language test certificate is a "specified
document." Whilst an English language test certificate was submitted with
the application made on 3 April 2015, it was not the "correct version"
given that the provider was no longer on the approved list. I find that the
Appellants fall squarely with the evidential flexibility policy and that
the Entry Clearance Officer's failure to apply the policy was not in
accordance with the law, as it was not in accordance with her policy.

12. Mr Melvin submitted that, in any event, the Appellants could not have
succeeded with regard to the evidential flexibility policy because it is
customary to give applicants 7 days to produce the specified document and
an English language test certificate would still not have been available.
However, this is an unknown in that, had the ECO contacted the first
Appellant, she may have been able to take a test with an approved provider
within 7 days, if indeed that timescale is applicable on these particular
facts, which I am not persuaded it is. I do not accept Mr Melvin's
submission at [11] that it is trite law that only documents submitted with
the application would be considered and that the "evidential flexibility
policy" applies only to documents that are in existence as at the date of
application, as no evidential or jurisprudential basis has been provided to
support these assertions. I do not consider that the extract cited from
[48] of Rodriguez can properly apply to the circumstances in this case,
given that the policy in that case was a previous policy relating
specifically to Tier 4 applicants rather than family members and there are
no such restrictions contained in the policy under consideration viz
Appendix FM SE, Family Members - specified evidence.

13. I am bound to observe that the underlying purpose of the requirement to
produce an English language test certificate is to demonstrate that the
applicant has attained a particular standard in English, so as to be able
to integrate and seek employment upon entry to the United Kingdom. There is
no question that the Appellant attained that standard as she passed her
previous English language test. She also took a further test - the IELTS
Life Skills A1 with an approved provider in February 2016 and passed it,
albeit this is post decision evidence.

14. I have concluded in light of the written submissions and the
jurisprudence that the failure by the Entry Clearance Officer to apply the
evidential flexibility policy was not in accordance with the law. In light
of the amendments to the appeal provisions of the NIAA 2002, in particular
section 86, there is no power by the Tribunal to remit appeals to the Entry
Clearance Officer but only to determine any matter raised by section 85 or
as a ground of appeal, the effect of which is that the Tribunal is the
primary decision-maker. In the Presidential decision in Greenwood No 2
(para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) the panel held at [21] that:

"If the effect of the Tribunal's decision was to conclude that the decision
of the Secretary of State under appeal was unlawful and the Tribunal did
not substitute another decision:
(a) if the decision of the Secretary of State involved a determination of
an application made by the litigant, a lawful decision remains to be made
by the Secretary of State - and it is preferable that the FtT say so
clearly;
(b) alternatively, if the challenge in the appeal was to an "own motion"
decision of the Secretary of State, it would be a matter for the Secretary
of State to decide whether a further decision should be made in the wake of
the FtT's decision.

15. The Upper Tribunal expressly held at [23] that this power survives the
amendments to the appeal provisions of the NIAA 2002.At [25] the panel
further suggests that, in certain circumstances [unconsidered and
undetermined cases] the Tribunal is obligated to take on the role of
primary decision maker. However, this is not a case where the application
was unconsidered or undetermined. In these circumstances, in light of my
finding that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was unlawful, the
correct decision is to find that a lawful decision remains to be made by
the Secretary of State.

16. I am conscious that due to the passage of time since the first
application for entry clearance was made in February 2014, the second
Appellant is now no longer a child and the Third Appellant will also
shortly turn 18 years of age. Given that the delays were due essentially to
entry clearance applications being placed on hold pending the outcome of
the MM Lebanon litigation, I do not consider that it would accord with the
common law principle of fairness or the best interests of the second and
third Appellant for their entry clearance applications to now fail on the
basis of their ages. Thus consideration needs to be given to the grant of
entry clearance to the second and third Appellants outside the Rules, with
regard to their family life with both their parents. There would appear to
be no reason why the first Appellant's application for entry clearance
should not succeed, given that the requirements of the Rules are met.

17. The appeals are allowed to the extent that the applications for entry
clearance remain outstanding before the Entry Clearance Officer for a
lawful decision to be made.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

12 August 2017

ANNex






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU071822015
      HU071832015
      HU071842015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2017                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               mrS NAJMA KIANI
                             MISS FAZEELA KIANI
                           MR MOAZAM SULTAN KIANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Unrepresented. The Sponsor attended in person.
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan, born respectively on 3.6.74;
22.9.97 and 23.8.99. On 3.4.15 they made a second application for entry
clearance in order to join the Sponsor, the husband of the first Appellant
and father of the second and third Appellants, who is a British citizen.
The applications were refused in decisions by an Entry Clearance Officer
dated 28.8.15 on the basis that the Appellants failed to meet the financial
requirements of the Rules and that the English language requirements. The
Appellants appealed against those decisions.

2. The appeals came before First tier Tribunal Judge Thomas for hearing on
19 October 2016. In a decision promulgated on 17.11.16 the Judge dismissed
the appeals on the basis that the first Appellant did not meet the English
language requirement at the date of decision because at the time of the
present application the Respondent no longer accepted the TOEIC ETS
certificate and whilst she had now provided a IELTS Life Skills A1
certificate for a test taken in February 2016 this was produced post
decision. The Judge, however, found that the financial requirements were
met in substance at the date of decision and consideration had not been
given to the Sponsor's gross total income from two jobs.

3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
out of time by the Sponsor, who submitted inter alia that:

(i) at the time of making the first application for entry clearance the
TOEIC ETS certificate was the specified document to prove the English
language requirement. Whilst at the time of considering the second
application the IELTS Life Skills A1 certificate was the specified document
to prove the English language requirement, it was the responsibility of the
ECO to request this certificate from the first applicant but the ECO erred
in failing to provide the first applicant with an opportunity to provide
this;

(ii)  the FtTJ failed to consider that the ECO had not followed the
procedure set out in FM-SE at D(b)(ii) viz "if the applicant has not
submitted a specified document, the decision maker may contact the
applicant or his representative in writing or otherwise, and request the
document or the correct version..."

(iii) the first applicant subsequently passed the IELTS test and submitted
the certificate during the appeal along with her degree certificate;

(iv) the Judge further erred in treating the second Appellant as an adult
and in failing to consider her best interests, given that at the time of
the application and decision she was under 18.

4. In a decision granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and
extending time so as to admit the appeal in time, First tier Tribunal Judge
Scott Baker held that the Judge failed to consider the application of the
evidential flexibility policy of the respondent, which was particularly
relevant as the failure to provide the correct certificate was the only
issue at large and the failure to make findings on this discloses an
arguable error of law; the failure to treat the second Appellant as a minor
and to consider her best interests was also an arguable error of law.

Hearing

5. At the hearing before me, the Appellants were unrepresented but the
Sponsor, Mr Zafar Sultan Kiani, appeared on their behalf and made
submissions in line with the grounds of appeal (which he had drafted). He
relied upon a bundle that he had prepared which had been submitted on
3.7.17. He stated that his wife is a graduate and can pass anytime the
English language course and that she did pass it and submit it with the
application and the same certificate was submitted to the ECO but by that
time the requirement was changed. He said that they only became aware of
need to get a certificate from a different provider when they received the
refusal decision.
He stated that the evidential flexibility principle clearly states that if
there is a document which is required the Respondent should contact the
Appellant: Appendix FM-SE D (b)(ii) at page 37 of the Appellants' bundle
and see also (f) on page 38. The Sponsor stated that his wife has passed
the other test: page 142 dated 11.2.16. which proves she is competent in
English and that the previous test results are set out at pages 143-144.
The Sponsor further stated that his daughter was under 18 when she made the
application and should be treated as a child under the Rules: Chapter 8
section 5A at page 36 at 2.1.

6. In his submissions, Mr Melvin relied upon the rule 24 but he accepted
that this does not refer to the issue of the English language test. He
submitted that
the first refusal of entry clearance in August 2015 is based on the
application made in April 2015 and it is incumbent upon anyone to meet the
requirements of the Rules at the time of the application. It is clear from
the 1.4.16 decision which upheld that first decision that the Respondent
took issue with both the financial requirements and the English language
certificate. He submitted that the Judge has considered Article 8 in line
with the Rules and has approached the appeal correctly and Appendix FM- SE
states that the requirements of the Rules need to be met at the date of
application.

7. Mr Melvin expressly accepted the submission made by the Sponsor on the
points he raised about evidential flexibility but sought to point out that
the Rules make it clear that it is discretionary ie the ECO may contact an
applicant. He submitted that the Upper Tribunal has considered evidential
flexibility at great length on many occasions and the discretion of the ECO
has been upheld in all the reported caselaw. He submitted that there is no
material error of law in the decision of the First tier Tribunal; the Judge
has considered the Rules applicable and found that the Appellants cannot
meet those Rules and has considered whether there are circumstances which
warrant consideration outside the Rules and as such dismissed the appeal.



Decision and reasons

8. I find that First tier Tribunal Judge Thomas materially erred in law and
I announced my decision at the hearing. I now give my reasons.

9. The refusal decisions dated 28.8.15 state in terms: "I have considered
the provision of evidential flexibility as set out in paragraph D of
Appendix FM-SE. I have not deemed it appropriate to exercise evidential
flexibility in this case as it falls for refusal on other grounds."
However, despite the fact that the issue was expressly raised by the ECO it
was simply not considered at all by the Judge, despite the fact that the
issue of the English language certificate was the only remaining basis for
refusing the application once the Judge accepted that the financial
requirements of the Rules were met.

10. Moreover, the Judge was aware [4 refers] that this was a second
application for entry clearance, the first having been refused on grounds
of financial requirements alone. At that time, therefore, the English
language test certificate supplied by the first Appellant met the
requirements of the Rules. There was then substantial delay on the part of
the Respondent due to the fact that entry clearance decisions concerning
the financial requirements of the Rules were put on hold pending judgment
in MM (Lebanon). Thus by the time that the second application was made, ETS
were no longer licensed to award TOEIC and thus the certificate was
invalid.

11. In these circumstances, I consider that it was incumbent upon the Judge
to consider the refusal by the ECO to exercise discretion in light of
Appendix FM-SE and the failure so to do is a material error of law.

12. I indicated and the parties agreed that I could proceed to re-make the
decision. Mr Melvin indicated that he would wish to make written
submissions prior to a decision being taken. I acceded to this request and
append directions in order that a decision can be made expeditiously, given
the undue delay that has already taken place in respect of these
applications for entry clearance.






                       ________________

                           DIRECTIONS
                       ________________


1. Mr Melvin to provide written submissions by 4pm on 27 July 2017 and to
serve via email to dutjudge.chapman@ejudiciary.net and to the Sponsor:
z.zafarsultan@yahoo.co.uk.

2. If the Sponsor wishes to respond, the deadline for submissions is 4pm on
Friday 4 August 2017 and they should be sent by email to:
Tony.Melvin@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk and dutjudge.chapman@ejudiciary.net.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

19 July 2017













