
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/07825/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reason Promulgate       |
|On 11 May 2021                     |On 27 May 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     LG

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.  At the conclusion of the  hearing,
I indicated that the appeal would  be  allowed,  giving  brief  reasons  but
reserving my full reasons, which I now give. The order made is described at
the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Nepalese national born on 21.5.83, and is now  37
   years of age, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 7.2.20, dismissing on
   all grounds her appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 8.3.20, to refuse her application for entry clearance to the UK  as
   the adult dependent child of her mother, Lok Maya Gurung,  widow  of  her
   father, a former Gurkha soldier.

2. The application made on 24.12.18  was  principally  refused  because  the
   appellant  did  not  fall  within  the  respondent's  historic  injustice
   discretionary policy. Her father, who served as a Gurkha solider for some
   9 years until discharged in 1967, was never able to apply for  settlement
   in the UK prior to his death in 1991, as the  policy  was  not  in  place
   until 2009. Whilst the policy applied to  the  widows  of  former  Gurkha
   soldiers, so that the appellant's mother was able to come to  the  UK  in
   2012, it does not apply to the adult children  of  such  widows.  For  an
   adult child of a former Gurkha soldier to qualify  for  settlement  under
   the policy, at the time of the application the former Gurkha parent  must
   either have been, or was in the  process  of  being,  granted  settlement
   under the 2009 discretionary arrangements, or was granted leave under the
   2004 arrangement under which the requirement to have been  discharged  on
   or after 1.7.97 was waived. It follows that children and other  dependent
   relatives of former Gurkhas falling outside the policy  are  required  to
   meet the relevant Immigration Rules or other discretionary criteria.

3. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the sponsoring mother  chose  to  come
   to the UK at a time when there was no right for her to bring her children
   to the UK. At [23] of the decision,  the  judge  also  remarked  on  "the
   almost complete lack of documentary evidence in respect of the  financial
   position". After reviewing the evidence, at [29] the judge concluded that
   it was insufficient to demonstrate that the appellant enjoyed family life
   with her mother "in the Kugathas sense". The judge went on from  [30]  of
   the decision to consider the alternative basis that the finding on family
   life was wrong, and purported to examine whether the  historic  injustice
   was responsible for  the  current  interference.  After  considering  the
   chronology, at [32], the judge did not accept that the  'debt'  could  be
   said to be owed to a Gurkha widow in the same way,  concluding  that  the
   historic injustice did not apply. At [34] the judge considered  that  the
   present case was of an adult  child  with  no  particular  disability  or
   dependency seeking to join a parent in the UK. She was  healthy  and  had
   been able to work in Nepal; she could not meet the requirements of either
   the Rules or  the  discretionary  policy.  In  the  premises,  the  judge
   concluded that the decision to refuse entry clearance  was  proportionate
   in the article 8 balancing exercise.

4. The grounds argued that the First-tier Tribunal:

     a. Erred in the approach to  the  available  evidence  and  failed  to
        disclose concerns as to evidence of contact between  the  appellant
        and her mother in the UK;

     b. Erred on the application of the historical injustice principle;

5. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Gumsley on 3.5.20, who considered that whilst the judge's  concerns
   about the evidence, or lack of evidence, may have been justified, it  was
   arguable that given the significance the evidence relating  to  telephone
   and Viber communication seemed to have played in the  assessment  of  the
   question as to whether there was  family  life,  the  judge  should  have
   alerted the appellant to these concerns and afforded her the  opportunity
   to respond.

6. In essence, the grounds of appeal advanced an argument  that  the  policy
   is deficient in not applying to the appellant. It was argued that had the
   long-standing injustice against Gurkhas and their families not  happened,
   the appellant's father would not have been denied a right  to  settle  in
   the UK so that the appellant would  either  have  been  born  in  the  UK
   following her father's discharge from the army, or been able to  come  to
   the UK as a child  with  both  parents.  It  was  also  argued  that  the
   appellant is living in extreme poverty and her physical  separation  from
   her mother, on whom she  is  entirely  dependent  for  accommodation  and
   financial support, perpetuates the historic injustice against her father,
   her mother, and the appellant herself.


7. The grounds accepted that the conditions of the policy as drafted could
   not be met by the appellant. However, it was argued that the historical
   injustice principle should be applied to the appellant so that if she
   enjoys real, effective or committed support from her mother so that
   family life continues, and if there is no greater public interest than
   the ordinary interest in immigration control, the appellant should
   succeed. In essence, the argument is that had those rights been available
   whilst the appellant's Gurkha father was alive, then the whole family
   would have come to the UK together and the appellant would probably have
   been born in the UK.

8. My error of law decision promulgated on 4.9.20, accepted the historic
   injustice argument, finding a material error of law in the decision of
   the First-tier Tribunal, and setting it aside to be remade in the Upper
   Tribunal. The matter came back then before me for remaking the decision
   in the appeal in a remote hearing on 11.5.21. I had directed in my
   earlier decision that the resumed hearing should be held face-to-face.
   However, by email the appellant's representatives asked for the matter to
   be listed remotely with an interpreter. Fortunately, all parties were
   able to participate effectively in the remote hearing.


9. In preparation for the resumed hearing, the Upper Tribunal has received
   copies of the appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle (in two parts), and
   the appellant's Upper Tribunal bundle comprising 41 pages. Mr Moriarty
   also relied on his skeleton argument prepared for the First-tier Tribunal
   appeal hearing and dated 16.1.20.

10. At the hearing, I heard oral evidence from the sponsor, based on her
   witness statement of 24.12.19 (ABp6), and further oral evidence from a
   family friend and former neighbour in Nepal, Mr LG, himself a former
   Gurkha soldier, who has maintained contact with the sponsor and her
   family in Nepal. In addition, the new bundle prepared for the Upper
   Tribunal hearing contains further evidence of voice and social media
   contact between the appellant and her mother, and further money transfers
   by the sponsor to her daughter in Nepal.

Consideration & Findings

11. The authority for the approach advocated on behalf of the appellant is
   derived from the decision in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
   [2017] EWCA Civ 320, where at [42] the Court of Appeal held:

"Those circumstances of the appellant and his family, all of them
uncontentious, and including - perhaps crucially - the fact that he and his
parents would have applied at the same time for leave to enter the United
Kingdom and would have come to the United Kingdom together as a family unit
had they been able to afford to do so, do not appear to have been grappled
with by the Upper Tribunal judge under Article 8(1).  In my view they
should have been.  They went to the heart of the matter: the question of
whether, even though the appellant's parents had chosen to leave Nepal to
settle in the United Kingdom when they did, his family life with them
subsisted then and was still subsisting at the time of the Upper Tribunal's
decision.  This was the critical question under Article 8(1).  Even on the
most benevolent reading of his determination I do not think one can say
that the Upper Tribunal judge properly addressed it."

12. In other words, the historic injustice principles should be applied in
   consideration of the application of a member of a former Gurkha's family
   for entry clearance.  Although the respondent's policy does not apply to
   children of widows of former Gurkhas, the historic injustice principles
   should be considered in the article 8 ECHR considerations, namely whether
   family between the appellant and her mother was sufficient to engage
   Article 8 ECHR and, if so, the proportionality balancing exercise between
   the rights of the appellant and her mother on the one hand and the public
   interest on the other.  In passing, I note that it appears from the
   respondent's refusal decision that the historic injustice principles were
   considered and applied to the appellant's circumstances.

13. Reading the impugned decision, it is clear that First-tier Tribunal
   Judge's approach was to first assess the family life claim applying the
   Kugathas principles, looking for something more than the normal
   relationships to be expected between adult relatives. Then, in the event
   that he was wrong to find that family life had not been proven to exist,
   the judge went on from [30] of the decision to consider in the
   alternative whether the historic injustice principles ought to apply.
   However, it is clear from [34] of the decision that the judge
   specifically excluded the historic injustice aspect from both parts of
   the decision, that is to say whether family life engaging article 8
   existed between mother and appellant, and whether the decision was
   proportionate to any such family life.  In the premises, I was satisfied,
   as Mr McVeety fairly conceded, that was an error of law.

14. At the error of law hearing, Mr McVeety's argument was that the error
   was not material, because of the specific findings of the First-tier
   Tribunal as to the inadequacies of the sponsor's evidence.  He pointed
   out that in oral evidence she was unable to recall the ages of her
   children or who was in education and who was not. The judge had also
   criticised inadequate documentary evidence of financial support and of
   communication between the appellant and her mother. I accepted, in
   general terms, Mr McVeety's point that there were difficulties for the
   appellant and the sponsor in demonstrating an ongoing a family
   relationship sufficient to engage Article 8 ECHR but I was satisfied that
   in making that assessment the judge should have taken account of the
   historic injustice principles. In particular, it is potentially relevant
   the mother came to the UK in 2012 to take up her rights previously denied
   to her husband to settle in the UK and that this separation may have
   diminished the level of family life contact between the appellant and her
   mother, which arguably was attributable to the historic injustice.

15. At the continuation hearing for the remaking of the decision in the
   appeal, the evidence of the sponsor and her supporting witness was
   largely unchallenged. In cross-examination, Mr McVeety queried the
   financial circumstances of the appellant and her siblings in the family
   home. The evidence was that whilst they used to farm their own land, most
   of that land had been washed away in torrential rain and flooding. The
   family also lost their cattle in the devasting floods. As a result, to
   others to try and earn a living, her children must work on the remaining
   land belonging. They earned roughly 500 rupees a day (about �3), which
   was not enough to maintain them. The sponsor said that if she did not
   send money to them, they would have to borrow money to be able to
   survive. She also said that she speaks to the appellant about 4-5 times a
   week and had been called by her earlier in the day as it was Mother's Day
   in Nepal. She added that since the Covid-19 pandemic, they have been
   speaking more frequently. She is now 74 years old and I have taken this
   into consideration with regard to her ability to recall details.

16. In his oral evidence, Mr NG relied on his witness statement of 5.5.21
   which confirmed the family's circumstances in Nepal. He last visited the
   family in November 2020, returning in December 2020. He confirmed that
   most of the land in the village had been washed away in the floods.
   According to his witness statement, it was he who encouraged the sponsor
   to apply to come to the UK in 2011. In relation to the difficulties in
   recalling details of her family during the First-tier Tribunal appeal
   hearing, Mr NG pointed out in his statement that she is completely
   illiterate and has difficulty even remembering her own telephone number.
   He supported her when she came to the UK and helped her maintain contact
   with her remaining family in Nepal, including the appellant, then using
   calling cards and now using mobile phone calls and applications. He also
   helped her transfer money to her family in Nepal. He continues to help
   her in this way, taking her to the bank and Western Union and confirmed
   that he did not keep the receipts as he didn't know they would be
   important. He confirmed that the sponsor has been sending money regularly
   stating, "Sometimes, they have their own income and there is a gap of a
   month for sending the money however, there has never been a gap of two
   month between the support." He also confirmed that the sponsor visited
   her family in Nepal in his company before the Covid pandemic. The final
   part of his witness statement speaks as to his observation of the
   sponsor's emotions when speaking with her children on the telephone,
   stating that it was obvious that she missed them very much.

17. In submissions, Mr McVeety stated that if I accepted the evidence,
   which he did not challenge, the level of contact and continuing financial
   support would be above that to be expected between adult relatives in
   normal circumstances. I did accept that evidence as genuine and reliable.
   It follows that he could not challenge that there was continuing family
   life between the sponsor and the appellant sufficient to engage article 8
   ECHR. He accepted that it then followed that the public interest in
   enforcing immigration control was outweighed by the historic injustice
   principle. For his part, Mr Moriarty pointed out that some of the gaps in
   evidence identified by the First-tier Tribunal had now been filled by the
   further documentary evidence and the evidence of Mr NG.

18. On the clear evidence, I am satisfied that the appellant enjoys real,
   effective and committed support from her mother so that family life
   sufficient to engage article 8 ECHR continues. The mother's financial
   support is essential to her maintenance and survival. I also accept that
   but for the historic injustice, the level of that family life would have
   been greater as they would been in closer proximity to each other with
   easier means of communication and contact.  On the facts of this case, I
   am satisfied that there is no greater public interest than the ordinary
   but important interest of maintaining immigration control. In the
   premises, that public interest is properly outweighed by the historic
   injustice, so that the appellant should succeed in her appeal.

19. Whilst this case is a little more remote than the more usual case,
   given that the mother took advantage of the policy to come to the UK only
   after her husband died, I am satisfied that it is correct to apply the
   historic injustice principle to the article 8 claim. When that is done,
   it is clear that had the right to settle in the UK been available whilst
   the appellant's Gurkha father was alive, then the whole family would have
   come to the UK together and the appellant would probably have been born
   in the UK, or at the very least the appellant would have been able to
   enter and settled in the UK at the same time as her mother.


Decision

      The appeal of the appellant is allowed on article 8 ECHR human  rights
      grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       11 May 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."




Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       11 May 2021


