
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08763/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SWIFT
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 aden asava
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent represented himself.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the respondent, hereinafter  "the
claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him leave
to remain on human rights grounds.

2. The claimant is a national of Kenya born in November 1991 who  has  lived
in the United Kingdom since 2003.  He has committed offences.  He was fined
for offences of dishonesty in June 2011.  The sentence was varied  to  four
weeks in a young offenders' institute.  Other  matters  are  known.   On  4
September 2015 when he was 23 years old the claimant was with an accomplice
who robbed a young person walking home from  school  and  he  was  sent  to
prison for thirteen months on 24 August 2016.

3. It was the Secretary of State's  case  that  the  appeal  could  only  be
allowed if the claimant was integrated into the United  Kingdom  and  there
were very significant obstacles in the way of  his  integrating  in  Kenya.
This is echoing the requirements set out in Section 117C(4) of Part  5A  of
the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the  associated
Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State's case is that though the  judge
acknowledged this, the evidence did not permit the judge to  conclude  that
either criteria was established and  the  judge  was  wrong  to  reach  the
conclusions that he did.

4. We have had an opportunity of going  through  the  Decision  and  Reasons
with some care.  We do not agree that the Secretary of  State's  criticisms
of the judge's finding that the  claimant  was  integrated  in  the  United
Kingdom. Clearly, trouble with the criminal law and being sent  to  custody
are indications of a person who is not integrated.  They show  disaffection
with society and in the times that a person is incarcerated he  is  clearly
not integrated into society as a whole.   However,  these  feature  do  not
represent the entire story  of  the  claimant's  life  and  the  First-tier
Tribunal did take notice that the claimant had spent time in care.  He  had
developed some associations as a result of that but, more significantly, as
is explained in paragraph 40 of the Decision and Reasons, he has "formed  a
relationship with his foster family and he has undergone  some  educational
courses pursuing studies in electrical installation with some success".

5. We are not aware of any precise test on the meaning of "integration"  for
these purposes.  The First-tier Tribunal did direct its mind to all of  the
matters pointing towards  integration  and  not  before  finding  that  the
appellant has  "integrated".   We  do  not  say  that  this  was  the  only
conclusion possible on the evidence but we are satisfied  that  the  First-
tier Tribunal was entitled as a matter of law to conclude  that  the  first
part of the relevant test was satisfied, namely that the claimant, who  had
been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of  his  life,  was
socially and culturally integrated there.

6. However, that is no use to the claimant unless he can  also  satisfy  the
Tribunal properly that there will be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
integration into a country to which he  will  be  deported,  in  this  case
Kenya.  Here we have to say  that  we  cannot  agree  with  the  First-tier
Tribunal that the evidence could support such a conclusion.

7. The First-tier Tribunal judge has shown clear regard to the  law  in  the
body of the Decision and Reasons and was careful to  make  findings  in  an
ordered way and that has assisted us.  This is how we are able to reach the
conclusions we have on the first part of the test, but when it comes to the
second part we find that the judge had confused issues.  In  paragraph  46,
for example, the judge refers to the claimant having "obviously a close and
loving relationship with his foster family" and it being a "very  big  step
indeed" to be removed from that family. These are not reasons  to  conclude
that the claimant would have very significant obstacles to his  integration
into Kenya.  They are further reasons to show how he has integrated in  the
United Kingdom and they do not address the point that they relied  upon  to
address by the judge.

8. Similarly, difficulties were acknowledged in the claimant's  relationship
with his natural mother but she is not  in  Kenya.   It  is  therefore  not
relevant for the purposes of the second limb of the test for the  judge  to
say as the judge did that these things are "positive  matters  which  at  a
stroke would be removed if the claimant was sent to Kenya".  Again,  as  we
have indicated, the judge either did not apply the correct test, or did not
apply it in the right way because the judge was influenced  by  facts  that
are irrelevant to the point which is being made.

9. The judge did note that the claimant had not been to Kenya for some  time
and that the claimant speaks English which is widely spoken in  Kenya,  and
that it is accepted that the claimant is an enterprising young man  who  is
preparing to pursue a career as an electrician.

10. We do not doubt for  a  moment  that  he  would  find  it  difficult  to
establish himself in Kenya.  We acknowledge, as the judge did, that he  has
not been there since he was a boy and there is no evidence of any ties with
anyone who might have any inclination to offer him any kind of  support  or
assistance.  These points are things that we have  considered.   We  cannot
see that the judge was entitled on these facts to say that there were  very
significant obstacles to his integration.  They were the kind  of  problems
that were to be expected in the case of a person  being  deported  who  has
spent a long time in the United Kingdom and that is as far as it goes.

11. We therefore conclude that the judge erred in  law  by  making  findings
that simply do not satisfy the legal test that he correctly set himself.

12. We are grateful to the claimant for the way  he  has  conducted  himself
today.   He  has  given  evidence  and  made  his  submissions  calmly  and
courteously. He made a good impression, but this does not  alter  the  fact
that the test in law cannot be satisfied on the evidence  before  a  First-
tier Tribunal.

13. We therefore find the First-tier Tribunal  clearly  erred  in  law.   We
allow the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that  decision  and  we
substitute the  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision.

Notice of Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We set aside its decision  and  we
substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against   the
Secretary of State's decision.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 January 2019                |



