
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08876/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2020                    |On 14 January 2020                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          Mr Ambrose Samson Idahota
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan, Counsel, instructed by FA Legal
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Beg ("the judge"), promulgated on 6 August 2019, by which
she dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his human
rights claim.

The Appellant, a national of Nigeria, entered the United Kingdom in
December 2011 as a visitor.  He subsequently overstayed and has had no
lawful status since.  He then entered into a relationship with a dual
Nigerian-British citizen, Ms A.  He married Ms A on 21 March 2019.  The
human rights claim was essentially based upon his family life in this
country.  It was said that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the
couple going to live together in Nigeria and that a separation would be
disproportionate.  The Respondent considered the human rights claim both
within and without the context of the relevant Immigration Rules,
concluding that the Appellant could not succeed on either basis.

The judge had a number of credibility concerns with the Appellant's
evidence, specifically relating to his intentions when coming to the United
Kingdom and his decision to remain here after the expiry of leave to enter.
 In going beyond that to consider the Article 8 claim, the judge considered
what is often described as the Chikwamba point, in other words, the
possibility of an individual returning to their country of origin to make
an entry clearance application and then re-join their partner in the United
Kingdom (Chikwamba [2008] 1 WLR 1420).

On the facts of the case before her, the judge concluded that Ms A, a staff
nurse at a London hospital, could accompany the Appellant and live in
Nigeria on a permanent basis.  Alternatively, the judge concluded that Ms A
could either go back there on a temporary basis whilst the Appellant made
an entry clearance application or could remain in this country whilst he
made such an application alone.

The grounds of appeal are primarily focussed upon reasons challenges in
relation to the adverse credibility findings mentioned previously.  In
addition, paragraph 8 of the grounds states that the judge had attached
"insufficient weight" to Ms A's overall circumstances, including in
particular her employment and the importance to the United Kingdom
community thereof.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow on 19
November 2019.

At the hearing before me, Mr Dolan acknowledged the limited scope of the
grounds (of which he is not the author) and comments made in the grant of
permission.  He accepted that weight was a matter for the judge and that
there was no challenge to the judge's conclusion that the Appellant could
potentially return to Nigeria alone and make an entry clearance application
from that country.  He did, however, submit that the judge had failed to
conduct an adequate proportionality exercise with particular reference to
Ms A's circumstances.  Her employment as a staff nurse had been left out of
account. Whilst the significance of her employment may not have inevitably
led to a different outcome, such a possibility existed, and this rendered
the judge's failure material.

In respect of the credibility issues, he submitted that there were no
sufficient reasons.  On the face of the evidence, there were no clear
contradictions and the judge appeared to have simply found the Appellant to
be unreliable for the simple reason that he had overstayed his visit visa
in the first place.  In fact, it was submitted, the Appellant had stated
throughout that he had intended to return when arriving in the United
Kingdom, but matters had changed in respect of his family circumstances
back in Nigeria.

Ms Everett submitted that there were no material errors of law. On the
facts of this case Ms A's employment was not sufficient to have had any
material bearing on the outcome of the Article 8 claim and the judge was
entitled to find against the Appellant in respect of the visit visa issue.
Alternatively, any errors in relation to the latter issue were immaterial.
Ms Everett submitted that the judge was fully entitled to take account of
the timing of the marriage, Ms A's dual nationality, and her general ties
to Nigeria, when considering the issue of insurmountable obstacles.

I conclude that there are no material errors of law in the judge's
decision.

I do have some concerns about the judge's reasoning in respect of [17],
[18] and [19] of her decision, relating to the visit visa issue.  Whilst
the judge was certainly entitled to rely on the Appellant's inability to
state whom he had been coming to visit in this country, the substance of
his evidence in respect of what he had claimed had occurred back in Nigeria
in relation to his father and stepmother did not on the face of it contain
particularly clear inconsistencies, and it is somewhat difficult to discern
what the judge meant when she said the evidence was "confusing" at [19]. It
is right that the Appellant did overstay his visit visa and this of itself
may have led to an adverse view of credibility generally, but specific
reasons are still required for the overall conclusion that an individual
has not been telling the truth.

However, in my view, the findings relating to the credibility issues and
any error related thereto are simply immaterial to the Article 8 claim as a
whole, particularly as this was effectively focussed entirely upon the
Appellant's relationship with Ms A.  Even if there had been difficulties
with the Appellant's family back in Nigeria, I conclude that on no
legitimate basis could this have made a properly material impact on the
issue of whether the Appellant and his wife could have gone to live
somewhere else away from the family without being subject to any relevant
hostility such as to render this scenario so significantly difficult as to
meet the threshold of insurmountable obstacles, or indeed unjustifiably
harsh consequences. There was, for example, never a suggestion that the
family had wide-ranging influence or the ability to track the Appellant
down in other locations.

In respect of the insurmountable obstacles test (I acknowledge the apparent
concession recorded in [9] of the decision but it is clear that the judge
did deal with this matter as a substantial issue in any event), the judge
was entitled to conclude that there were no such obstacles for the
Appellant and Ms A living in Nigeria on a permanent basis.  The judge was
fully entitled to take into account the timing of the marriage, with Ms A
being fully aware of a lack of her husband's status and the distinct
possibility of them having to live elsewhere.  She was fully entitled to
take account of Ms A's dual Nigerian-British nationality, with the obvious
consequences that she (Ms A) was entitled to go to and reside in Nigeria.
The judge was entitled to take into account Ms A's skills and
qualifications in respect of her employment as a staff nurse and the
possibility (in the absence of any evidence to the contrary) that she would
be able to find some sort of employment (perhaps in a similar field) in
Nigeria. Finally, the judge was entitled to take account of the fact that
Ms A had family in Nigeria, including her mother, and that she herself had
lived and worked there for a relatively short period in the recent past.

Given the high threshold applicable to the insurmountable obstacles test,
or indeed that of unjustifiably harsh consequences, the conclusion reached
by the judge on this discrete issue was open to her.

Further, as mentioned earlier, the judge set out two other alternative
possibilities: first, that the Appellant and Ms A could return together
temporarily to Nigeria whilst he applied for entry clearance to come back
to this country; second, that the Appellant could return to Nigeria alone
to make that application, with Ms A supporting him from the United Kingdom.
 As Mr Dolan quite properly recognised, neither of these alternatives are
challenged in the grounds.  That fact is of itself a sufficient basis upon
which the appeal to the Upper Tribunal must fail.

In any event, the judge's conclusion that these possibilities existed and
were not disproportionate was entirely open to her on the facts of the
case. There appears to have been no suggestion that a temporary separation
would have caused any particular difficulties to either the Appellant or Ms
A.  This is not a case involving, for example, children or ill-health on
the part of one or other of the couple, and, as I read the evidence, there
was nothing to indicate that Ms A would have had to cease her employment
during a temporary separation whilst the Appellant made an entry clearance
application from Nigeria. So, on either one of the alternative scenarios,
the Appellant's appeal was almost bound to fail in any event.

I say the following about Ms A's employment.  It is certainly the case that
nurses, and perhaps staff nurses in particular, are much valued within the
NHS and our society as a whole.  It is right that the judge has not
specifically addressed the issue of contribution to the community, as it
might be described.  However, it is not a freestanding factor in Article 8
cases, and whilst it is right that this may be capable of bearing relevance
to the question of the weight attributed to the public interest, following
UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975, the President has relatively recently
analysed the issue and urged significant caution in respect of the
relevance of employment or value to the community in any given case (see
Thakrar (Cart JR; Art 8: value to community) [2018] UKUT 336 (IAC)). In
acknowledging the binding nature of the point of principle in UE, at [112]-
[115] he states the following:

         "112.    Accordingly, the warnings contained in  the  judgments  of
         Sir David Keene and Richards LJ are important. Before coming to the
         conclusion that submissions  regarding  the  positive  contribution
         made to the United Kingdom by an individual fall to be  taken  into
         account, as diminishing the importance to be given  to  immigration
         controls, a judge must not only be satisfied that the  contribution
         in question directly relates to those controls. He or she must also
         be satisfied  that  the  contribution  is  "very  significant".  In
         practice, this is likely to arise only where the matter is one over
         which there can be no real disagreement.


         113. I am not sure that the list of examples given by  Lord  Bridge
         in Bakhtaur Singh are all of this kind. It must be remembered  that
         those examples were given against  the  background  of  the  former
         appellate regime  which,  as  I  have  said,  gave  adjudicators  a
         foothold  in  the  policy  realm  that  is  not  shared  by   their
         successors.


         114. Without in any way intending to be prescriptive, it is  likely
         that one touchstone for distinguishing between instances that  lie,
         respectively, exclusively in the policy realm and in  the  area  of
         Article 8, is whether the removal of the person concerned will lead
         to an irreplaceable loss to the community of the United Kingdom  or
         to a significant element of it.


         115. If judicial restraint is not properly maintained in this area,
         there is a danger that the public's perception of human rights  law
         will be adversely affected."


With all due respect to Ms A, I cannot see that her position as a staff
nurse could rationally have carried such significant weight so as to have
made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal. In any event, this
point could only have gone to the questions of whether there were
insurmountable obstacles to the couple going to live in Nigeria
permanently, and/or perhaps whether there were exceptional circumstances in
the case. As to the latter, the facts and case-law on contribution to the
community presented an insuperable threshold. In relation to both
questions, the possibility of the NHS losing Ms A was irrelevant to the
judge's unchallenged and fully sustainable conclusion on the entry
clearance option (by which Ms A would remain in the United Kingdom whilst
the Appellant applied from Nigeria).

For all the reasons set out above, the judge's decision shall stand and the
Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Signed   [pic]                  Date: 7 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
