
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08364/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2018                           |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MR r d a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Klear of Counsel instructed by Phillip
Priscilla Solicitors


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh promulgated on 10 September 2018 in
which she allowed the respondent's appeal against a deportation order which
was made on 28 August 2014.  We will continue to refer to the respondent in
this appeal as "the appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the
respondent".  We have anonymised the appellant because he has a young
child.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 13 November 2008 with a
multiple visit visa, valid until 6 May 2009.  He was granted further leave
to remain until 6 November 2009 and again until 24 June 2010.  In February
2010 he lodged an application for a certificate of approval to marry his
then partner, PMR.  Following their marriage he applied for leave to remain
as her spouse, she being a person present and settled in the United
Kingdom.  He was granted leave to remain until 5 June 2012.  During the
course of June 2012 he applied for indefinite leave to remain as her spouse
but that application could not be processed for administrative reasons and
he resubmitted his application on 23 July 2012.

3.   In February 2013 the appellant appeared before Blackfriars Crown Court
facing charges of conspiracy to defraud and on 13th June 2013 he was
sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.  He was issued with a liability to
deportation letter and questionnaire on 8 July 2013.  It was not clear if
it was received by the appellant as no response was forthcoming.  He had in
the meantime been transferred to a different prison.  Be that as it may, on
16 April he was again served with a liability to deportation letter and a
questionnaire, to which he responded on 16 June 2014.

4.   On 22 August 2014 a decision was made to refuse his application for
indefinite leave to remain dated 23 July 2012 and on 26 August 2014 a
deportation order was signed against him.  He was served with the reasons
for deportation together with the order on 28 August 2014 and the decision
was certified affording him an out of country right of appeal.

5.   Further representations were made on his behalf on 1 September 2014,
referring to his relationship with SB.  The timing of this further
information coincided with the confirmation of the removal directions dated
3 September 2014 and scheduled for 9 September 2014.  On 8 September 2014
the reasons to refuse to revoke the deportation order notice was served on
the appellant.  This decision was again certified under Section 94B of the
2002 Act.

6.   On 9 September 2014 he was not removed and the removal direction was
cancelled.  At the end of his custodial sentence he was detained at Brick
House IRC.  On 8 October 2014 he submitted an application for judicial
review in respect of the decision to make a deportation direction and the
certification.  A decision was made to refuse him leave to remain with no
right of appeal.

7.   On 28 October 2014 he made a bail application, which was granted, and
on 5 May 2015 his application for judicial review was refused.
Subsequent representations were made on his behalf on 13, 28 May 2015, 7
September 2015 and 1 December 2015.  On 13 July 2016 a decision letter
refusing him leave to remain addressed the previous representations made on
his behalf.  On the same occasion he was detained on reporting under the
immigration service powers.  On 18 July 2016 removal directions were set
for 26 July 2016.

8.   Following the notice for removal directions a pre-action Protocol was
submitted on 20 July followed by an application to stay the removal.  On 28
July 2016 a sealed judicial review was lodged and a bail application was
submitted on 17 August 2016.  He was released on a restriction order on the
same day.

9.   On 20 September 2016 his application for judicial review was refused
but he was not removed from the United Kingdom.

10.  On 17 October 2016 a renewed judicial review application was confirmed
and the matter listed for an oral permission hearing for 3 November 2016.
On 25 October 2016, however, a consent order was signed and he discontinued
his judicial review application.

11.  At the end of December 2016 he submitted additional evidence to
support his application for further leave to remain and there were certain
communications between him and the Home Office between December 2016 and
March 2017.  On 14 March 2017 he was detained when he attended at his
reporting venue.  The detention was with a view to effecting his removal.
On the same day he was served with a human rights refusal decision
certified under Section 94B.

12.  On 16 March 2017 he sought to return to Ghana voluntarily and informed
the Home Office of his wish.  However, as the removal directions were
already set, he could not return voluntarily.  On 17 March he indicated
that he no longer wished to return to Ghana voluntarily, citing the fact
that his partner was unwell and he had a child in the United Kingdom.  On
21 March 2017 he was served with removal directions for his return to Ghana
on 28 March 2017.  On the day before his removal he was served with a
supplementary letter containing the decision of 14 March.  On the same day
his representatives applied for and were granted a stay on the removal
directions of 28 March 2017.

13.  On 3 April 2017 he submitted a judicial review application challenging
the decision of 14 March and also requesting that the Section 94B
certification be withdrawn.  He was granted bail on 18 April 2017.

14.  On 23 April 2017 the Secretary of State agreed to withdraw the
decision of 14 March 2017 and the supplementary letter served upon the
appellant on 27 March.  A consent order giving effect to the withdrawal of
the judicial review was sealed.  On 14 June 2017 the Supreme Court handed
down judgment in the case of Kiarie and Byndloss v SSHD [2017] UKSC 42 and
in light of that judgment the certifications under Section 94B were
withdrawn, as was the decision of 13 July 2016 refusing his human rights
claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules with no right of appeal.
 The submissions between 5 June 2014 to March 2017 stood to be
reconsidered.

15.  On 17 July 2017 a decision was made to refuse him leave to remain in
accordance with Section 82(1) of the 2002 Act.  He appealed against that
decision.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellant, from SB and
from a social worker, Ms Bulmer.  As well as that, the judge made it plain
that he had considered all of the evidence in the case.  Paragraph 22 sets
out the documents which were considered, namely the appellant's bundle
consisting of 133 pages and the Home Office bundle, including, amongst
other documents, the appellant's applications, the decision of the
Secretary of State, the judge's sentencing remarks, the liability to
deportation and questionnaire dated 8 July 2013 and the response to the
liability to deportation letter dated 5 June 2014, the PNC records in
relation to the appellant and further submissions from the appellant's
legal representatives.  There were also other documents included with the
respondent's bundle.  The judge correctly identified that the burden was on
the appellant to show that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
and for him to show that Article 8 was engaged in his case.  The judge made
it plain that in reaching his decision he took account of all the
documents.

17.  It is not necessary to rehearse all of the findings which can be seen
in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Putting it shortly, the FTT
found that the risk to the appellant and SB's son (S) outweighed the public
interest requiring the appellant's deportation.  The critical findings can
be found from paragraphs 64 to 85 of the decision.

18.  There was no dispute that the appellant met the statutory requirements
enabling his deportation pursuant to Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007,
but it was his case that his deportation would amount to a breach of
Article 8 of the European Convention.  The FTT so found.

The Grounds of Appeal

19.  The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on a number of
grounds.  The first of these was that the FTT had failed to weigh up the
public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals before finding that
the risk to the son, S, outweighed it.  Reference was made to the case of
MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 at paragraph 26.  Secondly, the public
interest in deportation was not diluted by the fact that there was no
further offending.  The offence itself was significant.  It appeared to
have been a professionally planned fraud carried out over a significant
period and probably cost the train company involved over �100,000 of loss.
It was submitted that the FTT had applied the wrong threshold.  The correct
approach encompassed the arduous test of undue hardship.  There was no
suggestion in the decision that if necessary the son could not be
adequately cared for by social services if the appellant was deported.

20.  There was insufficient reasoning as to why it was accepted by the FTT
that the appellant was a full-time carer of S.  The finding that it was
unlikely that SB would be able to continue full-time work if the appellant
was deported was said to be contrary to her own evidence and to the
evidence that her employer was extremely sympathetic and supportive of her
condition.  This finding was inadequately reasoned and was not made out on
the evidence.

21.  No account was taken of the submission by the Presenting Officer that
the relationship between the appellant and SB was entered into when both
parties were aware that his immigration status was precarious.  The
relationship had been given greater weight in the proportionality
assessment than it should have been afforded in the light of Section
117B(4)(b).

22.  More specifically, the FTT had applied the wrong threshold when
finding that it was unreasonable for SB to travel to Ghana.  This was a
lower threshold than that which was required, namely undue harshness.
There was a lack of adequate reasoning behind this finding and the judge
failed to make a finding on the SSHD's position in the refusal letter which
stated that medical facilities were available, that extended family could
assist with the family's transition, that the child's young age made him
more liable to adapt and that SB was in a favourable position to find
employment.  The FTT had failed to consider all the factors, adequately or
at all, and this amounted to a material misdirection.

23.  Permission to appeal was granted principally on the basis that the
judge appeared to refer to a reasonableness test rather than a test of
undue harshness when considering Section 117C of the 2002 Act, but the
scope of argument was not limited.

24.  In presenting the appeal for the respondent Mr Wilding handed up
copies of the case of KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home
Department, a judgment handed down by the Supreme Court on 24 October 2018.
 That decision altered the respondent's challenge to a degree inasmuch as
it previously relied on MM.  Effectively, KO said that the extent of the
criminality did not come into the equation when assessing the undue harsh
test.  Reference was made in particular to paragraph 23 where Lord Carnwath
said the following:

"On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly intended to
introduce a higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness' under section
117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the deportation of
foreign criminals. Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of
comparison. It assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is
a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context.
'Unduly' implies something going beyond that level.  The relevant context
is that set by section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the
deportation of foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness
going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with
the deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view (and
subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a balancing
of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence, other than is
inherent in the distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to
length of sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT
(Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932,
[2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement to
show 'very compelling reasons'. That would be in effect to replicate the
additional test applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences of
four years or more."

25.  From paragraph 27 onwards Lord Carnwath referred to the meaning of
"unduly harsh" and in particular cited the guidance given by the Upper
Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, paragraph 46.  There the following
was said:

"By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh' does not
equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.
Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.  'Harsh' in this
context, denotes something severe, or bleak.  It is the antithesis of
pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly'
raises an already elevated standard still higher."

26.  Mr Wilding submitted that the decision had problems from paragraph 80
onwards.  Undue harshness had to be considered in relation to both the
question of separation and the question of the family unit moving abroad.
The judge started with the question of separation, which was surprising,
but in fact nothing really turned on that.


27.  There was no analysis of what would amount to undue harshness in
paragraph 80.  Paragraphs 64 to 80 set out his findings about the evidence
and the background, but there was no engagement with the high test of undue
harshness.  Relocation to Ghana by the family was dealt with only in
paragraph 82 and that paragraph was not itself enough.  The only specific
challenge to the evidence which Mr Wilding advanced was in relation to the
finding in paragraph 84 that SB would be unlikely to be able to continue in
full-time work.  There was no deeper analysis of that.  When it was
compared to the finding in paragraph 50 that she generally worked six days
a week and that her employers were extremely supportive and sympathetic, it
was not clear where the findings in paragraph 84 came from.  In the
circumstances, though, it was a relatively minor matter.


28.  In paragraph 82 the FTT had found that it was "unreasonable to expect
the appellant's partner and child to travel to Ghana".  This was no mere
slip of the pen or the keyboard.  It showed that the FTT had applied the
wrong test.  In paragraph 85 the judge had relied on the best interests of
the child rather than any question of undue hardship.


29.  In reply Mr Klear submitted that the reference to reasonableness was
indeed a slip.  This was a long decision by an experienced judge who had
set out all the evidence on which he relied.  Paragraphs 38 to 51 contained
the summary of the evidence of SB.  The judge had found her to be credible.
 The appellant's evidence was set out in paragraphs 26 to 37 and the social
worker's in paragraphs 53 to 55.


30.  At paragraph 60 reference was made to the submissions of the Secretary
of State in relation to Section 117C and in paragraph 62 the submissions by
Mr Klear were set out.  It was recorded that Mr Klear submitted that the
removal of the appellant would be "unduly harsh".  Paragraph 76 set out
117C in full including the "unduly harsh" test.  Reference was made to
117C(5) in paragraph 79.  It was obvious that the judge had looked at the
relevant provisions and the reference to unreasonableness was an obvious
slip.


31.  In respect of materiality, the judge took account of SB's psychiatric
condition.  Her condition was incurable.  He found that if she travelled to
Ghana it would trigger a relapse exposing the child to emotional harm and
neglect.  That is why he thought it would be unduly harsh if the appellant
were deported and the family had to move to Ghana.


32.  In paragraph 80 the judge referred to Section 55 of the Borders,
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the case of ZH (Tanzania) which
was still good law.  Considering the best interests of the child first was
in line with KO.  In the light of this, another Tribunal would not have
arrived at a different decision.  Paragraph 80 was also relevant in its
discussion of the child's circumstances.  In the absence of the appellant
it would be unlikely that SB could meet his needs without considerable
support.


33.  In reply Mr Wilding submitted that paragraph 82 did not engage with
the severity referred to in KO.  That pointed to the reference to
unreasonableness not being a slip of the pen.  The whole decision was
infected by the failure to engage with the higher threshold.

Conclusions

34.  We reserved our decision which we give now.  There is no dispute that
the appellant is a foreign national with a relevant criminal conviction
involving conspiracy to defraud and involving a loss to the commercial
companies of �100,000.  The given start date of the offending behaviour was
1 January 2009 and ended on 8 November 2012.  The FTT records that the
appellant disputed the length of his involvement in the offence but he also
stated that he did not seek to go behind the judge's sentencing remarks.
Whether the date of the offending was within three months of his entry into
the United Kingdom or a year after that is in essence neither here nor
there.  His risk of reoffending is assessed as being low.

35.  The appellant's relationship with SB commenced during the life of his
marriage.  According to her she did not know anything about his immigration
status.  She said that it was early 2012 that the relationship became
serious.  She was aware that he had leave to remain but never discussed his
status.  She was unaware of the fact that he was facing criminal charges
until he rang from prison.  The FTT obviously accepted this evidence.  Mr
Wilding did not seek to make anything of the precarious nature of the
appellant's immigration status when the relationship was formed and in view
of the fact that this appeal really turns on the circumstances of the child
it does not seem to us that that is a factor which would weigh very heavily
in the balance anyway, if at all, following KO. Neither do we consider that
the findings as to Ms Bogle's employment are germane to the issue.

36.  The crucial findings are as follows.  The appellant's son was born on
17 October 2015 and continued to reside with the appellant and SB.   There
was ample evidence that the appellant played a significant role in the
family unit.  At paragraph 77 the FTT found that the appellant was the full-
time carer of his son.  He supported his partner generally and particularly
during any relapse of her mental illness, when she experienced episodes of
bipolar.  When he was held in a Home Office detention centre she struggled
to meet their son's needs.  The evidence supported the contention that
their 2 year old son looked to the appellant as his principal carer and
recognised him as such.  As we have indicated, one of the grounds of appeal
is that the FTT failed to provide adequate reasons as to why it was
accepted that he was the full-time carer of the child.  There was, however
evidence about this both from SB, the appellant himself and from the social
worker, as well as the other evidence referred to by the FTT.  This point
was not advanced by Mr Wilding and we consider that he was wise not to make
anything of it.

37.  The most pressing issue in this case is SB's illness.  While she is
able to maintain a full-time job she is diagnosed with bipolar.  The
appellant's position was that he was able to support her during periods of
relapse, ensuring that she took her medication and took care of herself.
There was also evidence that she would fall asleep from time to time as a
result of the medication, which could put the child in danger.  The family
support unit became involved with the family.  This is an agency which
works closely with vulnerable families and Ms Bulmer, the social worker who
gave evidence, became involved with them in September 2017 until April
2018.  The local authority was satisfied that the safeguarding needs of the
child were currently being met and that a care package required to support
the family, in the event of SB suffering a relapse, was in place.  The
needs of the family could be met because the appellant remained within the
household.  If SB suffered a relapse the local authority would be required
to consider what support the family would need.  There was no need for
additional support with the appellant in place.  If he were deported there
would be a family case conference to determine whether they needed to put a
plan in place.  If his needs could not be met he might be placed on a child
in need register.  The risk assessment which was completed in January 2018
showed that SB suffered with bipolar with a high risk of relapse.  The
presence of the appellant significantly minimised that prospect.  There
were concerns in relation to her caring for the child alone.  That posed a
serious risk to his welfare.  Coin Street was a facility which was able to
and did provide respite of three hours a week to the family.  This would be
insufficient support for SB alone if the appellant were deported.  In the
event that the mother cared for the child alone and fell short of what
would reasonably be expected, the local authority would consider taking
care proceedings which could result ultimately in the removal of the child
from the family and his being placed for adoption.  However, if the
appellant remained in the United Kingdom providing stability for the
family, then it was unlikely that Coin Street would remain involved with
the family.

38.  SB evidence, which was accepted, was that she came to the United
Kingdom aged 16 or 17 to join her mother and her daughter, to whom she had
given birth in Jamaica.  She completed compulsory education in the UK and
went on to further education, including university.  She had experienced
episodes of depression and anxiety prior to university but this had become
unmanageable at university.  She completed her first year but struggled
during the second year and was unable to complete the course.  She left to
seek employment.  She commenced work as a cashier at Santander in 2004,
gradually progressing to branch manager, before leaving in 2014.  She had
been admitted to the care of the mental health team at King's College
Hospital and her medication of Quetiapine was increased.  Gradually, with
support and help from the staff, she was able to monitor and manage her
condition and function again.  She had had a serious relapse in 2017 when
the appellant was unexpectedly detained in immigration detention.  She
simply failed to feed her child, was disorientated and knew that she needed
help.  Her impression was that as an individual with a diagnosis of bipolar
she would not be well-received in Ghana and would be considered to be
possessed by the Devil.  She could not speak the language spoken in Ghana
and did not think she would have access to medical treatment and
medication.

It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that prescribed medication was
available in Ghana and that the child was of an age to be able to adapt to
life there with the appellant and his mother.  The language difficulties
were not insurmountable.  She should be able to find employment there,
given her experience in this country.  In the alternative it would not be
unduly harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom.  She would be
provided with respite support and would have access to NHS mental health
services and support from the local authority family support agency.

It is fair to say that the judgment does not really engage with the issue
of whether or not medical treatment was in fact available in Ghana, as is
plainly set out in the refusal letter.  However, the judge obviously
accepted, in paragraph 82, the evidence from the appellant and SB that her
condition would be treated with suspicion in Ghana.  We do not consider
that he found there was insufficient treatment and therapy in Ghana to
treat her condition but merely narrated that that was her evidence.
However, he found that she would have no confidence of appropriate
treatment in the event of a relapse.  Her condition could not be cured and
there was a real risk that if she travelled to Ghana it would trigger a
relapse, exposing the child to emotional harm and neglect, the very same
risks the authorities in the United Kingdom would seek to guard against.

In paragraph 78 the judge found that the trigger of her condition has
historically been emotional, with elements of anxiety.  It is in this
context that the question of a relapse if she had to travel to Ghana should
be considered.

We are satisfied that the judge considered the position if the family were
to relocate to Ghana.  The findings in fact about what would happen there,
in paragraph 82, are sufficient in our view to allow the FTT to find that
the test of undue hardship to the child was met.

39.  The issue of separating the family by deporting the appellant is dealt
with principally in paragraphs 77, 78 and 80 of the decision.  SB has
struggled to meet the needs of the son on occasions when the appellant has
been held in detention.  The concern, described by Ms Bulmer, of the real
possibility of the child being taken into care or possibly being placed for
adoption is significant.  In the event of a relapse, which could be
triggered by anxiety, the child would be at risk.  At the present time he
is meeting his developmental milestones, resides within an emotionally warm
family and is safe in a happy family home.  He benefits from the attendance
of the appellant at his creche.  The judge found that in the absence of the
appellant it would be unlikely that SB could meet his needs without
considerable support.  It would likely result in involvement from outside
agencies and, as we have indicated, paragraph 78 refers to the possibility
of being placed for adoption.  This is based fairly and squarely on the
evidence of Ms Bulmer.  The FTT was entitled to accept all this evidence
and, in our opinion, to hold that the circumstances fell within the ambit
of undue hardship.

40.  The FTT referred in a number of paragraphs to Section 117C of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It can hardly be thought
that she was unaware of the appropriate test and we are satisfied that the
reference to unreasonableness was merely a slip, when the decision is read
as a whole.  We are satisfied that the material findings in fact were based
on evidence which she was entitled to accept and that, having regard to the
best interests of the child S she was entitled to find that the test of
undue hardship was met.  We conclude that there is no material error of law
in the decision of the FTT.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is dismissed and the determination of the FTT
stands


Signed
                                                       Date 10 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/291)

We make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  in  this
decision.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

