
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08393/2018;
                                                              HU/08400/2018;
                                                             & HU/08397/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2021                    |On 24th August 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                                  'RBS' (1)
                                     and
                                  'IN' (2)
                                     and
                                  'IS' (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, Counsel, instructed by Piper May
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which I gave
orally at the end of the hearing on 20th July 2021.

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellants' appeals against the
respondent's refusal of their human rights claims.  The background to these
appeals is set out my decision promulgated on 6th January 2021, annexed to
these reasons, in which I found that a First-tier Tribunal had erred in
law.  I do not repeat that background.  Suffice it to say, I preserved no
findings of fact.  The issues for the two adult appellants (a married
couple) and their infant son, all Nepalese citizens, are:

   1. on the TOIEC issue, with the appellants accepting that the respondent
      has demonstrated a prima facie case, first, whether the appellants
      have provided an innocent explanation meeting the minimum level of
      plausibility (see SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of
      Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and SSHD v Shezad and Chowdhury [2016]
      EWCA Civ 615?

   2. Second, in respect of the TOEIC issue, should I reject any innocent
      explanation by the appellants, having been satisfied that the
      respondent has proven the alleged deception?

   3. Third, whether, on wider article 8 ECHR grounds outside the
      Immigration Rules, the appeal should be allowed?

Documents

In terms of documentation, I discussed with the representatives at the
beginning of the hearing whether I should be referring to any additional
documents that had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
representatives confirmed that I did not and instead, all I needed to refer
to were three sets of documents: the first, entitled a "list of essential
reading," which ran to some 126 pages including the witness statements of
the first and second appellants; a second supplementary bundle, which
included a statement of Professor French and a report of a criminal
investigation by Detective Inspector Carter in relation to the test centre
at Westlink College where the appellant asserts she took the TOEIC test;
and third, a comparison document entitled "IELTS in CEFR scale," which
compared the IELTS qualification, which the appellant passed to get her
student visa in 2008, with the impugned TOEIC test she took in 2012.

The appellants' witness evidence

I heard oral evidence given by the first and second appellants, who adopted
their witness statements.  Those statements were a number of years old,
dating back to 2018 and had been produced to the First-tier Tribunal, with
limited evidence in respect of the third appellant; the current
circumstances in Nepal; and the circumstances in which the second appellant
took the TOEIC test.  Nevertheless, it is important to note that the second
appellant was adamant, both in her witness statement and in oral witness
evidence, that she had taken the TOEIC test in question and there was no
motivation or reason for her to have used a proxy to take the test.

She was cross-examined by Mr Tufan and confirmed that in April 2012, when
she had taken the TOEIC test, she had lived in Rayners Lane in Middlesex
near Harrow, whereas the test centre in question was in Harlow. She
candidly accepted that it was some distance apart but she also explained
that her visa was due to expire and she needed to obtain a valid English
language certificate by July/August of 2012.  When she approached a test
centre offering her first preference, an IELTS qualification, nearer to her
college, the London College of Management Studies, that test centre was
fully booked, so she then sought further advice from her college, who
recommended that instead she take the TOEIC qualification.  That was some
distance away but did enable her to take her qualification promptly and she
did not wish to leave matters until the last minute.  In terms of the
remainder of her oral evidence, she said that she did not notice anything
untoward when she took her test and indeed, after taking the test, she went
on to carry out successfully additional studies to which I was referred at
pages [70] to [80] of the first bundle.

The second appellant candidly confirmed that in terms of her son, the third
appellant, whilst he was now four years old, at nursery and about to start
reception class in the UK, there had been no health difficulties and he had
progressed well in nursery.

However, the second appellant emphasised the period of time that she had
spent in the UK and also the difficulties of returning to Nepal, where
there were no jobs.  She also accepted that she had not carried out any job
searches recently but even with her qualification to MBA level, she had not
worked for a number of years.  She and her husband were only able to
survive by living in a property belonging to her brother, who also owned a
business in the UK and paid for the family's full needs.

The first appellant also gave evidence, in respect of which there was
limited cross-examination.  He explained that he had never overstayed,
including a period when he in fact left the UK to re-enter, in order to
ensure that he did not overstay.  He re-iterated that whilst he had also
attempted to study at a college, his college had had its licence revoked
and he, for reasons set out in his witness statement, had been unable to
access an alternative sponsoring college.  The couple had spent thousands
of pounds over the years attempting to regularise their position and, in
his words, his life had been ruined in the circumstances.  He too was
adamant that his wife had not cheated in relation to her studies and at the
time of the TOEIC test she had been on a Tier 2 (General) visa, which was a
route to settlement.

The respondent's closing submissions

Mr Tufan relied on the respondent's refusal letter.  He also referred me to
the well-known authority of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016] and in
particular ï¿½57, where it was recognised that there might be a number of
motives for why somebody would cheat.  That might be the case even where
their English was, as potentially here, perfectly satisfactory.  Those
reasons might include a lack of confidence, fear of failure, lack of time
and commitment and contempt for the immigration system.  Those reasons
could potentially overlap.

Moreover, I should also give weight to the "look-up tool" and in
particular, the criminal investigation into the Westlink College and the
section of Detective Inspector Carter's report in May 2015, which included
an unannounced visit on 15th May 2012, only a matter of weeks after the
second appellant took her test on 18th April 2012.  At the unannounced
visit, those taking the tests had apparently fled and upon discovery it
appeared that there had been proxy tests taken. Of the tests taken at that
centre, two thirds were invalid and the remainder were questionable and no
tests at had been released as "valid".  Whilst Mr Tufan addressed the best
interests of the third appellant, a minor, nevertheless, the best interests
of that child were to return as a family unit with his parents to Nepal.
There was little evidence of any obstacles to integration in Nepal.  The
couple were more educated than most and they had financial resources in
order to ensure their integration into Nepal.  Any challenges, as sometimes
was the case in relation to the efficacy of the finding in relation to
deception and the validity of the result had been dealt with by Professor
French at page [14] of his report and in particular, the limited number of
false positives that arose in the ETS investigation.

Closing submissions on behalf of the appellants

Mr Nadeem reiterated that the second appellant had successfully passed an
IELTS test in May 2008, a number of years before the 2012 test.  Looking at
the specific IELTS results at page [79] of the first bundle, it appeared
that her proficiency between 2008 and 2012 had improved, which was entirely
consistent with her having reasonable English on entry to the UK and then,
four years later, her English improving as she lived and studied in the UK.
 It was also entirely plausible that she would have genuinely taken the
test in circumstances where she was rigorous in ensuring that she had
appropriate qualifications.  She even went on to obtain further
qualifications.

There was, it was acknowledged, an incident at Westlink College in May 2012
but that was not a date on which the appellant was present and it was also
further unclear as to what action had been taken between 2012 and 2015 (the
date the second appellant's leave was curtailed), when Detective Inspector
Carter's report had suggested that Westlink College had been closed as a
result of the 2012 raid.

The second appellant had been consistent in challenging the allegations
against her and whilst she had not sought a copy of the test recording, she
had nevertheless continued to pursue applications, including judicial
review, noting that there was no in-country right of appeal at the time.  I
was also asked to take into account her general plausibility and the good
quality of her English in giving evidence at the hearing today.

In relation to the human rights appeal more widely, I was asked to take
into account that were I satisfied that the second appellant had not
engaged in TOEIC fraud, then the respondent's caseworker guidance was clear
that she would therefore be granted six months' leave to remain.  The
consequence of that, because of the recent decision on long residence in R
(Waseem & Others) v SSHD (long residence policy - interpretation) [2021]
UKUT 146 (IAC), was that the second appellant would then become a "book-
ended" overstayer, who had been in the UK for over ten years, which should
have significant weight.  Indeed the refusal letter had actively considered
long residence.

In terms of any wider concerns relating to suitability, any specific
concerns relating to deception would fall away.  The second appellant had
now paid off the litigation debts and whilst the NHS debt remained, that
was something where she had agreed a schedule of repayments with the NHS.
In any event, consideration of that under paragraph 9.11.1 of the
Immigration Rules did not mandate refusal but allowed the respondent to
exercise discretion to grant her leave to remain.  Whilst the appellants
had made their case in relation to difficulties in integrating into Nepal,
the primary point was that the private life and family life had not been
established or developed when the couple were present in the UK unlawfully.
 They had, in good conscience, attempted to regularise and clear the second
appellant's name in relation to the allegations against her.

Findings

I deal first with the question and allegation of deception and second, the
question of the wider article 8 rights.

On the one hand, I am conscious that the result for the second appellant in
respect of her TOEIC test taken in April 2012 was marked as 'invalid'. I
have also been referred to the criminal inquiry into Westlink College,
which had revealed that between 18th October 2011 and 18th April 2012,
Westlink College had undertaken 915 TOEIC speaking and writing tests, of
which ETS had identified the following:

"Invalid 661

Questionable  254

Not withdrawn, so no evidence of invalidity  zero

and

Percentage invalid     72%."

It is noteworthy that that period covers the date on which the second
appellant took her test.  ï¿½12 of the same "Project Faï¿½ade" Report completed
by Detective Inspector Carter said that there was evidence of organised and
widespread abuse of TOEIC that took place at that particular test centre,
and at ï¿½13, continued that an ETS audit had taken place on 15th May 2012,
as a speaking and writing test was taking place.  On arrival the auditors
were met by a college employee who attempted to prevent them from going
directly to the test room.  When they did arrive at the test room all of
the candidates and others ran out of the room leaving it empty.  No
invigilators were present.  On closer inspection of the computers, the
online tests had been abandoned before completion and documents were seen
that suggested pilots (imposters) had been used to take the test for the
candidates.  As a result of this audit, no test scores were registered and
the licence to continue testing was revoked by ETS.  Voice analysis showed
evidence of widespread cheating and voice samples compared the voices of
eight candidates interviewed under caution and none were the same.  That is
therefore a piece of evidence to which I give significant weight and the
context is one where, as the appellants themselves accept, there is
sufficient evidence to show a prima facie case that the second appellant
may have been involved in TOEIC fraud.  Nevertheless, as the case-law
reminds us, that is not the end of the matter, and I have to consider
whether there was an innocent explanation which is plausible to the
relevant basic standard.

The second appellant's case is a very simple one.  First of all, the
quality of her English meant that she had no motive, in particular what was
said to be a fear or lack of confidence in taking the test in question.
Her English, a number of years previously, was already good enough and her
later TOEIC scores were consistent with having improved even further.
Whilst I accept Mr Tufan's submission that there will be cases where,
nevertheless, even where somebody has English of sufficient level they may
still cheat for other reasons, for example of nervousness or a lack of
time, nevertheless, prior proficiency in English has to be a relevant
factor.

Second, I also take into account the second appellant's straightforward
evidence as to why she took the test in April 2012 in Essex, when living
near Harrow.   Her explanation was plausible, namely that she had wished to
take the test before her visa expired in August 2012.  She had wanted to
take a second IELTS test, could not find a test centre with dates that did
not run close to the deadline and asked her college for advice.  Her
explanation was not, in reality challenged to any degree by Mr Tufan and
instead, what he submitted, in closing submissions, was that this was
implausible in circumstances where there was an ETS audit a number of weeks
later where suggested that there had been mass fraud.  Nevertheless, the
fact that there was an unannounced ETS audit visit a number of weeks later
suggesting that the fraud was widespread does not detract from the central
clarity of the second appellant's submission as to why she chose the test
she did; at the location which she did; to which there has been no
substantive challenge.

In terms of the second appellant's general credibility, whilst I attach
limited weight to it, I noted that her spoken English and comprehension was
good today, albeit this is many years after the event in question in 2012.
Moreover, the second appellant was a witness who was willing to concede
points that were not in her favour.  She was readily willing to accept the
fact that, for example, the third appellant has no healthcare issues and he
is doing well at school; she has not made regular or recent enquiries in
relation to the availability of work in Nepal and she also readily accepted
that she currently receives significant support from her brother in the UK.
 I infer that he might even be willing to support her for a limited, albeit
not an indefinite period, if she and the other two appellants were returned
to Nepal.

I am satisfied, based on the clarity of the second appellant's evidence as
to why she chose the test centre she did, on the date she took the test,
that she has provided a plausible innocent explanation.  Moreover, in
considering whether the respondent has gone on to discharge the overall
burden on herself, I am also satisfied that the respondent has not proven
that the second appellant had engaged in the TOEIC fraud.  While on the one
hand, I bear in mind the Project Faï¿½ade report which indicated no valid
test results in the period in question; Professor French's views on the
small number of "false positives" (see ï¿½4 - conclusions, at page [12] of
his report); I also consider not only on the plausible explanation, but
beyond that, the second appellant's prior attainment in English under the
IELTS qualification;  her studies prior to, and after the TOEIC test in
April 2012, ranging from the award of a postgraduate diploma, in studies
accredited by Ofqal, which included corporate communications and strategic
management (page [73] of the supplementary bundle), to the award of the
second appellant's MBA from the University of Sunderland in April 2013
(page [71]), which indicate a person who is not reluctant or unmotivated to
study, or have her work externally assessed. The IELTS qualification score
was consistent with her English improving in the period from 2008 to 2012
and I also took into account her general credibility before me at the
hearing, willing to accept points that were not necessarily in her favour,
as well as her excellent English (accepting that this is many years after
the TOEIC test).

In conclusion, the respondent has not shown that the second appellant
engaged in TOEIC deception, as alleged.

I then turn to the question of the appellants' under article 8 ECHR.  I
have considered section 117B of the 2002 Act, and in particular, as neutral
factors, the adult appellants' proficiency in English and the fact that
they have not relied on the UK taxpayer for support, having instead relied
on the second appellants' brother.  I take into account that they have
never had settled status in the UK, although at the date of curtailment in
2015, they were on a route to settlement via the second appellant's Tier 2
visa.  I also take into account that the appellants have not had lawful
leave to remain since curtailment in 2015, albeit at the time, the second
appellant had had continuous lawful leave from 28th March 2009 to 1st
October 2015 (the date of curtailment) and the first appellant had entered
the UK on 29th November 2007.

I consider, in that context, the public interest in the maintenance of
immigration control and, whilst this is not an appeal under the Immigration
Rules, the extent to which the appellants might otherwise meet any part of
the Rules, in circumstances where the appellants' leave was initially
curtailed solely on grounds of deception.

Mr Tufan understandably relied upon the question of whether there were any
obstacles, very significant or otherwise, to the family's integration into
Nepal.  I accept his primary submission that the appellants have not
established very significant obstacles to their integration in Nepal.  The
couple are educated (the second appellant to MBA level) and the second
appellant has candidly admitted that she has not carried out any detailed
job searches in Nepal.  I do not accept the appellants generalised
assertions that there are no jobs which the couple could find in Nepal,
when they have not even searched for jobs.  They have the significant
support of the second appellant's brother, who provides them accommodation
and money, and even though there appears to have been some sort of
estrangement between the appellant's relatives in Nepal and the appellants,
nevertheless I am satisfied that were they to return to Nepal, here they
could at least rely, in a short term, on financial support from the second
appellant's brother.  I do not accept that there is any evidence that the
couple, who left Nepal as adults, would return as "outsiders", in the sense
of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.

However, in the assessment of the appellants' article 8 rights, the
obstacles to return are not an end to the matter.  This is a case where the
first appellant was very careful to not breach the terms of his leave and
even left the UK to re-enter for that very purpose on a Tier 2 spousal visa
in September 2013.  As already noted, the second appellant had her leave
curtailed only because of the TOEIC allegation.

There are two further ways in which my TOEIC finding impacts on the
appellants' human rights.  They were on a route to settlement prior to
curtailment.  I discussed with Mr Tufan, the guidance: "Educational Testing
Service (ETS): casework instructions - Version 4.0" dated 18th November
2020, which states, at page [9]:

         "Implementing appeal findings

         If an individual who has used an invalid Test of English for
         International Communications (TOEIC) certificate in support of an
         application wins an appeal on Article 8 grounds, then the grant of
         leave will depend upon whether the relevant rules are met. Usually,
         the individual will be on the path to 5-year settlement if the
         rules are found to be met and the 10 -year route if the appeal
         succeeds on the basis of the exceptions in Appendix FM.

         If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds but a finding is
         made by the Tribunal that the appellant did not obtain the TOEIC
         certificate by deception, you will  need to give effect to that
         finding by granting six months leave outside the rules. This is to
         enable the appellant to make any application they want to make or
         to leave the UK."

On the basis of the respondent's own policy, at the very least, as Mr Tufan
accepted, the consequence of my finding on the TOEIC deception allegation
is that the appellants will be granted some form of leave, and to use a
phrase from the case of Hoque & Ors v SSHD  [2020] EWCA Civ 1357, will
become "book-ended overstayers".    Whilst it is not possible to conclude
on the evidence before me that the appellants would therefore have
continuous lawful residence, by virtue of  Muneeb Asif (Paragraph 276B -
disregard - previous overstaying) [2021] UKUT 0096 (IAC), because the
appellants may not be able to rely on some of their subsequent applications
benefiting from paragraph 39E, (because they are out of time), the fact
that the appellants were on a route to settlement; had lived in the UK for
a significant period of time lawfully; and had always otherwise attempted
to comply with the Immigration Rules must, in my view, lessen the weight of
the public interest in immigration control.

Moreover, I also conclude that the alternative basis of the refusals, on
grounds of suitability, because of NHS and litigation debts, no longer have
any material weight.  Mr Nadeem submitted, and Mr Tufan did not dispute,
that the litigation debts have been repaid.  In respect of the NHS debt
(incurred because of the third appellant's childbirth), first, I take into
account that the debt was incurred in the context of curtailment of leave,
based on the TOEIC allegation.  Had leave not been curtailed and instead
the adult appellants had been permitted to continue to work, pursuant to
the Tier 2 visas, any liability would have instead been to a far more
limited immigration health surcharge.  Put simply, it is unlikely that the
debt would have arisen. Second, the appellants have already agreed a
repayment schedule, with which they are complying.  Third, the outstanding
debt is not a mandatory ground for refusal (see paragraph 9.12.1 of the
Immigration Rules).

In summary, the appellants cannot meet the Immigration Rules, but that is
in large part, if not wholly, the result of the curtailment of leave based
on the TOEIC allegation.  The appellants were on a route to settlement
before curtailment and will, as a result of the respondent's own policy,
become book-ended overstayers.  There are no outstanding issues around
suitability.  While I do not conclude that the appellants should be granted
indefinite leave to remain (it is not possible to say that they have the
required continuous lawful residence), nevertheless, I conclude that
refusal of leave to remain would be disproportionate, in the context of the
appellants' right to respect for their private and family lives.   As a
consequence, the respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain is not
upheld, and the appellants' appeals succeed.

Decision

The appellants' appeals on human rights grounds succeed.

Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   4th August 2021






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has succeeded. I regarded it as appropriate to make a  fee  award
of ï¿½140.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   4th August 2021
ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/08393/2018;
                                                              HU/08400/2018;
                                                             & HU/08397/2018
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And via Skype                        |                                     |
|On 16th December 2020                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                                  'RBS' (1)
                                     and
                                  'IN' (2)
                                     and
                                  'IS' (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr A Chohan, instructed by Piper May Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, instructed by the Government Legal
Department

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   These are the approved record of the decision and  reasons  which  were
    given orally at the end of the hearing on 16th December 2020.

2.   Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended  the
    hearing in-person at Field  House.   The  parties  did  not  object  to
    attending via Skype and I was satisfied that the  representatives  were
    able to participate in the hearing.

3.   This is an appeal by the appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M Paul (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 24th January  2020,
    by which he dismissed the appellants' appeals against the  respondent's
    refusal on 28th March 2018 of their application  for  leave  to  remain
    based on a right to respect for their family and  private  lives  under
    article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

4.   The appellants are citizens of Nepal.  The two  adult  appellants,  RBS
    and IN are a married couple  who  entered  the  UK  in  2007  and  2009
    respectively  with  valid  student  visas,  which   were   subsequently
    curtailed in 2015.  IS is their infant son, born in the UK in  February
    2017.  The family's leave to remain was curtailed in 2015 on the  basis
    of the second appellant's alleged participation in deception by use  of
    a proxy test taker for tests of proficiency  in  English  (a  so-called
    'TOEIC' test), via a third party test provider, ETS, as a  test  centre
    at West Link College, Essex, taken  on  18th  June  2012.   The  second
    appellant's test result had been assessed under a  "look  up"  tool  as
    "invalid."

5.   As a result of the "look up" tool result, coupled with  the  number  of
    invalid results at the test centre (72%) with none  being  accepted  as
    valid, the respondent concluded that  the  second  appellant  had  used
    deception to obtain the TOEIC.  The respondent refused the  appellants'
    application on 'suitability' grounds, not only relation  to  the  TOEIC
    deception, but also on the basis of outstanding  litigation  debts,  in
    relation to previous unsuccessful applications for judicial review,  in
    respect of one of which a payment plan was in place but in  respect  of
    the second debt, no attempt had been made to pay that debt.  The second
    appellant had also failed to pay an outstanding NHS  charge  of  nearly
    ï¿½7,000 incurred because of the birth of IS.

6.   In addition, the respondent did not accept that  the  appellants  could
    not return to Nepal as a family unit; nor that they would be  destitute
    as claimed, upon return to Nepal, because of  an  earthquake  that  had
    taken place in Nepal in 2015.  The appellants had family in  Nepal  and
    would not return to Nepal as outsiders.

7.   The appellants appealed against the respondent's decision.  A  previous
    appeal before a First-tier Tribunal was dismissed, but  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was found by the Upper Tribunal to have erred in law, and  the
    earlier decision was set-aside, without preservation of any findings of
    fact. The Upper Tribunal remitted the appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be considered afresh.  It was in this  context  that  that
    the FtT heard the appellants' appeal.

The FtT's decision

8.   The FtT identified the key  issue  before  him  as  being  whether  the
    second appellant had engaged in the TOEIC  deception.   The  FtT  noted
    that while the earlier decision of the First-tier Tribunal had been set
    aside without preserved findings of  fact,  the  earlier  decision  had
    recorded evidence given by the second appellant  before  it.   The  FtT
    considered the second appellant's more recent evidence before  him,  in
    particular that she had failed to refer to a visit to  Nepal  in  2015,
    which the earlier First-tier  Tribunal  had  recorded  as  having  been
    referred to in evidence by the second appellant.   At  paragraph  [38],
    the FtT did not regard the  adult  appellants  as  credible  or  honest
    witnesses and in particular, drew adverse inferences in relation to the
    issue of whether the second appellant had invited her family  relatives
    to her wedding to her husband, the first appellant.

9.   At paragraph [42], the FtT regarded the prima  facie  evidence  against
    the second appellant, as having participated in the TOEIC deception, as
    very strong.  There was widespread invalidity of  the  results  at  the
    test centre where the test had been taken and the FtT was not satisfied
    as to why the second appellant had not  simply  sought  to  retake  the
    language test, upon learning that it had been treated as  invalid,  nor
    had she  made  any  enquiries  after  October  2015  to  challenge  the
    circumstances in which her leave had been  curtailed.   The  FtT  found
    that this was inconsistent with somebody who was a student at MBA level
    in the UK, who was anxious to protect her position.

10.  At paragraph [43], the FtT was not impressed by the second  appellant's
    ability to explain the layout of the test centre where  she  had  taken
    the test,  as  her  answers  were  capable  of  being  rehearsed.   Her
    strongest argument, as assessed by the FtT at paragraph [44],  was  the
    fact that she had obtained an MBA from the  University  of  Sunderland.
    Against this, the FtT noted that the second appellant had  provided  no
    material from her course to demonstrate her writing or  reading  skills
    and she had acknowledged  that  the  standards  of  the  University  of
    Sunderland were lower than at other institutions.  At  paragraph  [45],
    the FtT concluded that he was satisfied that the second  appellant  had
    obtained her TOEIC certificate by deception.

11.  At paragraphs [46] to [47],  the  FtT  referred  to  and  rejected  the
    appellants' wider human rights claim, noting that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    had previously refused permission to bring judicial review  proceedings
    in 2017 on the basis that there was nothing  pointing  to  there  being
    overwhelming difficulties in the family's return to Nepal.

12.  Having considered the  evidence,  the  FtT  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

13.  The appellants lodged  grounds  of  appeal  which  are  essentially  as
    follows:

    (1)  It was procedurally unfair for the  FtT  to  have  allowed  cross-
         examination of what  the  second  appellant  had  said  in  witness
         evidence before a previous Tribunal, when that  decision  had  been
         set aside without  preserved  findings  of  fact.  The  appellants'
         objection, raised with the FtT, had not been  noted  in  the  FtT's
         most recent decision, nor had the  FtT  recorded  his  response  in
         allowing cross-examination. If it  were  acceptable  to  rely  upon
         earlier evidence given in another Tribunal, a  full  copy  of  that
         evidence  should  have  been  made  available  to  the  appellants,
         including the record of the  proceedings  of  the  previous  Judge,
         which the Upper Tribunal, in setting aside the  previous  decision,
         had noted was missing from the Tribunal file.

    (2)  At paragraph [36], the FtT  had  misdirected  himself  in  law  by
         failing to consider that ultimately, the legal  burden  of  proving
         fraud rested on the respondent.

    (3)  Whilst the FtT had recorded the  second  appellant's  evidence  as
         evasive, he had failed to explain why it was vague and evasive.  No
         finding of fact had been made in relation to the first  appellant's
         evidence whatsoever.

    (4)  At paragraph [40], the FtT had referred to  fundamental  flaws  in
         the second appellant's account but had  not  explained  what  these
         flaws were.

    (5)  At paragraph [42], while the FtT described the second  appellant's
         explanation of: how arrangements were made to take the test at  the
         test centre; why she did not seek to retake  the  TOEIC  test;  and
         evidence  about  her  college's  involvement  or   complicity,   as
         unreliable; the FtT failed to engage with  the  second  appellant's
         evidence, recorded at paragraph [13], that the test centre at which
         she had taken the TOEIC test  had  closed  down  and  therefore  no
         information could be obtained.

    (6)  At paragraph [44], the FtT referred to the  second  appellant  not
         providing course materials from her  MBA  program  but  the  second
         appellant had never been  asked  why  she  had  not  provided  such
         material and it was therefore procedurally unfair for  the  FtT  to
         raise the issue after the event.

    (7)  At paragraphs [46] and [47], the FtT had failed  to  carry  out  a
         proper proportionality assessment of the appellants'  human  rights
         claims and instead had briefly relied upon an earlier refusal of an
         application for judicial review.

14.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman granted  permission  on  25th  June
    2020.  The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

Oral submissions

15.  First, as a procedural matter, Mr  Chohan  asked  me  to  consider  the
    witness statement of the representative, Mr M Nadeem, a  level  3  OISC
    adviser who had represented the appellants before the  FtT.  Mr  Nadeem
    adopted his witness statement and was willing to be  cross-examined.  I
    regarded it as is important  to  record,  particularly  if  a  person's
    professional standing might otherwise be affected,  whether  there  was
    any challenge to their credibility and integrity.  Ms Everett confirmed
    that she did not seek to challenge in any way the  facts  contained  in
    the witness statement of Mr Nadeem, or his credibility or integrity.  I
    therefore accept his unchallenged evidence and record that  I  have  no
    concerns about the accuracy or honesty of his evidence.

16.  Before I come on to the submissions, I very briefly  outline  what  was
    contained in the  witness  statement.   At  paragraph  [4],  Mr  Nadeem
    confirmed that during cross-examination before the FtT, the  Presenting
    Officer asked whether the second appellant and her family were  invited
    to a wedding,  to  which  the  second  appellant  replied,  "no".   The
    Presenting Officer followed up by putting to the second appellant  that
    she had told a previous Tribunal that she was so invited, to which  the
    second appellant answered, "not me, my husband's parents  invited  us".
    At this point the Presenting Officer pointed to paragraph [26]  of  the
    previous First-tier Tribunal determination.  The  quote  continues:  "I
    objected and advocated that the previous determination  was  set  aside
    and so it could not be used for cross-examination."  The evidence of Mr
    Nadeem was that he continued to reiterate his objection,  pointing  out
    that there was not a copy of the questions from the Presenting  Officer
    or a record of proceedings from the hearing before the earlier Tribunal
    (Judge Swaniker), by analogy to production of Asylum  Interview  Record
    questions.  If the proper course of action were, as  suggested  by  the
    FtT, that witnesses could be questioned on the record of their evidence
    before a previous Tribunal, the appellants  had  a  right  to  see  any
    record of proceedings and Mr Nadeem referred to the  FtT  refusing  the
    adjourn the hearing, despite this issue not being raised beforehand.

The appellants' submissions

17.  In relation to Mr Chohan's submissions, without  reiterating  what  was
    in the grounds, the decision of Judge  Swaniker  had  been  set  aside,
    without preserved findings of fact.  Decisions by First-tier  Tribunals
    often did not purport to record all the evidence or  precise  questions
    that had been put to an individual or the context or nuances  of  those
    questions.  Where  there  was,  for  example  a  mixture  of  fact  and
    evidence, that in turn would have to be separated out and it was simply
    unfair, procedurally, for the appellants, who had not had notice of the
    issue being raised, to have the issue sprung on them and  at  the  very
    least, the hearing before the FtT should have been adjourned  with  the
    opportunity to review any record of proceedings.

18.  Mr Chohan reiterated the ground that the FtT  had  misdirected  himself
    in relation to the law, without considering the  overall  legal  burden
    and also reiterated that the FtT's conclusion that the second appellant
    was evasive had simply not  been  explained.   Moreover,  referring  to
    paragraph [34] of the decision, Mr Chohan asked me to consider that the
    second appellant had expressly given evidence as to her successful pass
    in English at level B2 in 2009, so substantially prior to the  impugned
    TOEIC test in question, which was relevant to any motive in seeking  to
    have a proxy to take the test.   Moreover,  it  was  important  that  I
    considered the timeframe and the fact that  the  second  appellant  had
    been able to later extend and vary her visa on the  basis  of  her  MBA
    award, without not needing to rely upon the impugned test.

19.  With regard to the MBA transcript,  the  second  appellant  had  simply
    never been asked about this and the Tier 2 visa that she had  obtained,
    which extended her leave to remain, was based on the MBA award  and  if
    it was satisfactory for the Secretary of State, in those circumstances,
    it would beg the question why it was not satisfactory for the  purposes
    of this appeal.  The FtT's conclusions in relation  to  paragraph  [42]
    and what the second appellant was able to comment on in relation to the
    test centre's complicity in any deception was  similarly  flawed.   She
    could only comment on what she had done at the test centre and was  not
    able to comment on what others had done and she could not be criticised
    for not having tried to track down other international students at  the
    college when it had been closed down, as the FtT had criticised her  at
    paragraph [14].

The respondent's submissions

20.  In response on behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Ms  Everett,  in  a
    measured response identified two areas  where  she  accepted  that  the
    FtT's criticisms of  the  second  appellant  were  not  valid  but  she
    nevertheless asserted that the  overall  findings  on  the  appellants'
    credibility were unarguably open to the FtT and therefore any flaws  in
    certain aspects of the analysis around credibility did not  affect  the
    overall approach.

21.  First, Ms  Everett,  accepted  that  the  second  appellant's  lack  of
    knowledge of any widespread fraud at the test centre  in  question  was
    not one that the second appellant could be criticised for as there  was
    nothing to suggest that she would necessarily know what was  going  on.
    Second, Ms Everett also accepted that it might not necessarily  be  the
    case that simply because the second appellant had not adduced  evidence
    and a transcript of the MBA educational material, that her  credibility
    could be criticised.

22.  However, where the real weaknesses in the second  appellant's  evidence
    as identified by FtT remained were first of all that it  was  perfectly
    procedurally fair, albeit in the circumstances it was a finely balanced
    decision, to use the record of a previous judge, even if that  decision
    had been overturned and she did not see what an adjournment would  have
    achieved.  Similarly, the FtT had not misdirected himself in law and it
    was clear that the "lookup tool" together with the generic evidence had
    satisfied the initial evidential burden of  proof  on  the  respondent.
    The FtT had also specifically given examples  of  the  context  of  the
    appellants trying to distance themselves from their relatives on  their
    return visit to Nepal.

Discussion and conclusions

23.  In relation to the  ground  relating  to  reliance  on  evidence  given
    before a previous First-tier Tribunal, on the one hand, I do not accept
    Mr Chohan's general submission that a later Tribunal is never permitted
    to rely on any aspect of an earlier First-tier Tribunal decision  where
    that decision has been set aside and the findings of fact have not been
    preserved.  There can, it seems to me, clearly be  circumstances  where
    if,  with  sufficient  clarity,  evidence  given  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal has been recorded,  that  a  subsequent  Tribunal  and  indeed
    advocates may legitimately be able to refer  to  that  prior  evidence.
    However, having not accepted that general  proposition,  such  reliance
    may require safeguards and caveats.

24.  The first point is in relation to prior  notice  and  the  need  for  a
    potential adjournment. Mr Nadeem  had  objected  to  the  use  of  such
    evidence and  the  possibility  of  an  adjournment  had  clearly  been
    discussed and rejected. The basis of the objection was that the context
    of the questions in the earlier evidence and the  precise  nuances  may
    not have been understood and at the very  least,  to  the  extent  they
    existed, any record of proceedings should have been made  available  to
    the witnesses for them to be able to refresh their  memory.   Even  if,
    the FtT had disagreed  with  that  submission,  it  was,  in  my  view,
    incumbent for him to have recorded and then explained why  he  rejected
    the submission made by Mr Nadeem and similarly why he had  refused  the
    adjournment request.  Not to have  recorded  that  submission  and  the
    adjournment request risks, as in this  case,  the  decision  making  no
    reference to those submissions and a party, as in this case, being left
    with the impression that a contested issue has not been resolved by the
    FtT.  There was an issue that was contested, namely  the  admissibility
    of the  evidence  and  whilst  the  FtT  had  clearly  regarded  it  as
    appropriate for the evidence to be admitted, he had not  explained  why
    he did not regard Mr Nadeem's submissions as being without  merit.   On
    that very ground alone, I do regard that as a material  error  of  law,
    based on a failure by the FtT to record his  reasons  on  an  important
    contested issue.

25.  Moreover, I accept that in some cases  there  will  be  judgments  that
    clearly set out the record of evidence but I also accept the submission
    that many judgments will not recite the evidence and crucially,  as  in
    the decision in Judge Swaniker, there may be a  mixture,  in  the  same
    passage, of evidence on the one hand, and findings, on  the  other,  so
    that it becomes less clear about what was  evidence;  and  what  was  a
    finding.  Mr Nadeem referred in his  witness  evidence  to  the  cross-
    examination of the second appellant by reference to what had been  said
    at paragraph [26] of Judge Swaniker's decision.  Considering  paragraph
    [26], it is a lengthy paragraph (which it  is  unnecessary  to  recite)
    containing precisely such a mixture, which does not (nor does it  claim
    to) discuss all of  the  nuances  and  context  of  the  questions  and
    answers.  That makes  separation  of  a  finding  which  has  not  been
    preserved from the record of the evidence, which might remain relevant,
    all the more difficult.  In  the  circumstances,  to  rely  on  such  a
    summary, without considering the possibility of obtaining and reviewing
    any record of proceedings, or seeking to agree a note of what was  said
    between the representatives, amounted to an additional material  error.
    It may not be necessary in every case, but it was  a  material  failing
    where there had been no advance notice  of  an  intention  to  rely  on
    specific answers to questions in the earlier hearing.

26.  In relation to the second ground, namely the FtT's  directions  on  the
    law at paragraphs [36] and [37] of  his  decision,  the  FtT  correctly
    reminded himself of the well-known authorities of SM and Qadir  v  SSHD
    (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and  SSHD  v
    Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and  the  fact-sensitive  nature  of
    these case.  Whilst a Tribunal is counselled against  long  recitations
    of case law, the FtT's summary of it at paragraph [36] states:

         "In relation to the issue of fraud the burden is on the  respondent
         to show there is a prima facie case, and if  established,  for  the
         appellant then to rebut the allegation."

27.  That ignores the remaining stages of  the  legal  analysis,  which  are
    that if an innocent explanation is provided which satisfies the minimum
    level of plausibility, the respondent must satisfy  the  Tribunal  that
    the explanation should be rejected, bearing in mind  that  the  overall
    legal burden remains upon the respondent.  In other words, in terms  of
    what has been described as a "burden of  proof  boomerang",  the  final
    stage of the legal analysis has been missed out by the FtT.  Bearing in
    mind the relatively limited findings, analysis and conclusions set  out
    at paragraphs [43] to [45] in relation to the TOEIC deception, I accept
    the submission that when read as a whole with paragraphs [38]  to  [42]
    (dealing with general credibility), it is far from clear that  the  FtT
    approached his analysis  of  the  evidence  before  him,  applying  the
    correct legal test. In those circumstances, I accept the second  ground
    that the FtT materially misdirected himself.

28.  In  relation  to  the  third  and  fourth  grounds  (conclusions  about
    evasiveness and fundamental flaws in evidence, without explaining  what
    they were), once again, I accept the force of the  challenge  that  the
    FtT failed adequately  to  explain  these  conclusions.  The  practical
    difficulty is that whilst there are references to the evidence of  both
    appellants  being  "evasive"   (paragraphs   [38]   and   [39]),   with
    '"fundamental flaws" in their accounts (paragraph [40]), they are never
    explained beyond a difficulty in  being  able  to  "fathom"  the  first
    appellant's evidence; and the second appellant's  evidence  before  the
    FtT in contrast to what it was argued she had said in evidence to Judge
    Swaniker about inviting her parents to the couple's wedding  (paragraph
    [38]).

29.  In relation to the fifth and sixth  grounds:  at  paragraph  [42],  the
    FtT's criticism of the second appellant for not being able  to  explain
    the test centre's involvement; at paragraph [44], the FtT's drawing  of
    adverse inferences because the second appellant did not adduce evidence
    of the detail of her MBA course  material,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that
    neither was a valid criticism of the second appellant.  I conclude that
    they compounded the earlier errors of law, although for  the  avoidance
    of doubt those earlier errors (the first to the  fourth  grounds)  were
    sufficiently material  to  warrant  the  setting  aside  of  the  FtT's
    decision alone.

30.  In relation to the seventh, final, ground  and  the  challenge  to  the
    FtT's proportionality assessment, at paragraph [46]  the  FtT  analysed
    the appellants' evidence in relation to  claimed  family  estrangement.
    That  analysis  was,  of   course,   underpinned   by   the   perceived
    inconsistency with evidence given to Judge Swaniker, to  which  I  have
    already referred and therefore the analysis is  similarly  compromised,
    and there is a material error in the reasoning.

Decision on error of law

31.  For all of the above reasons, there are material errors  in  the  FtT's
    decision, such that it  is  unsafe  and  must  be  set  aside,  without
    preserved findings of fact.

Disposal

32.  With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, notwithstanding that there are no  preserved  findings,  the
    appeal has already been considered by the FtT on two occasions  and  it
    is more expeditious that the Upper Tribunal remakes the FtT's  decision
    which has been set aside.  Mr  Chohan  agreed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    retaining remaking, while Ms Everett did not  have  a  strong  view  on
    remittal.  I regard it as appropriate to retain remaking in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Directions

33.  The following directions shall apply to  the  future  conduct  of  this
    appeal:

    33.1 The Resumed Hearing will be listed  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Keith sitting at Field House, face-to-face on the first  open  date
         in 2021, time estimate 2.5 hours, to enable the Upper  Tribunal  to
         substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

    33.2 The parties are to agree a consolidated,  indexed,  and  paginated
         bundle containing all the  documentary  evidence  for  use  at  the
         remaking hearing. Witness statements in the bundle must be  signed,
         dated, and contain a declaration of truth and shall  stand  as  the
         evidence in chief of the maker who shall be made available for  the
         purposes of cross-examination and re-examination only.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside, with no preserved findings of fact. The Upper Tribunal  will
remake the decision on the Appellants' appeals.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  30th December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

