

                                                           [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/09103/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2018                    |On 4 April 2018                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                       Ms Ajoke Olajumoke Saba-Odejayi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Ngwuocha, Carl Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer

                             DECISION & REASONS

1. This appeal came before me for an error of law hearing on 10 November
2017. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 30 November 2017, I found an
error of law and adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing. A copy of that
decision is appended.

Hearing

2.  I heard submissions from Mr. Ngwuocha on behalf of the Appellant. He
argued that the First tier Tribunal Judge accepted the Appellant had
resided continuously for 20 years. In the alternative, the Appellant became
appeal rights exhausted in 2008 and thereafter her case had been treated as
a live asylum case and therefore, the Respondent cannot be correct in
saying that she did not have knowledge that the Appellant had been residing
continuously in the United Kingdom since 1995. He submitted that, due to
the fact that the Appellant has a live asylum case it is not possible that
she could have left the United Kingdom and then subsequently returned
without detection. In response to a question from the Upper Tribunal, Mr
Ngwuocha confirmed that he had obtained a copy of the Appellant's file from
the Home Office by way of a subject access request but had not included
this evidence in the Appellant's bundle.

3. Mr Ngwuocha drew my attention to the letter dated 23.10.14 from OLCU
stating that her case was still being considered, which is at AB 12-13. He
also sought to rely on a letter from the Respondent dated 7.6.13, which had
not been previously submitted. He submitted that the key point is that the
Respondent knew all along that the Appellant had remained in the UK from
1995 until after the exhaustion of appeal rights in 1998 and the Appellant
had made further representations which then remained unresolved until 2014.


4. In his submissions, Mr Melvin made the point that the evidential gap in
residence is a substantial gap of 7 years and no evidence has been adduced
to show the Appellant was resident in the UK throughout and that it is
trite law that the onus or burden is on the Appellant to the balance of
probabilities that she remained in the UK and did not return to Nigeria
between 1997 and 2004. He submitted that the Home Office file registers her
as an absconder and only coming to light years later. He submitted that his
reading of the error of law determination and his recollection of the last
hearing is that the onus is to be placed on the Appellant that she remained
in the UK or was present during those years. He asked that I find on the
balance of probabilities that the Appellant has not remained in the UK
between 1997 and 2004 and thus cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE(iii)
of the Immigration Rules. Whilst the Appellant's representatives rely on
letters showing applications were made the most recent letter of 7.6.13
does not take the case any further in terms of meeting the Rules. He asked
that I place little weight in relation to the responses to solicitors'
enquiries of the Home Office, which do not show that in any way the
Respondent accepts she remained unlawfully in the period in question.

5. In his reply, Mr Ngwuocha submitted that there was nothing to show there
is any record of the Appellant leaving the UK and that the Appellant was
treated as live asylum case by OLCU. The Respondent has not dealt with the
fact that the Appellant always had an outstanding case with the Home Office
until a decision was made.

6. I reserved my decision. Following the hearing I received a letter from
the Appellant's solicitors dated 27.2.18, appending a copy of the
Appellant's Home Office case notes, which they had obtained by way of a
subject access request. Consequently, in directions dated 12 March 2018, I
gave the Respondent 14 days to make further submissions on this evidence,
or to object to its admission. At the time of writing [28 March 2018] I
have not received any further submissions from either party.

My Findings

7. Mr Melvin helpfully accepted that the suitability requirements of the
Rules were met by the Appellant and consequently, the only issue for
determination is whether the Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph
276ADE(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

8. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom unlawfully on or prior to 8
May 1995, when she made an asylum claim. The application which has given
rise to the current appeal proceedings, following a decision dated 14
October 2015, was made 18 May 2015. Thus on the face of it, the Appellant
had resided for over 20 years at the time she applied for further leave to
remain.

9. Therefore, the specific issue for determination is whether, on the
balance of probabilities, the Appellant can show that she resided
continuously in the UK throughout that 20 year period.

10. I have had regard to the contents of the Appellant's Home Office case
notes, which indicate that she arrived and claimed asylum on 8 May 1995. It
would appear that she travelled on a properly issued passport in her own
identity, issued on 25.10.94 valid for 5 years. There is a reference to the
proposed removal of the Appellant on 10 March 1998 to Lagos via Cairo and
subsequent reference to the Appellant being treated as an absconder from
that date, which indicates that she did not report for removal. There is a
subsequent file note referring to an OLCU review on 18.9.12, following
which it was concluded that there was no basis to grant leave and then to
an application for leave on the basis of family and private life having
been made on 27.5.15, which was refused with the right of in-country
appeal. There is reference to the Appellant reporting on 2.9.15 and
subsequently to being unable to report on 30.3.16 due to undergoing
chemotherapy for cancer. There is no reference to either the Appellant
departing or re-entering the UK since 8 May 1995. Consequently, I infer
from the Home Office case file notes that the Appellant has not left the
United Kingdom since 8 May 1995 as there no evidence to support the
Respondent's contention in this respect.

11. However, the burden is on the Appellant to prove her case to the
balance of probabilities. In respect of positive evidence of her presence
in the United Kingdom, I have had regard to the Appellant's bundle and the
somewhat scanty evidence in this respect. There is a letter from [
 ] surgery dated 19.5.15 which confirms that the Appellant has been
registered with them since 4.2.09 and that the earliest date of medical
records is 14.11.96. There are further official letters dating from 1995,
1996, 2005 and 2007 but I accept Mr Melvin's submission that there is an
evidential gap between 1997 and 2004.
12. I have also had regard to the witness statement of the Appellant's
partner, Olatunji Brown dated 6.11.16, who states that he has been living
with the Appellant since 2009. However, I am mindful that his evidence was
not found to be credible by First tier Tribunal Judge Martins and her
findings in this respect have not been subject to successful challenge.
Consequently, I place little weight on his evidence.

13. I find the absence of cogent evidence showing positively that the
Appellant has been resident continuously in the United Kingdom since 8 May
1995 concerning. However, in light of the fact that there is no evidence
that the Appellant has departed from the United Kingdom or returned since 8
May 1995, I have concluded on the balance of probabilities that she has not
left the country and has thus resided continuously since that time and thus
meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

14. Given that this is a human rights appeal, I have taken into account the
public interest considerations set out in section 117B of the NIAA 2002. I
have also had regard to the findings of Judge Martins in this respect,
however, they do not address whether the Appellant speaks English nor
whether she is financially independent. I find in favour of the Appellant
in respect of both those considerations, given that she gave evidence
before the First tier Tribunal in English and her husband's long standing
employment by Royal Mail as a postman. It is the case, however, that little
weight should be attached to the Appellant's relationship with her partner,
given that it was formed whilst the Appellant was in the United Kingdom
unlawfully. I have concluded in light of my finding that the Appellant
meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii) of the Rules that that this
factor is not outweighed by the public interest considerations and it would
not be proportionate for the Appellant to be removed to Nigeria.

Decision

15. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8).

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

28 March 2018
