
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09084/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th March 2020                    |On 28th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                               indira tumbapo
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy of Counsel, instructed by Sunrise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on 27 September  2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse her human  rights
    claim dated 8 May 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born  on  1  December  1994,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom as a spouse on 13 February  2016  with
    leave to remain as such to 1 November 2018.  Her latest application was
    on the basis of a relationship with a different partner with  whom  she
    had been cohabiting since September 2018.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    relationship was not accepted  and  in  any  event  did  not  meet  the
    definition of partner within Appendix FM because the  relationship  had
    not  involved  cohabitation  for  a  sufficient   period.    In   these
    circumstances  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  did  not  assist  the
    Appellant.  Further, she did not meet  the  requirements  in  paragraph
    276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 4. Judge Chana dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    September  2019,  primarily  on  the   basis   that   the   Appellant's
    relationship was not accepted and she could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  In all of the circumstances,  there  was  no
    breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals  on  two  grounds,  first,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take into  account  that  between  the  Respondent's
    refusal and the date of hearing, the Appellant had married her  partner
    (on 9 August 2019) and therefore met the definition in the  Immigration
    Rules, further there  was  sufficient  evidence  of  the  relationship.
    Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the Chikwamba
    point given that there was sufficient evidence to show the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules would be met.

 6. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant stated that in  essence,
    the appeal was a reasons and rationality challenge to the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In summary, there was a range of evidence  to
    support the Appellant's claim to be in a genuine relationship with  her
    husband; including  the  fact  of  their  marriage,  photographs,  text
    messages and statements from other  attesting  to  their  relationship;
    however none of this material was expressly taken into account  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal  who  instead  focused  on  what  was  said  to  be
    inconsistencies in the evidence.

 7. The first inconsistency was said to be in relation to  the  Appellant's
    accommodation, which is a house in  multiple  occupation  with  tenants
    living in separate units  without  communal  areas  and  therefore  not
    necessarily any significant interaction between tenants.  The Appellant
    and her husband were asked who else was living there and there  was  no
    actual inconsistency  in  their  evidence.   In  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision it is recorded that the Appellant said all rooms were occupied
    but could not name all of the occupants but in paragraph 21, that there
    was one empty room.  However, the evidence at  the  oral  hearing  from
    both the Appellant and her husband was that all rooms were full.

 8. The second inconsistency was said to be  in  relation  to  a  ring,  in
    circumstances  where  neither  the  Appellant  nor  her  husband  could
    remember when it was given.  Counsel submitted that there was confusion
    as in fact  the  Appellant  was  given  two  rings,  only  one  was  an
    engagement ring and the other less important and memorable as  to  when
    it  was  given.   Counsel  did  accept  that  there  was  an   apparent
    inconsistency in that the Appellant stated she was given a ring on  her
    birthday and her husband said he did not; then changing her  submission
    to too much weight being placed on this by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The third inconsistency was said to be about  the  break  down  of  the
    Appellant's first marriage.  The Appellant stated that this was due  to
    domestic abuse and in oral evidence, her husband stated that  this  was
    because the Appellant's first husband was having an  affair.   This  is
    not  necessarily  inconsistent  and  in  any  event,  the   Appellant's
    husband's written evidence referred to domestic abuse.

10. Finally, Counsel submitted that there was an inherent improbability  of
    the Appellant claiming her  first  marriage  had  broken  down  due  to
    domestic violence and a new relationship started if not true given that
    she was in the United Kingdom on a five year route to  settlement.   It
    was however accepted that this did not necessarily follow  and  it  was
    not the strongest point in the Appellant's claim.

11. As to the second ground of  appeal,  Counsel  submitted  that  had  the
    relationship been accepted,  the  principle  in  Chikwamba  would  have
    applied and the First-tier Tribunal should have considered the same  as
    there was sufficient evidence to show  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules had been met.  However, Counsel could not explain the
    relevance of the principles in Chikwamba to  the  facts  of  this  case
    given that there was no refusal on the basis of immigration  status  or
    requirement to return to make an application for entry  clearance.   If
    the relationship had been accepted  as  genuine,  then  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had to consider the  other  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for the purposes of the assessment  under  Article  8(2)  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights in any event.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Fijiwala submitted that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had properly considered all of  the  evidence  before  it  and
    reached conclusions on the genuineness of the Appellant's  relationship
    that were open to it on that evidence.

13. As to the inconsistencies, in relation to accommodation,  the  evidence
    was recorded in the decision at paragraphs 15 and 20 (in which there is
    an obvious typo) and the conclusion in paragraph 21 is correct.  It  is
    notable that there was no tenancy agreement  and  no  evidence  of  any
    joint bills.  The Respondent's record from the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer attending the hearing was further that the Appellant was  still
    living with her ex-husband and one  of  the  occupants  had  his  name,
    albeit this was not relied upon  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    decision.  In any event, there were  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
    about the accommodation.

14. There was an inconsistency in the evidence about  the  ring  which  was
    relevant to the Appellant's credibility and nature of the relationship.
     The explanation given by Counsel  at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal was not before the First-tier Tribunal and  does  not  in  any
    event explain the  inconsistency  in  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

15. There was a further inconsistency,  as  identified  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, between the oral evidence of the Appellant  and  her  husband
    about the break down of her first marriage; which was  again  different
    to Counsel's explanations before the Upper  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal also noted in  relation  to  credibility  that  the  Appellant
    continued living with her first husband for eighteen months despite the
    claim of domestic abuse and despite the fact that  she  was,  for  this
    period, already in a relationship with her current husband.

16. Overall, it was submitted that there  were  sufficient  inconsistencies
    identified in the evidence for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  reach  the
    findings it did on the genuineness  of  the  relationship.   The  other
    evidence referred to, including photographs, untranslated text messages
    and brief identical statements from others who did not attend the  oral
    hearing; could not have  detracted  from  those  conclusions.   In  any
    event, the weight to be attached to evidence is a matter for the Judge.

Findings and reasons

 1. In the decision under appeal,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  the
    evidence before it in paragraphs 4 to  18  of  the  decision  with  the
    findings following in paragraph 20 onwards.  In essence, the First-tier
    Tribunal did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her  husband  due  to  inconsistencies  in
    their evidence in three key areas; that there was a lack of  supporting
    evidence from friends or family (save for inexplicably identical  short
    statements) and a lack of any other supporting evidence.  The latter is
    indisputable, it was entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  find
    that little weight should be attached to the identical  statements  and
    to place weight on the lack of supporting evidence from family members.
     The First-tier Tribunal did not expressly refer to the photographs  or
    messages, but the latter were  untranslated  and  the  former  provided
    little support for the relationship in any event.

 2. As to the inconsistencies, I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    entitled to find the three inconsistencies relied upon in  the  reasons
    for the decision.  First, in relation to the accommodation, it was said
    that the Appellant had not given  evidence  that  there  was  an  empty
    bedroom in the house (i.e. that this was a factual error  in  paragraph
    20/21) and that the evidence was in fact  consistent.   However,  there
    was no statement from the Appellant, her solicitor or representative at
    the hearing as to the evidence given and the record of  proceedings  on
    the Tribunal file indicates that when answering a question about how it
    could be known that the Appellant and her husband share the same  room,
    the Appellant stated that they did, Mr M lived alone, another moved  in
    and she didn't know his name, the owner and "another bed"; although  in
    another answer, she said all  rooms  were  occupied.   The  explanation
    given by Counsel orally at the hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  did  not
    accord with any of the answers in the record of proceedings or decision
    and was entirely unsupported.  The Appellant's husband stated that  all
    rooms were occupied but also varied in his evidence as to who lived  in
    the house, including a wife and child of the owner  who  the  Appellant
    did not mention at all.  On its face, the evidence of the Appellant and
    of the Appellant and her husband was inconsistent as to  the  occupancy
    in the  property  and  those  who  lived  there  and  the  findings  in
    paragraphs 20 and 21 of  the  decision  were  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the record of evidence available.

 3. Aside from the point about whether there was an empty room, there  also
    remains an unchallenged finding  of  other  inconsistencies  about  the
    accommodation, as to who lived there.  In addition, there was a lack of
    supporting evidence such as a joint tenancy agreement, evidence of rent
    or joint bills.

 4. Secondly, in relation to the  ring  (paragraph  22  of  the  decision),
    Counsel for the Appellant accepted at the hearing  that  there  was  an
    apparent inconsistency between the Appellant's evidence  that  she  had
    been given one on her birthday and her husband's evidence that  he  had
    not given her one on her birthday.  The explanation by Counsel  at  the
    hearing about possible confusion about two different rings was entirely
    unsupported by any written statement and in any event, did not  address
    the accepted  inconsistency  about  whether  any  ring  (engagement  or
    otherwise) was given on a particular  special  occasion.   The  finding
    here  was  clearly  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   on   accepted
    inconsistent evidence.  The weight to be attached to this was  entirely
    a matter for the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Thirdly, in relation to the cause of the breakdown of  the  Appellant's
    first marriage (paragraph  24  of  the  decision)  there  was  also  an
    inconsistency in the oral evidence of the Appellant and her husband  as
    to the reason for this;  even  if  the  Appellant's  husband  had  also
    referred to domestic abuse in one of his  written  statements.   Again,
    Counsel attempted at the oral hearing to offer an explanation on  wider
    facts which was wholly unsupported by  any  written  statement  or  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  and  in  any  event,  did  not
    address the key discrepancy. This was not a case in which there was two
    different causes separately identified by different parties,  but  that
    there was a different primary cause identified by both  which  did  not
    overlap.  The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find that this was  a
    discrepancy which undermined the  Appellant's  credibility  as  to  her
    relationship.

 6. Taking these three  inconsistencies  against  the  lack  of  supporting
    evidence, it was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
    Appellant was not in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  The points
    highlighted by the Appellant in her  grounds  of  appeal  amount  to  a
    dispute with the findings rather than highlighting any factual error in
    the  recording  of  the  evidence  nor  any  error   in   findings   on
    inconsistencies which were  apparent  on  the  face  of  the  evidence.
    Counsel for the Appellant at the outset of  her  oral  submissions  put
    this case as in essence a failure to give  reasons  and  a  rationality
    challenge.  It falls far below the  threshold  to  establish  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusions were  irrational  and  clear  reasons
    were given for the conclusions.  I find no error of law in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision on the first ground.

 7. The second ground of appeal is wholly irrelevant in circumstances where
    the Appellant has failed on the first ground of  appeal  as  it  cannot
    establish any material error of law.   However,  I  deal  with  it  for
    completeness.  Although before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    asserted that she met all of the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    in Appendix FM for leave to remain at the date of hearing; there was no
    express reliance on Chikwamba nor of any potential application of  this
    case to the facts of the present appeal.  There was as such no error of
    law by the First-tier Tribunal in failing to consider the point,  which
    was not Robinson obvious, in the absence of any reliance  being  placed
    on it.

 8. The point is in any event misconcieved  as  Chikwamba  has  no  obvious
    relevance to the facts of this case even if the relationship  had  been
    accepted as genuine (which it was not) - this is not a  case  where  in
    substance  it  was  accepted  that  all  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met save for the immigration status  requirement
    such that the Appellant was required to return  to  Nepal  to  make  an
    entry  clearance  application  from  there.   To  the   contrary,   the
    immigration status requirement was met and the question of whether  the
    remaining requirements in Appendix FM were  met  was  relevant  to  the
    assessment of Article 8(2) of the European Convention on Human  Rights,
    it being trite that if the requirements are  all  met,  a  person  will
    succeed on human rights grounds.  There was no need to go  any  further
    to rely on Chikwamba in these circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date: 11th April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email



