
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09001/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2021                       |On 3 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           MARIO BENEDICT FRANSWAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Bhogal Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal against a decision of the  respondent  on  3  May  2019
refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. The appeal has been determined in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  I  set
aside its decision because it erred  in  law.   My  concern  was  that  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not show  proper  consideration  of
the many issues raised in the papers.  I also said, towards the end  of  my
short Reasons for Finding an Error of Law, and after I had  indicated  that
the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  for  want  of  a   detailed
explanation, that the appellant had "been in the United  Kingdom  for  over
half of his life".  As Mr Clarke pointed out, with considerably  more  tact
than the facts warranted, that is just wrong.  I do not  know  why  I  said
that.  The claimant has been in the United Kingdom since 2006  and  so  has
now been in the United Kingdom for fifteen years but he was  born  in  1982
and so has not been in the United Kingdom for over half of  his  life.   Ms
Jones confirmed that my finding to the contrary could not be  substantiated
and had to be seen as an error.

3. The Reasons for Refusal dated 3  May  2019  confirms  that  the  relevant
application was made in June  2017.   It  also  sets  out  the  appellant's
immigration history.  He entered the United  Kingdom  in  2006  with  entry
clearance as a student that was valid until November 2009.  He made  an  in
time application for further leave as a student and his leave was  extended
in stages until 20 December 2013.

4. On 19 December 2013 he made a  "family  and  private  life"  application.
That was refused and an appeal dismissed.  His appeal rights were exhausted
on 13 May 2015.  Since then he has not  had  leave  to  be  in  the  United
Kingdom.

5. On 5 June 2015 he made further submissions that were  not  treated  as  a
further claim, and on 19 June  he  made  the  application  leading  to  the
decision complained of.

6.  The  letter  shows  that  there  was  not  an  application  based  on  a
relationship with a partner or a dependent child.  The Secretary  of  State
considered the "ten year private life route" but found  the  appellant  did
not satisfy the Rules.  In order to satisfy the Rules he had to show  "very
significant obstacles" to his integration into  India  and  the  respondent
found that he could not do that.  He was 23 years old when he came  to  the
United Kingdom having spent all his life in India  and  it  was  considered
reasonable to expect him to return there.  He was employable and  had  some
family contacts still in India.

7. The Secretary of State then looked  for  exceptional  circumstances  that
could lead to a grant of leave outside the Rules.  The appellant lived with
his parents and sister who had indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom and had lived with his grandmother who similarly had leave but  she
died in 2017.  Whilst recognising that there would be grief  following  the
grandmother's death the Secretary of State found no exceptional  reason  to
grant leave.

8. The Secretary of State then looked at the decision made in December  2014
by an Immigration Judge.  The gist of these findings was that the appellant
had close family ties in the United Kingdom  but  was  an  able-bodied  and
educated man who had ties in India and, having entered the  United  Kingdom
for a temporary purpose which had been fulfilled, should now be expected to
return.

9. The Secretary  of  State  acknowledged  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
general medical practitioner.  The appellant suffered  from  ailments  that
were sufficiently serious to require surgical intervention but nothing that
could not be treated  easily.   There  was  also  an  indication  that  the
appellant suffered from anxiety and depression leading to a  psychiatrist's
report dated 31 March 2019.  This considered it to be "essential" that  the
appellant be  offered  Cognitive  Behaviour  Therapy  which  would  not  be
available in India but the Secretary of State did not accept it was  either
necessary or unavailable in India.  The Secretary of State found  no  basis
for granting the application.

10. There are two bundles before me that I  find  particularly  significant.
The first was prepared for the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  8
October 2019, and the second prepared for the hearing in the Upper Tribunal
on 5 July 2021.  I return to the bundles below.

11. The appellant gave evidence.

12. He adopted his statement dated 8 October 2019 in the  first  bundle  and
his statement dated 30 June 2021 in the second bundle  and  was  not  asked
additional questions. In his statement dated 8 October  2019  he  explained
that he was born in India.  His mother left India for the United Kingdom in
March 2003 and his father and sister joined her in 2005.  The appellant was
not qualified to enter as a dependant because he was over 18 years  of  age
although he regarded himself still as  a  dependant  of  his  parents.   He
entered the United Kingdom in 2006 as a student.

13. He attended St Mary's University, Twickenham and was  awarded  a  degree
in history.

14. He spoke of his close relationship with  his  late  grandmother  in  the
United Kingdom.  His grandmother he described  as  "not  British"  but  she
benefited from a "right of abode".  His mother was able to enter the United
Kingdom to reside by reason of ancestry.

15. He referred in his  statement  to  extending  his  leave  and  then  his
"numerous attempts to regularise my status" although, as  indicated  above,
he had no status because he was an overstayer.

16. His grandmother died in November 2017.

17. He felt  that  his  life  was  "empty  and  meaningless"  following  his
grandmother's death.

18. The appellant described himself as a  "devout  Catholic"  and  not  only
attended  a  local  Roman  Catholic  church  frequently  but  he   was   an
extraordinary minister of Holy Communion at Sunday Mass.

19. He could not imagine how he could establish himself in  India  where  he
had no friends.  He also found it difficult to sleep and was anxious.

20. His family were in grief following the  death  of  his  grandmother  and
were supporting each other.

21. In his statement dated 30 June 2021 he confirmed  matters  said  in  the
earlier statement.

22. He explained that he had never been close  to  his  paternal  relatives.
The appellant's father had three brothers and two  sisters.   His  father's
eldest sister was now aged almost 80 years. She is a widow with poor health
and was  dependent  on  her  children.   His  father's  second  sister  was
unmarried, in her late 70s and in poor health.  His father's elder  brother
had died; the oldest brother was unmarried and retired and in poor  health;
another brother was married and retired and dependent on his  children  and
none of them were in a position to accommodate the appellant or support him
financially.

23. He said he would not be  able  to  maintain  the  same  level  of  close
friendship with his parents, sister and partner if he  returned  to  India.
Neither could he give them practical support if he were out of the country.

24. He said that his father and mother  were  suffering  from  poor  health.
His sister also had a condition that presented with spots and blisters  and
she required support mainly from her mother.

25. He then referred to relationship with his "partner".  He named  her  and
identified her as a Filipino national residing in the United Kingdom.  They
met through a Catholic singles website in 2019 and had become friends.  His
partner was residing lawfully in the United Kingdom as a skilled worker and
had made  an  application  to  extend  her  leave  until  June  2021.   The
application was made on 3 June 2021.  He explained how during the  pandemic
he had been in contact with  his  partner  by  telephone  and  it  was  his
intention when permissible to  settle  down  and  found  their  own  family
together.

26. He was taking Mirtazapine 15 mgs tablets.

27. He referred to the sadness that followed his  grandmother's  death.   He
then talked about the comfort and peace he found as a  Roman  Catholic  and
his frustration at not being able to do even voluntary work in  the  United
Kingdom.  He continued to serve as an extraordinary minister.

28. He described his life in the United Kingdom  as  being  at  a  "complete
standstill" and he could not imagine how he could live in India.

29. He then referred to the mutual support he and  other  close  members  of
his family enjoyed and his desire to be  a  productive  member  of  British
society.

30. He described himself as "Anglo-Indian" and how the  position  of  Anglo-
Indians was declining in India.  For  example,  India  no  longer  had  two
"Anglo-Indian" members of parliament.

31. He said he would be returning to a country very different from  the  one
that he had left.  He believed his future lay in the United Kingdom.

32. He also commented on the COVID pandemic "ravaging through India".

33. He was cross-examined.

34. He confirmed that he had worked for two years  in  the  National  Health
Service doing mainly administrative work.  He also said that he lived  with
his immediate family in the United Kingdom.

35. He said that it was his intention to marry his current partner and  then
establish their own family but he claimed not to have  discussed  with  his
partner the possibility of going to India  and  had  not  investigated  the
costs.

36. He postulated that landlords would not let property to him as  a  single
man on his own in India but he had produced no  evidence  to  support  that
claim.  He repeated that he had not made any investigations.

37. He was asked about the possibility of working in India.  He said he  had
a history degree. He knew about the Tudor Wars and the Hundred  Years'  War
but did not regard those things as particularly helpful in India.   He  had
ideas about training as a teacher but was rather vague about how they could
be effected.

38. He was then referred to a passage in the Decision  and  Reasons  that  I
set aside.  At paragraph 24 the judge recorded  that  the  appellant  "said
that he came to the UK with the intention of staying  here  and  not  going
back to India".  He was asked if that was correct and he replied,  "I  must
have said it".  Mr Clarke pressed the point and asked the appellant  if  he
really did agree that he entered the United Kingdom not intending to return
even though that intention was required by a Tier 4  visa.   The  appellant
replied that he did not intend to overstay.   He  had  tried  to  establish
himself in the United Kingdom lawfully.   When  it  was  pointed  out  that
trying to establish a lawful presence by giving a false reason for  wanting
to enter the United Kingdom could have been thought dishonest he said  that
he came intending to go back but circumstances changed.

39. He could not explain why the GP records did not say more of his role  as
a carer.  He also suggested that if he had returned to India he would  have
been killed by the recent Coronavirus.

40. The appellant accepted  that  he  had  had  treatment  from  the  health
service.  He was asked if he had paid for  that  treatment  and  found  the
question hard to answer.  I asked him simply if he had paid or had not paid
and he replied that he did not know.

41. He accepted that the Roman Catholic church had a presence in  India  but
said that he would find it hard to strike up new friendships.

42. He did not expect he would have any support from  his  father's  family.
They had just not shown any interest.  They had disapproved of the marriage
between his parents.

43. The appellant's mother, Geraldine Franswah, gave evidence.  She  adopted
her statements of 8 October 2019 and 29 June 2021.

44. In her first statement Mrs Franswah confirmed that was  settled  in  the
United Kingdom as of right because of ancestry  and  she  was  later  being
joined by her husband and daughter and later still by the appellant.

45. She said it was the appellant's intention after obtaining his BA  (Hons)
in  history  to  study  for  a  PGCE.   He  obtained  work  when  that  was
permissible, when that was no longer permissible he worked in  a  voluntary
capacity for a different organisation but gave that up  when  he  was  told
that was no longer allowed.  She was concerned that his life was on hold.

46. She said that when he applied for his "UK ancestry  dependant"  visa  he
was still under the close supervision of his parents and had  no  funds  of
his own.  She described him as a level-headed person.   He  had  some  skin
problem which required treatment and was showing signs of stress.

47. She said there was no  one  for  him  in  India  now  and  he  would  be
completely on his own.  She postulated that he would not be able to  manage
or find anywhere to live or get work.

48. Then she talked  about  the  appellant's  close  relationship  with  her
mother, his grandmother.

49. Mrs Franswah then  explained  how  she  had  blood  pressure  and  other
problems and had recently been admitted to hospital in an emergency.

50. She continued to work because the family needed the money.   They  would
be better off if the appellant were able to work and contribute.

51. She said that the appellant's  father  had  medical  problems  as  well.
They wanted the appellant to be in the United Kingdom to help support them.

52. Her most recent  statement  included  much  that  was  in  her  previous
statement.

53. She insisted that she  did  not  have  a  close  relationship  with  the
appellant's paternal relatives.

54. Family members were also still  grieving  following  the  death  of  her
mother in November 2017.  She confirmed that she was on lifelong medication
for her circulation and heart problem.

55. The family in the United Kingdom supported the appellant financially  as
they had done through his time at university.

56. Mrs Franswah had been  subject  to  furlough  during  lockdown  and  her
husband was expecting to retire next year and they were worried  about  the
financial strain.  She rejected the contention that family members  in  the
United Kingdom could send money to the appellant in  India.   They  do  not
have money to give.  She did not want to go to India presently because  she
was frightened of COVID.  She could not preserve the close relationship she
enjoyed with her son if he moved to India.

57. In answer to supplementary questions she confirmed that  she  could  not
enter sooner than she did because of  family  responsibilities.   She  made
much of the other relatives entering the United Kingdom as a right.

58. In answer to questions in cross-examination she confirmed that  although
she had poor health that was not the reason she had been  unable  to  work.
She had been subject to furlough.  She confirmed that  she  was  not  aware
there were any enquiries being made of how the  appellant  might  establish
himself in India or how they  might  manage  without  him  if  he  left  to
establish his own family as he talked about doing.

59. The  appellant's  father  gave  evidence.   He  is  Mr  Newton  Benedict
Franswah.  Again, he had made a statement in relation to the first  hearing
dated 8 October 2019 and a further statement dated 29 June 2021.

60. In his first statement he explained  that  the  appellant  was  still  a
young man in need of help when he came to the United Kingdom.

61. The appellant applied for a dependant  visa  but  that  application  was
refused.  Indeed, his application for leave as a student  was  unsuccessful
but "his case came up in the UK which he won" which I assume means  that  a
decision refusing him leave was appealed successfully.

62. He talked about the close relationship the appellant  enjoyed  with  his
late grandmother.

63. Mr Franswah then said that he was "getting  old"  and  suffered  from  a
variety of  diseases  including  high  blood  pressure,  high  cholesterol,
diabetes and gout.  His wife was suffering from problems too.  There was  a
lot of stress.  The appellant's sister was particularly close to him.

64. He pleaded that the appellant be allowed to remain.

65. In his more recent statement he emphasised the shock of  his  mother-in-
law's death and gave  more  details  of  his  own  and  his  wife's  health
problems.  The family were suffering huge financial strain  exacerbated  by
his wife being made redundant.

66. He said how at a previous hearing his daughter had said she  could  send
�10,000 and that he could send �10,000 to the appellant in  India  to  help
him obtain a teaching degree and to reintegrate in  life  but  those  funds
were no longer available.  He was worried about  how  the  appellant  could
establish himself.  He was  worried  about  how  his  daughter  would  cope
without her brother.  His relatives were not supportive.   He  had  visited
India in 2010 to attend his elder brother's funeral.  His late brother  was
the only family member who supported him.  The others were  not  interested
and were themselves aging.

67. He was visibly  distressed.   I  assured  him  that  I  would  read  the
statements in evidence-in-chief  and  I  confirm  that  I  have  read  them
although I have not found it helpful to set them out herein.  In answer  to
supplementary questions he confirmed that the family in India would neither
be inclined or able to help.

68. He was cross-examined.  He did accept that there were some relatives  in
India and he was in contact but they would not support the appellant in the
event of his return.

69. The appellant's sister gave evidence.  She is Farina Ann Franswah.   She
made a statement dated 8 October 2019 and a further statement dated 29 June
2021.

70. Ms Franswah explained in her first statement that she was close  to  the
appellant, her brother, and how she was concerned that  he  had  "lost  his
spark" with all his immigration problems.  This was repeated  in  her  more
recent statement.  She had said how she had been extremely ill  during  the
pandemic and how the appellant had done much to look after  her  physically
as well as emotionally.  She was worried about her  parents  own  declining
health.

71. She had now formed a serious relationship and hoped to move in with  her
partner later during the year.  They wanted to live independently.  She was
reluctant to move out because her parents depended on her and  her  brother
and also earn money.

72. She accepted that she had previously offered to  find  �10,000  to  help
the appellant establish himself in India if that were  necessary  but  felt
that was not an offer she could keep open.  She needed such  funds  as  she
had for her own  family  plans  and  also  to  support  the  parents  whose
circumstances were going to decline.

73. In answer to supplementary questions she confirmed that she  had  little
to do with her relatives on her paternal side in  India.   There  would  be
brief courtesy conversations at Christmas but that was all.

74. She was cross-examined.

75. She confirmed that she had said that there were some links  between  her
and her paternal relatives but not much.  She said she  could  not  support
him anymore financially.

76.  Mr  John-Paul  MacNamara  gave  evidence  adopting  letters  dated   24
September 2019 and 24 June 2021.  The two letters say essentially the  same
thing.

77. Mr MacNamara is a law  lecturer  at  City  University  and  a  part-time
practising barrister.  He gave evidence  by  video  link  interrupting  his
holiday in Wales in order to give that  evidence.   He  gave  it  from  his
parked motorcar.

78. He describes the appellant as a "good friend" and that he has known  the
appellant for at least seven years through the Roman Catholic church.

79. He  spoke  of  the  appellant's  personal  qualities  in  glowing  terms
exhibited by his committed membership of the church community and also  the
Catenian Association which he described as a "Catholic male fraternity".

80. He was also concerned how the appellant would cope with COVID  virus  in
India but he had no special expertise in COVID in India.

81. He thought the Catenian Association did  have  a  presence  in  Goa  but
probably not throughout India.

82.  The  bundle  prepared  for  the  hearing  before  me  contains  several
supportive letters which I have considered.

83. Ms Bernadette Paul sent two letters. The first is dated  24  June  2021.
She writes of the integrity  and  work  ethic  that  are  manifest  in  the
appellant and his family and says how  they  are  respected  in  the  local
community.  The second is dated 25 September 2019 and makes essentially the
same points although refers to there  being  a  huge  toll  on  his  mental
health.

84. There is a letter from the Right Reverend Paul  Hendricks,  the  Titular
Bishop of Rosemarkie.  The appellant worships at  a  church  within  Bishop
Hendricks' episcopal  area  and  he  confirms  that  the  appellant  is  an
extraordinary minister.  He makes the  point  that  this  role  has  strict
admission criteria and is only available to people  who  have  shown  their
aptitude to suitability.  He confirms  that  the  appellant's  parents  are
becoming more dependent on the appellant and although he presumes that  the
appellant will be capable of finding work  in  India  he  will  be  without
support.

85. There is a similar  letter  from  the  Reverend  Simplicio  D'Souza  who
identifies the appellant as a worshipping member of the  parish  and  again
writes appreciatively of the appellant's commitment to the parish  and  his
personal  humility,  kindness,  gentleness,  genuineness,  dedication   and
support.

86. There is also a  letter  from  the  Vicar  General's  office  signed  by
Monsignor Matthew Dickens.  He  refers  to  the  appellant  as  someone  of
"impeccable character and good standing".  I find this a little concerning.
 The appellant is not of impeccable character.  He is an overstayer  on  an
immigration application and it troubles me that  Monsignor  Dickens  either
does not appreciate that or does  appreciate  it  and  thinks  that  it  is
consistent with an impeccable character.  I  have  reservations  about  the
reliability of Monsignor Dickens' opinion which does not seem to be thought
through although I appreciate that the positive  points  are  confirmed  by
other sources.

87. There is also a letter from the appellant's partner.  She  clearly  sees
him as a potential husband but their relationship has not yet developed  to
that stage.

88. There is a letter from one Etienne Hoffland dated  24  June  2021.   The
writer knows most the appellant's parents and confirms that their health is
declining and expresses concern about how the appellant would cope in India
particularly in the light of the COVID crisis.  There is a  similar  letter
from Grace Montagni dated 24 June 2021 and she  writes  appreciatively  and
respectfully of the appellant, commenting especially on his humour.

89. There is a manuscript note from Helen Philip-Watson dated 23 June  2021.
 It is not clear how she is able to comment on  the  appellant  not  having
links in India but she supports his application to remain commenting on his
"good character" and his willingness to work and  support  members  of  the
community.

90. A Mr J F McConway introduces himself as a retired  science  teacher  and
director of a small property company.  He is a member of the  international
Catenian Association and speaks well of the appellant's trustworthiness and
integrity and expresses his belief  that  he  would  be  an  asset  to  the
community.

91. One Karena Ann Martinz writes as the  appellant's  aunt  and  godmother.
She refers to his work in the Roman Catholic church  and  to  her  sister's
family being "very close".  She too expressed the view that in the event of
the appellant's return to India he would be returning on his  own  with  no
one to support him.  He also had a role to play supporting  his  family  in
the United Kingdom and his parents are showing declining health.

92. There is a  letter  from  the  appellant's  great-aunt,  Maria  Virginia
Rosebud Julian which describes the appellant as a "very  responsible  young
man" and that he was someone to turn to in the event of a family emergency.
 He had been very supportive during the pandemic crisis.

93. The  bundle  includes  documents  relating  to  the  appellant's  family
ancestry and also financial documents but I do not consider anything  there
to be a matter of dispute.  The point of these documents is  they  tend  to
show that the appellant's close relatives  are  living  responsibly  within
their means and have manageable debts but are not  sitting  on  substantial
funds that could be made available to support  the  appellant  or  for  any
other purpose.  There are various "medical documents"  tending  to  confirm
various ailments of the appellant and his immediate family but nothing that
amounts to really serious health difficulties.

94. I have been informed by the material under  the  heading  "Current  news
articles re Anglo-Indian minority in India".  Clearly there is  a  move  in
Indian society to take away the special representation allowed  in  certain
circumstances to members of the  Anglo-Indian  community  at  the  time  of
Indian dependence in 1947.  This is not an asylum claim and it has not been
suggested the social conditions in India are such that a person such as the
appellant cannot safely return there.  I found the material  of  peripheral
relevance to this claim.

95. I have considered too the "Appellant's  Bundle".   I  see  no  merit  in
commenting on the witness statements that are not considered above  or  the
general supportive letters.  It is perfectly plain that there  are  several
people who think sufficiently of the appellant to go out of  their  way  to
express the view that they would like him to remain in the United Kingdom.

96. I must look particularly at a psychiatric report  by  Dr  Paul  Courtney
dated 31 March 2019.  Dr Courtney is a  consultant  psychiatrist  with  the
Hampshire  Partnership   NHS   Foundation   Trust.    His   most   relevant
qualifications are his membership of the  Royal  College  of  Psychiatrists
which was awarded in 1988 and his 22  years'  experience  as  a  consultant
psychiatrist.  His report  includes  an  appropriate  direction  about  his
duties and he describes the appellant as a 36 year old single man  who  has
lived in the United Kingdom for almost thirteen years.  He has not suffered
mental health problems until 2014 when his application for permanent  leave
to remain in the United Kingdom was refused. The appellant says that he has
no family to support him anywhere in India and he is worried about his duty
to support his parents in the United Kingdom.  In Indian culture it is  the
duty of the son to look after the parents.  He has experienced "substantial
stress" in relation  to  his  application  for  leave  and  his  depressive
symptoms  were  exacerbated  after  the  death  of  his  grandmother.   The
appellant has  prescribed  an  antidepressant  Mirtazapine.  The  appellant
appeared tense throughout the interview but spoke clearly with  no  thought
disorder or sign of psychosis.  He had suicidal thoughts at his lowest.

97. Dr Courtney recommended a change  of  antidepressant  medication  and  a
course of Cognitive Behaviour Therapy.

98. There are far fewer psychiatrists in India than in the  United  Kingdom.
Dr Courtney anticipated that drugs would be available for  the  appellant's
treatment but not  the  Cognitive  Behaviour  Therapy  that  he  considered
necessary.   He  concluded  that  the  appellant  would  not  get  adequate
treatment for his mental illness if returned to India.

99. There is also a report from Dr Roger Ballard dated  28  June  2015  that
was included in the  bundle  prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Dr
Ballard describes himself as a social anthropologist  and  has  appropriate
qualifications and experience.  He  was  particularly  concerned  with  the
relationship between the appellant and his late grandmother  which  clearly
is now of minimal relevance but  he  also  commented  on  the  relationship
within the entire family.  His findings, which of course do  not  bind  me,
are interesting.  He spent some time looking at the ancestry links  between
the appellant and his close relatives and the United Kingdom and  he  noted
that the appellant was an "odd man out" (paragraph 3.3) which  makes  sense
only as a reference to his not having entitlement to  live  in  the  United
Kingdom.

100. Under his conclusions beginning at paragraph 5.2 and  paragraph  55  (I
find the numbering a little eccentric) Dr Ballard said that:

  "I had little doubt that their collective objective was  to  reunite  the
  collectively in the UK.  In doing so they took advantage of  the  patrial
  status  of  the  appellant's  grandmother,  mother  and  maternal   aunt.
  However, they did so step by step: the appellant's mother laid  down  the
  initial beachhead in the UK, after which the other members of the  family
  applied for, and in due course were granted, entry certificates to the UK
  in conformity of the Immigration  Rules  -  with  the  exception  of  the
  appellant, whose application was refused on the grounds that his age  was
  such that he fell outside the Rules".

101. Dr Ballard then expressed the view that there was "little  doubt"  that
the appellant regarded himself as an integral member of the extended family
and that is how they regarded him.

102. When I undertake  an  Article  8  balancing  exercise  it  is  for  the
appellant to prove the facts on which he seeks to rely on  the  balance  of
probabilities. I must decide if the decision interferes with the identified
private and family lives and if it does then it is for  the  respondent  to
justify that interference.

103. It is then for me  to  carry  out  an  exercise  where  I  balance  any
interference in the private and  family  life  of  the  appellant  and  his
relatives against the public interest  in  maintaining  a  fair  system  of
immigration control.  I can be guided by the Immigration Rules  because  it
is very hard to see any public interest in removing  someone  who  actually
satisfies the requirements of the Rules entitling them to remain and I must
have regard to paragraph 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
2002 because Parliament requires that.

104. There  are  certain  features  of  the  case  that  are  obvious.   The
appellant does feel an unjustified sense of grievance because,  unlike  his
other relatives, he does not have a right to live  in  the  United  Kingdom
arising from his ancestry.  In my judgment this is  something  that  is  an
important aspect of the  case  but  not  one  that  assists  him.   British
nationality law can be exceedingly complicated but it is quite  clear  that
people who claim British nationality by  descent  can  do  so  only  for  a
limited number of generations, typically  three.   Descendants  of  British
nationals do not all have the  right  to  return  to  the  United  Kingdom.
Parliament decides which people have such rights and Parliament has decided
that this appellant does not.  I  must  think  extremely  carefully  before
treating him as if he did.

105. It is perfectly plain that the appellant has  established  private  and
family life in the United Kingdom.  Mr Clarke  saved  me  some  trouble  by
accepting that family life had been established between the  appellant  and
his parents and sister but, as I indicated in the hearing room, my  concern
is whether there  is  a  "private  and  family  life"  under  the  European
Convention on Human Rights at Article 8.  These are not two separate ideas.
 The word "and" is conjunctive and I am required to look at the  nature  of
the relationships established and then decide what weight should  be  given
to them.  Relationships at the "family life" end of the  continuum  broadly
are entitled to more weight than relationships at the "private life" end of
the continuum but it is only extremely close human  relationships  such  as
between husband and wife or life partners and parents  and  minor  children
that ordinarily attract considerable weight.

106. The elements in  the  private  life  are  essentially  the  appellant's
contribution to the community.

107. I found Mr MacNamara's  oral  evidence  a  convenient  summary  of  the
various supportive letters and statements that a before me. Mr MacNamara is
not an expert on the covid crisis in India and I attach  little  weight  to
his concerns about that but it speaks volumes  of  the  appellant  that  Mr
MacNamara was willing  to  interrupt  his  holiday  to  speak  up  for  the
appellant who is clearly held in high regard.

108. The appellant has done some work when he could although that is not  an
option open to him now and he has  given  himself  to  the  Roman  Catholic
church.  Here I need to express myself carefully.  Certainly, work done for
a religious organisation should not  be  seen  as  particularly  worthy  or
weighty and the  contrary  was  not  suggested.   The  point  is  that  the
appellant has made a contribution to the community  outside  his  immediate
family and has clearly been respected  for  what  he  has  done.   That  is
important and does put him in a stronger position than  if  he  had  simply
lived selfishly but it does not amount to much.  His contribution  is  real
and sincere but it is not exceptional.  He will be missed if he leaves  but
the church will carry on without him.

109. His parents and his sister value  him  and  his  parents  are  to  some
extent dependent on him because he is a responsible adult and a loving  son
and gives them assistance as they are facing up  to  the  infirmities  that
come in later life.  They are not "old people" and they are  certainly  not
incapable of looking after themselves.  There is  no  evidence  to  support
such a finding.  The appellant's departure would aggrieve them because they
would miss him personally and would inconvenience  them  because  he  helps
them but this is not weighty.  I make similar observations about his sister
but she was quite frank about the fact that she had intentions  of  forming
her own family unit, something which in the ordinary course of events would
not surprise anyone, and it must not be assumed that brothers  and  sisters
remain dependent upon each other  or  emotionally  close  throughout  their
lives.  They have a healthy relationship between adult siblings  and  there
is every reason for that to continue and enrich their later lives but again
it is not a reason to allow the appellant to remain in the United  Kingdom.
This is not a heavy point.

110. I do not see any difficulties in the appellant re-establishing  himself
in India.  The evidence on an  earlier  occasion  that  there  would  be  a
substantial premium available from the family to help him  start  has  been
retracted and it may well be that that money is no longer available.  I  do
not know.  If I have been told the whole truth  about  their  circumstances
then it is not.  However, the appellant is in apparently  good  health  and
has lived most of his life in India and has the advantages of a degree from
an English university and of having lived in the United  Kingdom  where  he
has developed his language skills so that he speaks English to a very  high
standard.  I do not believe that he cannot find employment  in  India  that
would be suited to his abilities.  He has very marketable skills.

111. Neither do I accept that he would face  extreme  social  isolation.   I
accept that he has no close relatives in India and that his relatives there
are aging. They will have no inclination to assist him and if they do  help
it will of minimal value given reluctantly. I do not make  my  decision  in
the belief that the appellant will find a strong or even useful network  of
family support awaiting him in India.

112. It is a feature of the case that the appellant is an active  member  of
the Roman Catholic church  and  the  Roman  Catholic  church  has  a  large
presence in India.  It seems to me plain that the appellant could establish
himself in India at a place where  he  would  be  able  to  find  a  church
community that would support him and welcome him and assist him settle in.

113. I have  seen  no  informed  evidence  to  suggest  that  returning  the
appellant to India now would be too dangerous because of the covid  crisis.
Plainly he would have to address the risks of infection but, as  Mr  Clarke
pointed out, the medical records show  that  the  appellant  has  a  second
"covid vaccine" on 9 June 2021. There is no evidential basis before  me  to
support the contention  that  I  should  give  great  weight  to  risks  of
infection from the covid virus.

114. I found Dr  Paul  Courtney's  evidence  to  be  of  limited  value.  Dr
Courtney is plainly well qualified and  experienced  and  his  evidence  is
entitled to respect. However he said nothing to suggest that  removing  the
appellant would subject him to the kind of serious decline  in  well  being
that is necessary to support an "article 8" claim. Undoubtedly it would  be
best of the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom  and  access  therapy
and treatment easily but he is not entitled to that.

115. I accept that  the  appellant  has  excellent  English  and,  save  for
overstaying, has respected the law in the United Kingdom. I  also  find  it
likely that if he were entitled to work would get a job quickly  and  would
progress in a carer. Allowing him to remain  would  not  be  burdensome  to
public funds  but  these  things  are  not  strong  reasons  in  favour  of
permitting him to remain.

116. In short, I can think of little reason to  say  that  the  interference
with the appellant's private and family life consequent on his removal from
the United Kingdom would be disproportionate.

117. There is an additional dimension to this.   Mr  Clarke  submitted  that
removal or refusal was particularly important  because  the  appellant  had
contrived to evade immigration control by coming into the United Kingdom on
one pretext intending to remain.  The main evidence for  this  is  this  is
what the appellant said on an earlier occasion and his efforts to backtrack
from that before me were not impressive.  Further, the contention that  the
appellant intended to establish himself in the  United  Kingdom  is  wholly
consistent with Dr Ballard's findings.  I also  ask  myself,  rhetorically,
why the appellant remained if it had been his intention to return?  Nothing
has been said that persuades me that  he  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
intending to return but changes his mind.

118. People cannot be allowed  to  make  their  own  rules.  Parliament  has
approved a set of Immigration Rules and the European  Convention  on  Human
Rights is not intended to be an easy way round  provisions  of  immigration
control.

119. The Convention provides both an overarching guide  and  a  backstop  to
prevent a disproportionate interference with people's  private  and  family
lives.  There is nothing disproportionate  about  the  refusal  here.   The
appellant does not satisfy the Rules.  He has no strong reason to remain in
the United Kingdom. His family life is the family life of an adult  capable
of living independently. The appellant has shown no  significant  obstacles
in the way of his establishing himself in India.  He just prefers  to  live
in the United Kingdom and that counts for almost nothing.

120. I have gone through all of the papers and have commented  on  much  but
not everything before me.  I can only come to one conclusion  and  that  is
that although refusing the appellant leave to remain  does  interfere  with
his private and family life and the private and family life  of  his  close
relatives, and indeed to some extent people who  he  knows  mainly  through
church, none of these things count for very much against the imperative  to
maintain immigration control.  The appellant is not entitled to live in the
United Kingdom and has not  established  a  human  right  that  trumps  the
requirements of the Rules.  In all the circumstances I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

121. This appeal is dismissed.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 July 2021                   |



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 09001 2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2021                            |                                |
|                                           |................................|
|                                           |.......                         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           mario benedict franswah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

1. The parties did not respond  to  directions  suggesting  that  the  Upper
Tribunal could decide if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  and  I
prepared a draft decision in October 2020. I decided not to promulgate that
decision until I had read the  judgement  in  The  Joint  Council  for  the
Welfare of Immigrants v The President of the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration
And  Asylum  Chamber)  [2020]  EWHC  3103  (Admin)  which  was  then   much
anticipated. I have seen nothing in that judgement that causes me to change
the substance of my draft.

2. The appellant is a national of India who was born in 1982.  He appeals  a
decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State on 3 May  2019  refusing  him  leave  to
remain on human rights grounds.

3. Permission to appeal was given by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
who gave permission noted that the gist of the complaint was that the First-
tier Tribunal's  decision  was  reasoned  inadequately  and  also  that  no
proportionality assessment had been conducted and there was  a  failure  to
apply "anxious scrutiny."  I am doubtful that the "anxious scrutiny"  point
could add anything but the appellant is clearly entitled to a decision that
is reasoned and where  the  proportionality  assessment  has  clearly  been
carried out lawfully.

4. I have come to the conclusion that that these qualities are not  in  this
decision.  Certain aspects of the evidence are reflected  in  the  grounds.
It may be that the judge has considered them.  He certainly  said  that  he
has considered all the evidence but  there  is  some  correspondence  which
might be thought to warrant a particular mention and  there  is  an  expert
report by one Roger Ballard which I am satisfied needs specific mention.

5. That said the appellant must not assume that I am saying that the  report
is particularly helpful to his case.  Much of it concerns  the  appellant's
relationship with his grandmother who, sadly, has since died, much of it is
a criticism of the decision of a judge who decided  a  similar  application
previously and whose decision was not set  aside  and  the  writer  of  the
report accepts expressly that he does not have a legal understanding of the
phrase "private and family life".

6. This  appellant  has  not  established  strong  relationships  which  can
sometimes assist a person whose leave to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  has
expired but he has been in the United Kingdom for over half of his life and
I am satisfied that at the very least a proper balancing exercise ought  to
have been carried out.

7. The Directions suggesting a decision with  a  hearing  did  not  consider
remaking the decision. It is not open to me to determine the appeal without
a hearing.

8. I have decided to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   It
will be heard again in the Upper Tribunal.

9. It seems to me that the evidence is not  particularly  controversial  and
that the points of dispute will be the relevance of  the  evidence  to  the
Article  8  balancing  exercise.   This  is  not  a  case  that  has   been
characterised by past accusations of dishonesty. It seems to  me  eminently
suitable for disposal at a remote hearing  where  the  appellant  can  give
evidence and call evidence.  It is likely that the appeal  will  be  listed
for a remote hearing.  If either party objects to that then  the  objection
must be made forthwith when it can be considered.

Notice of Decision

10. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its  decision  and  I
direct that the case be determined again in the Upper Tribunal.
