
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09962/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by UK Court     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Skype                                |                                     |
|On 6 October 2020                    |On 14 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                               Mr Gaire Subash
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai, Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The hearing was held remotely.  Neither party objected to the hearing being
held by video.  Both parties participated by UK court Skype.  I am
satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held because it was not
practicable because of the current Covid-19 restrictions and that all of
the issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  Neither representative
complained of any unfairness during the hearing and both representatives
confirmed at the end of the hearing that the hearing had been conducted
fairly.

The appellant is national of Nepal born on 7 July 1989. He appeals against
the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego sent on 10 February 2020
dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision dated 9 May 2019 to
refuse him entry clearance to the United Kingdom as an adult dependent
child of a former Gurkha soldier.  Permission to appeal was granted by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever on 15 March 2020.

Background

The appellant applied for settlement on 21 February 2019 to join his mother
in the United Kingdom.  She in turn had been granted settlement in the
United Kingdom in 2011 as the widow of a former Gurkha soldier.  The
application was refused on 9 May 2019 and the refusal was upheld on review
by the Entry Clearance Manager on 18 November 2019.  The basis of refusal
was that the appellant did not meet Annex K of the immigration rules in
respect of adult dependent children of former Gurkha soldiers,  that the
appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules in respect
of family life in accordance with Appendix FM and there was no breach of
Article 8 ECHR outside of the immigration rules.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor.  The judge found that
Article 8(1) ECHR in respect of family life was not engaged between the
appellant and the sponsor.  The judge did not accept that the appellant had
been unemployed for the last ten years nor that the appellant was
emotionally dependent on the sponsor in a situation where the sponsor and
appellant had been living apart since 2011.

The Grounds of Appeal

It is asserted that the appeal was procedurally unfair and that the judge
misapplied the law in respect of 'family life'. At the outset of the
hearing Mr Diwnycz for the respondent agreed that the decision was vitiated
by material errors of law.

Discussion and Analysis

Ground 1 - Procedural Unfairness

It was asserted by Mr Rai that there was procedural unfairness during the
appeal in that the judge introduced evidence in relation to the rates of
unemployment in Nepal without providing the source of that evidence or
giving the appellant any opportunity to counter the evidence.  The judge
went on to use that evidence to make a material negative factual finding
against the appellant.  This procedural unfairness has infected the
decision.

In respect of this error, Mr Diwnycz agreed that the judge had introduced
evidence during the hearing for which no source had been provided and that
this was procedurally unfair.

At [39] the judge states:

"The unemployment rate in Nepal is about 11%.  This is a statistic well-
publicised, as I discussed with Counsel in the hearing.  That means that
nearly 90% of people have jobs.  The appellant was, I was told, keen to
work in the UK at anything he could find to do.  His mother was asked, but
not able to give any indication at all of what efforts the appellant had
made to find work, what sort of work he had tried to get, whether he had
any interviews, where he had looked for opportunity and so on.  It is
simply not credible that he could find nothing to do in ten years.  On the
balance of probabilities I find that he has been working."

In the 'Note of Proceedings' prepared by the judge, it is said:

         "I have judicial note from past case that Himalayan Times April
         2019 said 89% employment, nine of ten have jobs."

The appellant is recorded as saying;

         "I do not know".

Mr Diwnycz clarified that having researched the issue of rates of
unemployment in Nepal,there is a reference on the internet to
https://kathmandupost.com.money/2019/04/27-nepal-employmentrate.  Mr Rai,
who was the Counsel at the hearing, stated that he had asked the judge to
provide the source of this evidence and the judge had failed both to
provide the source or provide a copy of the evidence.  Mr Diwnycz conceded
that the source of the evidence provided by the judge (which appears to be
a different source quoted by the judge in his Record of Proceedings) was
not provided at the hearing.  Mr Diwnycz also confirmed that during his
internet search he found several other statistics in relation to rates of
employment in Nepal which suggested that the rate of employment was much
lower than that suggested by the judge.  He also indicated that it is not
possible to state the reliability of the figures in the Kathmandu Post
evidence.  He pointed to the fact that in the latest CPIN on Nepal there is
no information about the employment rate.

I am satisfied that it was procedurally unfair of the judge to introduce to
these proceedings evidence that he had come across in a previous appeal
that had not been referred to by the respondent in the reasons for refusal
nor introduced by either party to the proceedings.  It was also
procedurally unfair of the judge to rely on this evidence without providing
the source of the evidence and without providing the appellant an
opportunity to provide evidence to contradict it.  The allegation of
procedural unfairness is made out.

I am also satisfied that the error was material because the judge relied on
this unfairly introduced evidence to make the finding that the appellant
had not been unemployed since 2011 which went to the issue of dependency.
Had the judge found that the appellant had not been working, he may have
come to a different decision.

Ground 2 - Misapplication of the Law

Mr Rai's submitted that at [40], when considering whether family life
exists between the sponsor and the appellant, the judge places too much
emphasis on the fact that the sponsor and appellant have been separated
since 2011.

At [40] the judge says:

"The appellant has lived in Nepal with his brother and without his mother
since she came to the UK in 2011.  It is not possible now to regard this as
an extant family life.  He is now 30 and they have lived in separate
continents for about eight years.  She visits him every couple of years for
a couple of months.  They doubtless speak often on the telephone and
through Viber or WhatsApp or something similar, but that is no more than
many parents and adult children do.  It is not indicative of family life.
There is no evidence other than a bald assertion of emotional dependency of
the appellant upon his mother.  Insofar as emotional support is needed the
appellant and his brother doubtless provide this for each other."

Mr Rai relies on Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320 for the proposition that
family life can exist even if the family live separately. At [17] it is
said:

"She added that '[such] ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on
his family or vice versa', but it was 'not ... essential that the members
of the family should be in the same country'.  In Patel and others v Entry
Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley LJ said (in paragraph
14 of his judgment, with which Longmore and Aikens LJJ agreed) that

'what may constitute an extant family life falls well short of what
constitutes dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still have a
family life with parents who are now settled here not by leave or by force
of circumstances but by long-delayed right'."

Mr Rai pointed to the fact that the sponsor was granted a settlement visa
to the United Kingdom on 28 April 2011 on the basis of being a widow of a
former Gurkha soldier following a change of policy by the government in
2009. She entered the UK in September 2011.  The policy then changed again
in January 2015 in relation to adult dependent children of Gurkhas.  The
sponsor had given an explanation in that there had been a delay between the
change of policy and making the application because firstly she was not
immediately aware of the change of policy and secondly it took time to
gather together the finances to apply for her son to come to the United
Kingdom.  It was an error by the judge to place too much emphasis on the
separation in circumstances where there had been a separation as a result
of a long-delayed right.  The appellant's father was discharged from the
British Army on 31 March 1994. Had he been given the right to enter the
United Kingdom at that time, he would have done so with his dependents
including the appellant.

Mr Diwnycz conceded that the judge had also erred in this respect and had
misapplied the principles set out in Rai.

I agree with both of the representatives that there has been an error in
this respect.  The judge placed too much emphasis on the separation in the
context of the long-delayed right. I also note that the existence of
'family life' is entirely fact-sensitive and that 'family life' can
continue between family members even where there has been a separation
depending on the individual circumstances of the case.

The judge also failed to properly evaluate whether there was 'real,
effective and committed support' between the sponsor and the appellant.
There was evidence of the appellant's long-term financial dependency on the
sponsor as well as regular communication and visits. It was incumbent on
the judge to give reasons for stating why he did not accept the mother's
evidence of her son's dependency in the context of Nepali culture, applying
the principles in Rai.  On this basis, I find that there was a second
material error of law. Had the judge applied the law correctly, the judge
may have come to a different conclusion.

I therefore set aside the decision in its entirety.

Disposal

There was a discussion between the parties as to the most appropriate way
of disposing this appeal.  Mr Rai submitted that since the appellant had
not had a fair hearing at first instance because of the procedural
unfairness and because there was further fact-finding to made in respect of
dependency that it would be appropriate to remit this appeal to be reheard
de novo in the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Diwnycz was in agreement and I am
also of the view that as a result of the procedural unfairness aspect in
particular, that the correct approach is for the appeal to be remitted to
the First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard de novo by
a judge other than Judge Housego.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        R J Owens
Date 8 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

