
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10118/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th November 2019              |On 13th December 2019              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mrs A H
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                          (Sheffield Visa Section)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel, instructed by Sterling & Law
                    Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision follows a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal and a
decision dated 13th August 2019 which found and error of law and set aside
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(ii) of
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

The particulars of the application, refusal of the Secretary of State and
appeal are set out in that error of law decision but essentially, the Entry
Clearance Officer refused the appellant's application on 10th April 2018,
noting that the applicant had applied for entry clearance to join her
partner, but their records showed that she had previously attempted to
enter the UK on 27th February 2017 using a Hungarian passport in the name
of Rac Judit with a different date of birth.  In support of the current
application she had produced a Ukrainian passport with a different name and
date of birth of 11th August 1975.  It was concluded that she had failed to
establish her identity and the application was refused under paragraph
320(3) of the Immigration Rules.  Further, as she was not the rightful
holder of the Hungarian passport it was concluded it was fraudulently
obtained and that she had contrived in a significant way to frustrate the
intentions of the Rules by deception and her application was refused under
paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules and approved by the Entry
Clearance Manager.

The appellant's appeal, on human rights grounds, was dismissed at first
instance and she appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  The decision of First-
tier Tribunal promulgated on 12th April 2019 was set aside owing to an
error of law.  There had been inadequate engagement with the argument that
the application of paragraph 320(11) effectively imposed an indefinite ban
and a failure to consider the appellant's sponsor's children further to
Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 9.

At the resumed hearing before me her husband, the sponsor, attended and
gave oral testimony, confirming that he and the appellant were still in a
relationship and that he had significant funding difficulties through
having to instruct solicitors and thus he had been unable to visit his wife
within the last year.

The only grounds for refusal were in relation to paragraph 320(3) of the
Immigration Rules and 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.  The Entry
Clearance Officer considered GEN.3.1 and GEN.3.2 under Appendix FM, but
found there were no exceptional circumstances.  The appellant was refused
entry clearance under D-ECP.1.3 of the Immigration Rules because of the
application of paragraphs 320.

A substantial amount of evidence about her identity and nationality were
produced with the application and the appeal bundle.  In addition to the
original valid Ukrainian passport she included a certificate from the State
Migration Service of Ukraine with an English translation, a Ukrainian birth
certificate with English translation and a valid Ukrainian national
identity card.  At paragraph 10 of my decision dated 13th August 2019 it
was recorded that the First-tier Tribunal had found the issue of identity
and Paragraph 320(3) had been resolved.  This provision was not a matter
pursued by the Entry Clearance Manager nor before me. The issue focussed on
Paragraph 320(11).

The evidence given was that the appellant had met her husband, Jonathan H,
a British national, in the United Kingdom in December 2013 and they began a
relationship soon thereafter.  The appellant moved in with him in June
2015.  In February 2017 when they travelled to Italy, on return, she was
stopped at port and she disclosed her Hungarian passport.  Although
initially she stated that this was her name, she then admitted she was a
Ukrainian national.  It was at this point she was refused entry under
paragraph 320(7A), which carries a warning that future applications would
be refused under paragraph 320(7B) and effectively a ten year ban.

The appellant had, following her previous refusal under paragraph 320(7A),
returned to Ukraine and in June 2017 the appellant and sponsor were married
in Ukraine and subsequently she applied for entry clearance.  She was now a
family member for the purposes of the Immigration Rules.

The mandatory refusal provisions under Paragraph 320 of the Immigration
Rules are disapplied as follows

    'A320. Paragraphs 320 (except subparagraph (3), (10) and (11)) and 322
    do not apply to an application for entry clearance, leave to enter or
    leave to remain as a Family Member under Appendix FM, and Part 9
    (except for paragraph 322(1)) does not apply to an application for
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life under paragraphs 276ADE-
    276DH'.

    ...

      320.  In addition to the grounds of refusal of entry clearance or
    leave to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following
    grounds for the refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter apply:

      ...

      Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom
    should normally be refused

      ...

      (11)  where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant
    way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

      (i)   overstaying; or

      (ii)  breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

      (iii) being an illegal entrant; or

      (iv)  using deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to
      enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of
      State or a third party required in support of the application (whether
      successful or not);

      and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding, not
      meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail conditions,
      using an assumed identity or multiple identities, switching
      nationality, making frivolous applications or not complying with the
      re-documentation process."

The issues argued before me in relation to the immigration rules were (i)
whether it was permissible to apply paragraph 320(11) in cases where
paragraph 320(7A) should not be applied (ii) even if that was the case,
should paragraph 320(11) be applied in this case and was it proportionate?
The application of 320(11) acted in lieu of a permanent ban when much of
Paragraph 320 was disapplied and a ten-year ban was applicable under
Paragraph 320 (7A and 7B).

As indicated, the appeal can only be considered on human rights grounds
and, applying the Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27  five stage test, it is
clear that the appellant has a subsisting and genuine marriage with Mr H
and, as such the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal is an interference which
has consequences of gravity such as to engage the operation of Article 8.
The threshold for interference is low.  Ostensibly, the interference was in
accordance with the law but as indicated above, I am satisfied that the
issue as to identity under paragraph 320(3) has been resolved.  Was the
decision on paragraph 320(11) grounds in accordance with the law and for a
legitimate aim?

The argument Ms Norman put forward was that the appellant's conduct fitted
within the category of paragraph 320(7A) rather than 320(11) as was
acknowledged by the decision maker who initially rejected her application
for leave to enter in February 2017.

Paragraph 320(7A) states that leave will be refused as follows:

"(7A)  where false representations have been made or false documents or
information have been submitted (whether or not material to the
application, and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material
facts have not been disclosed, in relation to the application or in order
to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third party required
in support of the application.

(7B)  where the applicant has previously breached the UK's immigration laws
(and was 18 or over at the time of his most recent breach) by:

(a)   Overstaying;

(b)   breaching a condition attached to his leave;

(c)   being an Illegal Entrant;

(d)   using Deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to enter
or remain, or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a
third party required in support of the application (whether successful or
not);

unless the applicant:

(i)   overstayed for -

(a)   90 days or less, where the overstaying began before 6 April 2017: or

(b)   30 days or less, where the overstaying began on or after 6 April 2017

and in either case, left the UK voluntarily, not at the expense (directly
or indirectly) of the Secretary of State;

(ii)  used Deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to enter
or remain, or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a
third party required in support of the application more than 10 years ago;

(iii) left the UK voluntarily, not at the expense (directly or indirectly)
of the Secretary of State, more than 12 months ago;

(iv)  left the UK voluntarily, at the expense (directly or indirectly) of
the Secretary of State, more than 2 years ago; and the date the person left
the UK was no more than 6 months after the date on which the person was
given notice of liability for removal, or no more than 6 months after the
date on which the person no longer had a pending appeal or administrative
review; whichever is the later;

(v)   left the UK voluntarily, at the expense (directly or indirectly) of
the Secretary of State, more than 5 years ago;

(vi)  was removed or deported from the UK more than 10 years ago or;

(vii) left or was removed from the UK as a condition of a caution issued in
accordance with section 22 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 more than 5
years ago.

Where more than one breach of the UK's immigration laws has occurred, only
the breach which leads to the longest period of absence from the UK will be
relevant under this paragraph."

Conduct which attracts a 320(7A) refusal will not attract the subsequent
ten-year ban under 320(7B) where the application is for entry clearance as
a family member in recognition of the balance under Article 8.  The only
exclusion available, therefore, to a decision maker is 320(3) which was no
longer pursued, (320(10) was not applicable) or 320(11) and, in accordance
with the law, invoked for the protection of the rights and freedoms of
others in securing immigration policy.   As highlighted, paragraph 320(11)
is not a mandatory measure but a discretionary measure.   In theory it can
just be continually reapplied in family cases which would defeat the
purpose of the disapplication of much of paragraph 320 but I am not
persuaded paragraph 320(11) can never be applied in cases where an
application has previously been refused under paragraph 320(7A).  The use
of paragraph 320(11) does not automatically impose a 10 year ban as an
appellant can always renew an application and the matter be revisited by
the Entry Clearance Officer or appeal.  Each case must be fact specific.

Additionally, it is not open to me to redetermine the discretion or its
application and it is not open to me to redirect the Entry Clearance
Officer as to which provision he might apply.

Nevertheless the approach and the use of Paragraph 320(11) can be taken
into account when considering all the circumstances under an Article 8
proportionality balancing exercise or GEN.3.2.(2)  both of which  include
consideration of the best interests of the children and which was addressed
in a cursory manner by the Entry Clearance Officer.

The question is essentially whether the refusal would result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner, a
relevant child or another family member whose Article 8 rights would be
affected.

Albeit that I cannot determine which provisions under the Immigration Rules
might be applied, caselaw has established that the decision maker needs to
exercise great care, where paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied when in
assessing aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal.  That exercise
must be relevant to the balancing exercise when assessing the final limb of
the five-stage test under Razgar, that is proportionality.  Would there be
unjustifiably harsh consequences owing to the refusal of the entry
clearance application on 10th April 2018, now shy two years by a matter of
months.  I bear in mind Section 85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002.

PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440:

"In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11) of HC 395, as amended, to
refuse an application for entry clearance in a case where the automatic
prohibition on the grant of entry clearance in paragraph 320(7B) is
disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the decision maker must exercise great
care in assessing the aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal and
must have regard to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully in
the United Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their status by an
application for entry clearance."

PS in particular looked at the approach in paragraph 320 (7B) in relation
to the discretion under the previous appeal regime.  Nevertheless, by
analogy I consider that the same great care should be exercised where
paragraph 320(7A) has been implemented previously and disapplied and that
similar consideration in relation to the application of Paragraph 320(11)
may be factored into the balancing exercise on proportionality.

Following an application for admission of late evidence by Ms Norman, and
without objection from Mr Walker, I admitted under Rule 15(2A) of The
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the Entry Clearance
application details recorded by the Entry Clearance Officer.  These notes
record that the British citizen spouse was employed with London Transport
on a salary of �48,575 per annum and that evidence of their marriage was
provided together with the financial details supporting the application.
In particular, what was recorded on 9th March 2018 was the following:

"Matches seen and results noted pre issue and ECR in maiden name CID check:
match to alias used living illegally in UK - CID details STD/5038395 -
travelled on fraudulently obtained Hungarian passport and false identity.
Has disclosed previous ID and RLTR."

"Has stated in VAF that she divorced him in 2014 but no divorce doc
submitted.  Once this is seen this can[e] be issued:", and:

"Lots of photos together with the sponsor and his children and holidays
together.  Were travelling together as a couple when RLTR in Feb last year
and in an interview with sponsor he said they had plans to marry.
Satisfied a genuine relationship of about four plus years from pictures and
supporting docs from family and friends and not just to regularise the
stay."

It is also clear on 13th March 2018 that there was "requested verification
check on passport (approved by ECM NF)".

It appeared that, knowing the facts of the case, it was intended that a
visa should be granted.  There was no explanation as to the alteration in
the thinking of the Entry Clearance Officer between 9th March 2018 and the
date of the refusal on 10th April 2018.  It is difficult thus to discern
the aggravating features.

As set out in PS, the decision maker must exercise great care in assessing
the aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal and must have regard
to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully in the United
Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their status by an application for
entry clearance.  That is precisely what the appellant did.

The guidance published for Home Office staff on 11th January 2018 in
relation to the grounds for refusal of paragraph 320(11) of the Rules (when
the person has previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate the
intention of the Rules) states as follows:

"This relates to general grounds for refusal under paragraph 320(11) of the
rules when the person has previously contrived in a significant way to
frustrate the intentions of the rules. For visitors this relates to
paragraph V 3.8 of Appendix V.

When an applicant has previously breached the Immigration Rules and/or
received services or support to which they were not entitled you must
consider refusing the application. When these circumstances are also
aggravated by other actions with the intention to deliberately frustrate
the rules, you must refuse entry clearance under paragraph 320(11).

This means when an applicant has done one or more of the following:

been an illegal entrant

overstayed

breached a condition attached to their leave

used deception in a previous application

obtaining:

asylum benefits

state benefits

housing benefits

tax credits

employment

goods or services

National Health Service (NHS) care using an assumed identity or multiple
identities or to which not entitled

and there are aggravating circumstances, such as:

absconding

not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail conditions

failing to meet the terms of removal directions after port refusal of leave
to enter or illegal entry

previous working in breach on visitor conditions within short time of
arrival in UK (indicating a deliberate intention to work)

receiving benefits, goods or services when not entitled

using an assumed identity or multiple identities

getting NHS care to which they are not entitled

attempting to prevent removal from the UK, arrest or detention by Home
Office or police

escaping from Home Office detention

switching nationality

troublesome or frivolous applications

not meeting the terms of the re-documentation process

taking part, attempting to take part, or facilitating, in a sham marriage
or marriage of convenience

harbouring an immigration offender

people smuggling or helping in people smuggling

This is not a complete list of offences. You must consider all cases on
their merits and take into account family life in the UK and, if the
applicant is a child, the level of responsibility for any breach. Before
you decide to refuse under this paragraph, you must refer your decision to
an entry clearance manager (ECM) to be authorised."

The guidance also specifically states:

"Paragraph 320(11)

If an applicant has previously breached the immigration laws but is
applying in a category which is exempt from paragraph 320(7B) you must
consider whether it is appropriate to refuse the application under
paragraph 320(11)."

In her entry clearance application, which generated the decision under
appeal her identity had been resolved (the Entry Clearance Manager did not
focus on this provision) and as at the date of hearing before me the issue
under paragraph 320(3) had been resolved.  It was not therefore an
aggravating circumstance in this regard.

Using deception in a previous application and an alias identity was
identified but there appeared to be no explanation for the change of
thinking of the Entry Clearance Officer and the GCID notes intimated that
entry clearance would be granted. Secondly, there is an injunction in the
guidance to take into account family circumstances.  It would appear the
immigration officials were unaware of the extent of the family
circumstances of the appellant and sponsor - that is with regard the
children and their best interests.

Under any Article 8 determination the Section 55 duty in relation to the
children's best interests should be taken into account.  Mr H is the father
of two children aged 9 and 13 years with whom he has regular and ongoing
contact.  He has the children every other weekend, every Wednesday and for
a number of weeks during the year during the holiday time.   T (s.55 BCIA
2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 confirms that Section 55
applies to children who are in the UK when an entry clearance decision is
made.  Clearly, the appellant's spouse is the father of two children whose
welfare would be affected by the determination of his spouse's location,
albeit that a state has a greater margin of appreciation in determining
entry clearance cases.  The best interests of the children are for the
retention of the status quo in terms of the regular contact with their
father.

I accept the oral evidence of the sponsor, who confirmed consistently that
he was unable to leave the United Kingdom because of his relationship with
his children.  From the documentary evidence presented to me including the
photographic evidence and the oral testimony of the sponsor they clearly
have a very close bond and he provides substantial maintenance, in the sum
of over �600 per month.  It is inherently likely that his removal to
Ukraine would affect that contribution and thus be contrary to the
children's interests. The separation between the sponsor and his ex-wife
was not amicable but they now cooperate and co-parent with a degree of
cordiality although relations apparently became strained and deteriorated
when the UK Borders Enforcement Team raided the sponsor's home, while his
children were staying with him, in search of the appellant, who was, as
they should have known, no longer in the UK.

It is clear therefore that the sponsor has family life with his two
children and he works here; he cannot realistically relocate to Ukraine
without very significant obstacles.  No doubt the children have already had
enough upheaval in their lives and there was also evidence that they had
had a good relationship with the appellant when she was in the United
Kingdom. His removal would seriously undermine the relationship between the
father and the children.

As the sponsor stated, he had been unable to afford to go to Ukraine to
visit his wife for many months.  No doubt that is a result of both
financial pressures and the need to care for his children on a very regular
basis. There are long term and insurmountable obstacles to the sponsor
moving to the Ukraine to be with his wife.

I also note from the entry clearance refusal that the appellant met the
Rules under EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM, the criteria of suitability under
Section S-EC of Appendix FM, the eligibility requirements of E-ECP.2.1 to
2.10, the financial requirements of E-ECP.3.1 to 3.4 and the eligibility
English language requirement of E-ECP.4.1 to 4.2.   That is in the
appellant's favour.

I have applied Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act,
noting that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
public interest.  It is clear that the appellant has satisfied 117B (2) and
(3).  I can accept that under Section 117B (4) little weight should be
given to a relationship when it is established by a person at a time when
that person is in the UK unlawfully.  As set out, however, by Lord Wilson
in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State [2018] UKSC 58, at paragraph 49, Section
117 B is not intended to be a strait jacket,

         'the provisions of section 117B cannot put decision-makers in a
         strait-jacket which constrains them to determine claims under
         article 8 inconsistently with the article itself. Inbuilt into the
         concept of "little weight" itself is a small degree of
         flexibility'.

I realise that the appellant was in the UK and developed her relationship
during a period when she was here unlawfully but, the appellant and her
sponsor married in the Ukraine where she was lawfully residing in the
Ukraine.  Thus I conclude that the relationship was in fact formally
contracted with a qualifying partner, which Mr H is because he is a British
citizen, when the appellant was outside the UK and thus weight can be
attached to the relationship.

I find overall that because of the nature of the relationship between the
sponsor and his children there would be insurmountable obstacles to the
sponsor leaving the United Kingdom and the prospect of a very long-term and
without definition separation between the husband and wife.  The sponsor's
visits to Ukraine to see his wife are impeded owing to his financial
circumstances but more importantly his commitments here.  I conclude that
there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences for the sponsor and the
appellant should they be unable to be together for the foreseeable future.


On the negative side for the appellant, I understand that she has breached
the UK Immigration Rules in a serious manner by the previous entry and use
of a Hungarian passport to which she was not entitled and obtained
unlawfully, but further to Huang [2007] UKHL 11, I am entirely unpersuaded
that the response to the  entry clearance application in 2017 over two
years ago, which would appear to be an extended ban on entry, is in all the
circumstances proportionate and does not have unjustifiably harsh
consequences.

In these particular circumstances, having explored the issues with regard
the family life of the sponsor and the children, which were only very
briefly considered by the Entry Clearance Officer, I find that the refusal
will have unjustifiably harsh consequences further to R (Agyarko) [2017]
UKSC 11.

I therefore allow the appeal of AH.

Notice of Decision

Appeal Allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity because there are minors involved.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
owing to the complexity of the matter.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
