
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11922/2017
     HU/11926/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2019                             |On 3 June 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    D.O.
                                    A.O.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Sowerby of Counsel, instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   These linked appeals come back before the Upper Tribunal to remake the
decisions in the appeals, further to the 'error of law' decision made after
a hearing on 15 January 2019, and the consequent setting aside of the
decisions of First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray promulgated on 14 August
2018. (A copy of the text of the 'error of law' decision is annexed
hereto.)


2.   It may be seen that on 15 January 2019 the Tribunal did not
immediately proceed to remaking the decisions in the appeals, but
considered it prudent to await the outcome of a pending appeal before the
President. A decision in JG (s.117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey
[2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) has now been promulgated. Further, it is to be
noted that the Court of Appeal has more recently expressed agreement with
"the interpretation given by the UT to section 117B(6)(b) in JG" in
Secretary of State for the Department v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria)
[2019] EWCA Civ 661 (paragraph 72).


3.   As noted at paragraph 2 of the 'error of law' decision, the Appellants
are father (d.o.b. 21 June 1980) and daughter (d.o.b. 22 October 2009).
Whilst not parties, the position of the partner/mother and a second child
are contingent upon the outcome of these appeals.


4.   Just as was the case before the First-tier Tribunal, the appeals
before me have again been pursued with primary focus on the circumstances
of the Second Appellant.  It is contended that the Second Appellant
satisfies the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration
Rules, and/or that section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 applies to the benefit of the First Appellant.  In essence,
therefore, the primary issue was whether or not it was reasonable to expect
the Second Appellant to leave the UK: i.e. -

         (i) as per paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) "it would not be reasonable to
         expect the applicant to leave the UK"; and


         (ii) as per section 117B(6) "the public interest does not require
         the person's removal [because] it would not be reasonable to expect
         the child to leave the United Kingdom".


Facts

5.   In respect of the Second Appellant's circumstances, the Judge made the
following findings:

"The second Appellant is now 8� years old.  She has lived in the UK all her
life.  She is in year 3 at school.  The Appellant states that the standards
of education in Nigeria are not as good as in the UK.  Whilst this may be
so, I find that given her young age she will be adaptable to life in
Nigeria, particularly in view of the fact that this is where both her
parents are from.  Further, she has not reached a critical stage of her
education.  I have taken account of the fact that 7 years residence is a
pointer to where a child's best interests lie and accept that it may
marginally be in her best interests to remain in the UK due only to
education here." (paragraph 20).


6.   I noted in the 'error of law' decision that such findings essentially
reflected the case as advanced by the Appellants - e.g. paragraph 12 of the
Appellants' Skeleton Argument dated 10 July 2018: "[A] is now 8� years old.
 She has lived in the UK all her life.  She has never left the UK.  She has
her own private life in the UK and strong connections in the UK and is in
year 3 at St Patrick's Catholic Primary School.  She predominantly speaks
English."


7.   Although the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside for
error of law, there was no express challenge to the primary findings of
fact, or the Judge's evaluation of 'best interests'. Neither party has
urged me to go behind such findings. In all the circumstances it is
appropriate that I take the Judge's findings as cited above as a starting
point for my own consideration of the issues in the appeal.


8.   Necessarily the passage of time means that the Appellants' case needs
to be considered on the basis that the Second Appellant has now been
present in the UK, from birth, for 9 years and 6 months.


9.   In this context Mr Sowerby observed that the Second Appellant is
approaching her 10th birthday, at which point upon application for
registration she will be entitled to British citizenship pursuant to
section 1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981. Whilst this is correct,
in my judgement it does not avail her in the current proceedings. Until
such time as she may acquire British citizenship she remains subject to
immigration control and therefore not in any way presently exempted from
the regime of the Immigration Rules. Moreover, with regard to section
117B(6), the 'reasonableness' test would still apply in the context of the
First Appellant's case even if his daughter acquired British citizenship.
In any event, I must determine the appeals on the basis of matters as they
stand presently.


10.  Nonetheless, it is not entirely irrelevant that the structure of
domestic immigration and nationality law is such that a period of 10 years
residence in the UK is seen as significant enough for a child to warrant
the grant of citizenship irrespective of status during that period. The
Second Appellant's length of uninterrupted residence requires to be
considered within such framework and by reference to such parameters.


11.  Further to the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal, the
Appellants have now filed some further evidence by way of a bundle dated 4
April 2019. The bundle is entirely focused on the circumstances of the
Second Appellant, containing a supporting letter from her Year 4 Class
Teacher dated 4 April 2019, a school report card, various certificates of
achievement (attendance, 'star of the week', times tables, gymnastics, 'out
of hours' learning, reading, and choir), and various photographs showing
the Second Appellant in a school environment. I note that the certificates
are not confined to the recent past but date back to 2015, and the
photographs included photographs that show the Appellant at a younger age
than now. There is some small element of repetition as between these
documents and photographs and the materials that appeared in the
Appellants' bundle and supplementary bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.
For the avoidance of any doubt I have had regard to all bundles that have
been filed on behalf of the Appellants in these proceedings, whether
initially filed before the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.


12.  The recent letter from the Second Appellant's class teacher describes
her as "an enthusiastic member of the class", who "has thrived on the
curriculum set up which encourages partner talk to gather their ideas in a
verbal sense", and notes her excellent achievements in a new 'times-tables'
initiative; it is said that the Second Appellant "is where I expect her to
be at for a Year 4 standard", and observations are offered as to how she
might maintain progress and improve standards. In my judgement the only
matter of concern raised is done so in terms that suggest no major issues,
referring to behaviour that is far from uncommon in children of the Second
Appellant's age:

         "Behaviourally, [the Second Appellant] is displaying only minor
         level disruptions in class. She should ensure she is on task and
         focusing when demonstrations and models are being given. She should
         use her partner and group discussions for her talk. She sometimes
         will become distracted and distract others by talking when I am
         giving instructions and communicate through body language gestures
         with other seated further away from her. If this continues it will
         become to impact of her learning and understanding."


13.  The school report, dated 16 July 2018, portrays the Second Appellant
as essentially an entirely normal student, for the main part either
'managing comfortably within the standard' or 'capable and competent within
the standard' for the core subjects of the curriculum, generally able to
listen attentively but at times distracted, sensitive to the needs and
feelings of others, showing commitment to clubs including choir and
gymnastics, and well presented. She is described as having made good
progress through Year 3, and having matured and grown in confidence.
Attendance was over 98% and she was only late once.


14.  The First Appellant gave further oral evidence before me. He confirmed
the contents of his witness statement of 22 June 2018 (Appellants' main
bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, pages 3-5). In examination-in-chief
he was invited to comment on the possible reasonableness of his daughter
relocating to Nigeria. He said that the level of education in Nigeria could
not be compared with that in the UK; he stated that his daughter had
friends in the UK and they would have 'sleepovers'; she also has cousins in
the UK, and most of his family is in the UK and not in Nigeria; he
commented on her membership of a gymnastics club at school, and also her
involvement in the choir; he also stated that she was involved in a drama
group at church where she attended Sunday School. In conclusion he stated
"This is the only life she knows". He was not cross-examined.


15.  The First Appellant also stated that in the last week "we" had visited
the grave of another daughter who had died shortly after birth on 17 April
2012. He said that they had gone to say a few prayers, and "we visit every
year".


16.  The background to this latter matter is referenced in the materials on
file, including the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The First
Appellant's partner, the mother of the Second Appellant, was delivered of a
second daughter, Precious, on 15 April 2012. Unfortunately, there were
complications at the time of birth: the baby was born at home, was
unconscious and had breathing difficulties; she was taken to hospital where
she died on 17 April 2012. (Some of the details of this are set out in a
psychiatric report on the First Appellant dated 12 February 2015 prepared
in the context of civil proceedings - Appellants' main bundle pages 8-15.)
Precious's grave is at Camberwell New Cemetery. In his witness statement
the First Appellant referred to feeling "a great connection to my daughter
when I go to visit her grave", adding that the family "regularly visit her
grave on her birthday and special occasions to us" (paragraph 5).


17.  The psychiatric report dated 12 February 2015 refers to a diagnosis in
respect of the First Appellant of Persistent Complex Bereavement Disorder,
with an alternative diagnosis of a combination of Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder and Abnormal Grief. Treatment by way of counselling is
recommended. There is nothing before me as to what treatment if any has
been received, and no further medical or psychiatric evidence. The
psychiatrist notes "It is my understanding that [the First Appellant's]
Bereavement Disorder has not compromised his ability at work".


18.  The First Appellant and his partner brought a civil action for medical
negligence, which was settled in 2017. In this context it is recorded in
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the First Appellant stated
that the settlement was in the sum of �27,000. He stated before the First-
tier Tribunal at the hearing on 10 July 2018 that only �8000 was left, but
the Judge noted that he had produced no bank statements to demonstrate his
funds (paragraph 18). Nothing further has been produced before the Upper
Tribunal by the Appellants in respect of the family's financial
circumstances.


19.  The evidence on file variously refers to the First Appellant as an
electrical engineer (birth certificate of Second Appellant), and a handyman
(e.g. birth certificate of First Appellant's son, and psychiatrist's
report). The psychiatrist's report also refers to the First Appellant
having worked on building sites since coming to the UK. The First
Appellant's witness statement says little about his employment and
financial circumstances, save that he admits the fact that he was convicted
for possessing a fraudulent Biometric Residence Permit, stating that he had
obtained it in order to secure employment to support his family (paragraph
11). He also acknowledges that he receives support in the UK from family
and friends, but expresses doubt that they would offer regular support in
the event of his return to Nigeria (paragraph 14). In this latter context
he also states that he does not have any family or property in Nigeria,
where necessarily he has not lived since coming to the UK; he says he has
lost ties and connections and asserts that he "will be unable to obtain any
employment".


20.  As noted above, the First Appellant and his partner now also have a
son born on 11 October 2015.


Law: Discussion

21.  On the issue of reasonableness, in his submissions Mr Sowerby
emphasised: the Second Appellant was born in the UK; she had never been to
Nigeria; she was doing well in school; she was now 9 � years old, and was
approaching the date when she might apply to become a British citizen; that
she had lost a sibling in the UK and it was clearly important to the family
that there was a proximity to Precious's grave. He essentially argued that
the combination of these circumstances rendered it not reasonable to expect
the Second Appellant to leave the UK.


22.  Mr Lindsay, on behalf of the Secretary of State, emphasised the
Supreme Court's endorsement of passages in the Respondent's then applicable
IDI's in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. In this context my attention was
directed to the following passages:

         (i) "The list of relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para
         10 above) seems to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the
         context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."
         (paragraph 17).

         (ii) "The President also cited (para 16) relevant guidance
         contained in an Immigration Directorate Instruction ("IDI") of the
         Home Office entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and
         Private Life: Ten Year Routes", published in August 2015, extracts
         of which were appended to the judgment (Appendix 2). They included
         a section headed "Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British
         citizen child to leave the UK?", under which were set out a number
         of "relevant considerations", such as risk to the child's health,
         family ties in the UK and the likelihood of integration into life
         in another country and:

             "b. Whether the child would  be  leaving  the  UK  with  their
         parent(s)

             It is generally  the  case  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
             interests to  remain  with  their  parent(s).  Unless  special
             factors apply, it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),  particularly  if
             the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK."

         There was no reference in the list to the criminality or
         immigration record of the parents as a relevant factor." (paragraph
         10).


23.  Mr Lindsay submitted that this was a clear endorsement by the Supreme
Court - emphasising that in circumstances where Lord Carnwath gave a single
judgement for the Court there was no qualification or caveat from any other
Judge - of the notion that it will generally be reasonable to expect a
child to leave the UK with his/her parent/s.


24.  This submission precipitated a discussion as to the approach to be
taken to the issue of 'reasonableness', and the significance of the
'powerful reasons' test referred to in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at
paragraph 49. Mr Lindsay argued that the endorsement by the Supreme Court
of the IDIs was such that even where a child had been present in the UK for
7 years it would generally be reasonable to expect him/her to leave the UK
with his/her parent/s unless the applicant/appellant could demonstrate
special factors - i.e. the default position would be to expect the child to
go, and it was for the applicant or appellant to demonstrate that the
default position did not apply. Mr Sowerby submitted that any presumption
went the other way: some powerful reason would require to be shown by the
Respondent to justify the interference with the child's private life
inherent in leaving the UK with his/her parent/s.


25.  In support of Mr Lindsay's submission it may be noted that it was the
approach of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) to essay "a simpler and more
direct approach" rather than attempt to analyse (and thereby reconcile
and/or disapprove) "impressive but conflicting judgement" (paragraph 14).
The intended adoption of a 'simple and direct' approach lends itself to a
reading of the decision in KO (Nigeria) as an invitation to disregard the
complexity of earlier jurisprudence. Mr Lindsay directed my attention to
the seemingly cautionary reference to MA (Pakistan) at the end of paragraph
19. (However, in this context it is to be noted that there is also an
approving reference at paragraph 17.)


26.  In my judgement in expressing approval at paragraph 17 of the "list of
relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance" the Supreme Court in KO
(Nigeria) was not limiting itself to the single factor at sub-paragraph b
quoted at paragraph 10. Additional relevant factors are paraphrased at
paragraph 10 - "risk to the child's health, family ties in the UK and the
likelihood of integration into life in another country" - and may be seen
in fuller form in Appendix 2 of the decision in PD (Sri Lanka) [2016] UKUT
108 (IAC) being discussed.


27.  It seems to me likely that sub-paragraph b was quoted at paragraph 10
of KO (Nigeria) because it makes express reference to the concept of
reasonableness. Be that as it may, in KO (Nigeria) the context of the
reference to the IDIs was primarily to highlight that "the criminality or
immigration record of the parents" did not feature in the list of relevant
factors - the issue of the extent to which the conduct of parents might
impact upon 'reasonableness' under section 117B(6) being at the core of the
consideration of the Supreme Court.


28.  Accordingly, in my judgement a presumptive quality is not to be
attributed to the policy represented by the IDIs considered in PD (Sri
Lanka), and in turn KO (Nigeria), on the basis of the wording at sub-
paragraph b - "it will generally be reasonable to expect a child to leave
the UK with their parent(s)" - or otherwise. Sub-paragraph b is just one of
a number of factors listed in the IDIs; it is not overtly asserted in the
IDIs - and otherwise it seems to me that there is no justification for
concluding - that it is to be accorded such significant weight that other
factors are negated or significantly diminished in the event that departure
would be in the company of a parent/s.


29.  This is further illustrated by the following passage from the IDIs,
(set out in a quotation from Appendix 2 of PD (Sri Lanka)), which I find
cannot be reconciled with sub-paragraph b if that sub-paragraph is to be
deemed to indicate a presumption in the policy.

         "In a separate section, paragraph 11.2.4 of the IDI poses the
following question:

         "Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British citizen child  to
      leave the UK?"

         The following moderately prolix answer, which invites consideration
         in all its fullness, is supplied:

             "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in
             the UK for a  continuous  period  of  at  least  the  7  years
             immediately preceding the date of application, recognises that
             over time children start to put down roots and integrate  into
             life in the UK, to the extent that being required to leave the
             UK may be unreasonable. The longer the child  has  resided  in
             the UK, the more the balance will begin to swing in  terms  of
             it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK, and
             strong reasons will be required in order to refuse a case with
             continuous UK residence of more than 7 years.


             The decision maker must  consider  whether,  in  the  specific
             circumstances of the case, it would be  reasonable  to  expect
             the child to live in another country.


             The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each
             child in the UK in the family individually, and also consider
             all the facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision
             maker should also engage with any specific issues explicitly
             raised by the family, by each child or on behalf of each
             child."


30.  There is no suggestion therein that the "strong reasons... required in
order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than 7 years"
are provided by simple reason of departure from the UK being in the company
of a parent or parents.


31.  Nor would such a position be consistent with the history and
development of policy in this area: see the 'ancestry' set out in PD (Sri
Lanka), referred to in KO (Nigeria) at paragraph 8) - e.g. there is no
suggestion in the Ministerial statement quoted at paragraph 9 of PD (Sri
Lanka) that where the ties established by a child over 7 or more years in
the UK outweighed other considerations, departure from the UK was still
appropriate if it were to be in the company of parents; rather, it was
considered that in such circumstances the whole of the family should be
allowed to remain in the UK. Similarly in respect of the development of
domestic jurisprudence, where for the main part it is at the very least
implicit and often explicit that the issue relates to a child whose parent
or parents face removal from the UK and who will therefore be accompanying
the child if unable to establish a basis to remain by reference to the
child's length of residence and ties in the UK.


32.  I was provided with a copy of the most recent IDI's: Family Migration:
Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private
Life: 10-Year Routes (Version 4.0), published on 11 April 2019. The same
'tension' as between sub-paragraph b and other passages in the earlier
IDIs, is again apparent. In referring to KO (Nigeria) it is stated "The
determination sets out that if a child's parents are both expected to leave
the UK, the child is normally expected to leave with them, unless there is
evidence that it would not be reasonable." However, it is to be noted that
this is preceded by this passage:

         "A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child..., or a
         non-British citizen child, who has lived in the UK for a continuous
         period of at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
         application, which recognises that over time children start to put
         down roots and to integrate into life in the UK. The starting point
         is that we would not normally expect a qualifying child to leave
         the UK. It is normally in a child's best interest for the whole
         family to remain together, which means if the child is not expected
         to leave, then the parent or parents or primary carer of the child
         will also not be expected to leave the UK."


33.  The first of these passages broadly reflects sub-paragraph b of the
previous IDI, and the submission advanced by Mr Lindsay. The second passage
does not.


34.  It is perhaps beyond the scope of this Decision - and certainly was
not the subject of submissions - whether there is a legal requirement that
policy be understandable (in the sense that its meaning be transparent and
coherent). Ultimately, the appeals herein are to be determined by reference
to legal principle irrespective of the Respondent's most recently drafted
version of his policy.


35.  Be that as it may, on balance it seems to me that both versions of the
IDIs are essentially urging upon the decision-maker an evaluation of
'reasonableness' taking into account a number of relevant factors -
including whether or not the child would be leaving the UK with a parent or
parents; but neither version is suggesting a particular outcome is
indicated by such a circumstance. In so far as individual passages within
the IDIs might be interpreted as suggesting such an outcome, this is not
reconcilable with the wider terms of the IDIs and/or otherwise does not
reflect that such is the Respondent's policy with any degree of clarity or
certainty.


36.  In all the circumstances I am not persuaded that either the previous
or the current version of the IDIs indicates that the Respondent's policy
is to deem it generally reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the UK
if he or she is to leave in the company of a parent or parents.


37.  More particularly, I am not persuaded that the endorsement of the
previous IDIs by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) was in substance an
endorsement of a general presumption that it will be reasonable to expect a
qualifying child to leave the UK with his or her parent or parents.


38.  For the avoidance of any doubt, I am unable to identify anything in
either JG (Turkey) or AB and AO that would support a different view.


39.  Further to this it is be noted that both in the context of paragraph
276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B(6) a decision-maker is ultimately concerned
with Article 8. In a case based on a period of 7 years residence by a non-
British child it may readily be seen that the low threshold of the first
two Razgar questions is likely to be met - there will almost inevitably be
some element of private life upon which a decision resulting in departure
from the UK will impact. To that extent the 'reasonableness' element in
each of 276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B(6) is essentially a manifestation of
'proportionality'. This is the more manifest under section 117B(6) where it
is in terms provided that the Article 8(1) protected rights will outweigh
other public interest considerations if the sub-section is satisfied. See
similarly paragraph EX.1.(a) of Appendix FM, and recall that Appendix FM
"reflects how, under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, the balance
will be struck between the right to respect for private and family life and
the legitimate aims of protecting national security, public safety and the
economic well-being of the UK; the prevention of disorder and crime; the
protection of health or morals; and the protection of the rights and
freedom of others (and in doing so also reflects the relevant public
interest considerations as set out in Part 5A of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002)" (Appendix FM at GEN.1.1).


40.  Indeed it seems to me that the concept of reasonableness in so far as
it relates to the particular circumstances of the relevant qualifying child
under each of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), paragraph EX.1.(a), and section
117B(6) is congruent with proportionality. If it is reasonable to expect a
child to leave the UK, a decision to that effect or with that consequence
is proportionate at least so far as the child is concerned; if it is not
reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK, a decision to that effect
or with that consequence is disproportionate. I cannot envisage a situation
that falls between the notions of 'reasonableness' and 'proportionality'.


41.  The jurisprudence of Article 8 is such that whilst it is for an
applicant to demonstrate an interference, it is then for the public body -
in this case the Secretary of State for the Home Department - to justify
the interference as proportionate.


42.  The reference in MA (Pakistan) at paragraph 49 to "powerful reasons"
in so far as it suggests an onus on the Respondent is no more than a
reflection of the jurisprudence that it is for the Respondent to justify
the interference. In so far as it is suggested that such justification must
be pursuant to powerful reasons, this is no more than a recognition of the
strength of private life likely inherent in a child having spent at least 7
years in the UK. The extent to which interference will be justifiable as
proportionate, will inevitably depend upon a combination of the strength of
the family and/or private life, and the extent of the interference;
necessarily the better the quality and/or the more extreme the
interference, the stronger the justification for interference will require
to be - i.e. the more powerful the reasons.


43.  In this context it seems to me that the discussion in Azimi-Moayed and
others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197
(IAC) remains valid. In particular it is to be noted that 7 years residence
was not considered inevitably favourably determinative, but that a nuanced
consideration of the particular age and experience of the child was
required - the example being offered that 7 years from the age of 4 would
likely be more significant than 7 years from birth.


44.  Accordingly I consider that the reference to 'powerful reasons' in MA
(Pakistan) is no more than a reflection of the established jurisprudence. I
do not consider that it is necessary or helpful - or indeed that it was
intended - that it be elevated to some sort of legal presumption in favour
of the qualifying child. Indeed the context of each of paragraph
276ADE(1)(iv), paragraph EX.1.(a), and section 117B(6) in the case of a non-
British citizen child is that the question of 'reasonableness' only arises
upon 7 years residence; plainly the gateway to the question cannot be in
itself also the presumptive answer to the question.


45.  In such circumstances I do not accept either: Mr Lindsay's submission
to the effect that KO (Nigeria) is authority, and/or the Respondent's
policy provides, that there is a presumption that it will generally be
reasonable for a non-British child resident in the UK for 7 years to leave
the UK with a parent/s who has no leave to remain; or Mr Sowerby's
submission that there is a presumption in favour of such a child. Each case
requires to be considered on the basis of its own particular facts within
the framework of the established jurisprudence, such jurisprudence
recognising that where Article 8 rights are engaged it is for the
Respondent to justify any interference therewith as proportionate.


46.  In this context, the 'simple and direct' approach adopted by the
Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) was in resolving the tension between previous
cases as to the scope of the 'reasonableness' test - and in particular the
issue identified by Lord Justice Elias in MA (Pakistan) at paragraph 36,
e.g. see now AB and AO at paragraph 58. This was not to negate the earlier
jurisprudence as to proportionality, either generally or in the context of
children.


Law: Concluded Summary

47.  Picking up from paragraph 14 of the 'Error of Law' decision - with
which both representatives indicated broad agreement - and adding in my
conclusions from the discussion set out above, I make the following
observations as to the approach to the issue of 'reasonableness' in respect
of a non-British citizen child resident in the UK for 7 years under any of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), paragraph EX.1.(a) of Appendix FM, or section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act:

         (i) The evaluation is one of what is reasonable for the child.

         (ii) 'Reasonable' is congruent with the concept of proportionality:
         is it disproportionate to expect the child to leave the UK?

         (iii) The child's best interests are a primary, but not  paramount,
    consideration.

         (iv) Although there is in principle no reason to exclude the public
         interest considerations pursuant  to  section  117B  in  evaluating
         proportionality, bearing in mind the Zoumbas  principle,  that  the
         child is not to  be  blamed  for  matters  for  which  she  is  not
         responsible, and also bearing in mind that  the  focus  is  on  the
         child, any adverse factors arising from the conduct of the parent/s
         are not to be weighed in the balance as part of  any  justification
         interfering with the child's Article 8 rights.

         (v) Nonetheless the 'real world' situation of where the  parent  or
         parents are expected to be is to be  factored  in  to  the  overall
         consideration. This will usually mean that  the  ultimate  question
         will be - is it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent
         with no right to remain to the country of origin. (This is  subject
         to the caveat identified in  JG  (Turkey)  in  respect  of  section
         117B(6), that consideration of reasonableness of relocation of  the
         child may avail an applicant with genuine and  subsisting  parental
         responsibility even if in practical terms the child is unlikely  to
         relocate outside the UK.)


         (vi) There is no presumption that it will generally  be  reasonable
         for a non-British child resident in the UK for 7 years to leave the
         UK with a parent/s who has no leave to remain.


         (vii) There is no presumption in favour of  a  non-British  citizen
         child resident in the UK for 7 years.


         (viii) Each case requires to be considered on the basis of its  own
         particular  facts  within  the   framework   of   the   established
         jurisprudence, such jurisprudence recognising that where Article  8
         rights are  engaged  it  is  for  the  Respondent  to  justify  any
         interference therewith as proportionate.


Determination of the Appeal

48.  I approach the question of reasonableness on the premise that the
Second Appellant would be going to Nigeria in the 'real world' circumstance
of her parents having no right to remain in the UK.


49.  Further to this, I do not accept the assertion made by the First
Appellant that he will be unable to obtain any employment, and will
otherwise have significant difficulties in re-establishing himself in his
country of nationality. In this context I note that the First-tier Tribunal
found that he "is likely to have sufficient funds to establish himself in
Nigeria" (paragraph 18); the Appellants have filed no evidence to
contradict this finding or otherwise to show that the family has exhausted
the court settlement, or any other funds they may have acquired.


50.  I also essentially adopt the First Tier Tribunal's finding to the
effect that those friends and family who are said to offer financial
support in the UK will more likely than not be able and willing to continue
to offer support until such time as the First Appellant is able to support
his family by himself. No supporting evidence is offered from any such
persons declaring that they would not be willing to provide support, and no
sustainable reasons is offered by the Appellants as to why such support
would likely stop if they were to leave the UK.


51.  In the circumstances I find that the Second Appellant would be
relocating to Nigeria in the company of both of her parents who may
reasonably be expected to be able to secure for her the means of support,
and will be able to continue to provide her with a supportive family home
and parental love and care.


52.  It is uncontroversial that in general terms it is in the Second
Appellant's best interests to remain in the care of both of her parents. As
regards geographical location, in my judgement it is in the Second
Appellant's best interests that she remain in the UK. The evidence suggests
that she is well established in school; whilst any relocation to another
school, including another school in Nigeria, may ultimately be effectively
managed by the Second Appellant with the support of her parents, it will
inevitably have some adverse impact, at least in the short term, on her. I
also consider it a reasonable inference that any such impact will be
exacerbated by the broader issue of relocation to an environment that is
essentially alien to the Second Appellant - who has only ever known life in
the UK. Again, whilst the impact will be ameliorated by the love, support,
and care of her parents, the disruption will more likely than not be
adverse to a significant extent.


53.  In this context, and generally, although there is limited supporting
evidence in relation to the Second Appellant's social life, I accept that
it is more likely than not that she has developed the normal friendships of
a girl of her age. I base this in part on the essentially normal and
regular engagement in school activities (including gym club and choir), her
church attendance (including involvement in the drama group), and the First
Appellant's reference to his daughter enjoying sleep-overs with friends
either at their homes or her own home. Necessarily such friendships will
not be able to continue in their present form in the event of the Second
Appellant leaving the UK, even if there is some facility to remain in
contact through social media.


54.  I have noted and taken into account what has been said by the First
Appellant concerning the significance of visits to the grave of the Second
Appellant's sister. It seems to me that such visits are made occasionally -
quite literally on the occasion of the anniversary of Precious's birth -
rather than frequently. I do not doubt the significance and importance to
the First Appellant both of the fact of such visits, and of the fact that
such visits are possible because of the proximity of the grave - a matter
that would be lost in the event of relocation to Nigeria. However, I am not
persuaded that this has the same resonance for the Second Appellant given
her age at the time of Precious's death (approximately 2� years), and that
in the unfortunate circumstances she never developed a sibling
relationship. As such, in considering the circumstances of the Second
Appellant, I attach only the most marginal of weight to this particular
factor.


55.  Be that as it may, the subjective significance of the Second
Appellant's private life in the UK is pithily encapsulated by her father's
observation that "This is the only life she knows". The objective
significance is underscored by the circumstance emphasised by Mr Sowerby -
that she approaches completion of the period of time at which Parliament
has considered it appropriate that sustained presence in the UK be
acknowledged by the grant of citizenship.


56.  Against these elements of established private life, the Respondent by
way of justification for interference only really offers the submission
that there is some sort of presumption in law and/or fact that it is
reasonable to expect the Second Appellant to accompany her parents to
Nigeria. For the reasons explained above I do not accept that there is any
such presumption.


57.  I have had regard to the 'public interest considerations' so far as
they relate to the Second Appellant. I acknowledge that the maintenance of
effective immigration control is in the public interest, and that
ordinarily this is achieved through the consistent application of a
published set of rules. However, this is not inherently a matter to be
weighed against the Second Appellant in circumstances where it is in
substance her case that she meets the requirements of paragraph
276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. The Second Appellant speaks English
and is making good progress in the education system. As a child, the Second
Appellant cannot be expected to be financially independent; the extent to
which she might be a burden on taxpayers will be a product of the industry
of her parents in the event that they be permitted to remain in the UK.
Whilst it is to be acknowledged that the Second Appellant has not had any
lawful basis to be present in the UK, this is not a matter of her devising.


58.  In all the circumstances I find that the Respondent has not offered
any good reason to justify interfering with the private life that the
Second Appellant has established in the UK during the first 9� years of her
life. In my judgement any interference in the Second Appellant's private
life would be disproportionate. In all of the circumstances I find that it
would not be reasonable to expect the Second Appellant to leave the UK.


59.  Necessarily, the implication for the First Appellant is that the
public interest does not require his removal.


60.  Both appeals are allowed on human rights grounds, with reference to
Article 8 of the ECHR, accordingly.


Notice of Decision

61.  Appeal HU/11922/2017 is allowed.

62.  Appeal HU/11926/2017 is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




Fee Award

Although I  have  allowed  both  appeals,  to  a  significant  extent  I  am
influenced in so  doing  by  the  total  length  of  time  that  the  Second
Appellant has been present in the UK. This has accrued  to  some  extent  by
virtue of the appeal process. In such circumstances I do not  consider  that
a fee award is appropriate in respect of either Appellant.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

                                    ANNEX

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION


(The following is the text of the  reasons  given  in  the  'Error  of  Law'
Decision herein.)


1.   There was an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Murray promulgated on 14 August 2018 dismissing these linked appeals.  In
consequence, the decisions in the appeals require to be set aside and
remade.  After discussion with the representatives I am satisfied that the
prudent approach to remaking the decisions in the appeals is to await any
development or clarification of the approach to be taken in light of KO
(Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 further to an appeal presently listed before the
President of the Tribunal on 13 February 2019.  This matter accordingly
stands adjourned.


2.   The Appellants are father and daughter with the respective dates of
birth of 21 June 1980 and 22 October 2009.  There are other members of the
family unit present in the UK, specifically the partner of the First
Appellant (and mother of the Second Appellant), and a further child,
presently aged 3.  I am given to understand that only two members of the
family have lodged appeals against decisions that affect each of them for
reasons of cost.  It is expected, at least by the family, that the position
of the other family members will be considered and determined by the
Secretary of State in light of any outcome in these proceedings.


3.   The First Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2005, entering
pursuant to a 6 month visit visa.  He has remained without permission
thereafter.  The Second Appellant was born in the United Kingdom.


4.   The issues before the First-tier Tribunal which, given the
circumstances of the disposal of the error of law issue and the requirement
to remake the decision in due course, I do not presently set out or explore
in any great detail, were in the main focussed on the circumstances of the
Second Appellant.  It was the Appellants' case that the Second Appellant
satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration
Rules, and moreover that section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 applied to the benefit of the First Appellant.  In
essence, therefore, the key issue was whether or not it was reasonable to
expect the Second Appellant to leave the UK.


5.   In respect of the Second Appellant's circumstances, the Judge made the
following findings:

"The second Appellant is now 8� years old.  She has lived in the UK all her
life.  She is in year 3 at school.  The Appellant states that the standards
of education in Nigeria are not as good as in the UK.  Whilst this may be
so, I find that given her young age she will be adaptable to life in
Nigeria, particularly in view of the fact that this is where both her
parents are from.  Further, she has not reached a critical stage of her
education.  I have taken account of the fact that 7 years residence is a
pointer to where a child's best interests lie and accept that it may
marginally be in her best interests to remain in the UK due only to
education here." (paragraph 20).


6.   It seems to me that these findings were essentially an acceptance of
the matters advanced on the Appellants' behalf: see for example paragraph
12 of the Appellants' Skeleton Argument dated 10 July 2018: "[A] is now 8�
years old.  She has lived in the UK all her life.  She has never left the
UK.  She has her own private life in the UK and strong connections in the
UK and is in year 3 at St Patrick's Catholic Primary School.  She
predominantly speaks English."


7.   However, notwithstanding the apparent acceptance of the primary facts
relied upon by the Appellants in respect of the Second Appellant's
circumstances, it is common ground before me that the First-tier Tribunal
Judge thereafter fell into error.


8.   Paragraphs 21-23 of the Decision are in these terms:

"21. The Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 Elias LJ stated at paragraph 103
that the fact that the parents are overstayers and have no right to remain
in their own right can thereafter be weighed in the proportionality balance
against allowing the child to remain, but that is after a recognition that
the child's seven years of residence is a significant factor pointing the
other way.

22.  In relation to the public interest, therefore, the [First] Appellant
has admitted fraud.  This weighs heavily in the balance on the public
interest side of the scales.  He has been here without any form of leave
since 2005 after he arrived as a visitor and did not return.  He only
attempted to regularise his status in January 2017 and has a poor
immigration history.  I heard evidence from ... the Vicar from St Paul's
Church who gave evidence to his attendance at church and to his role as an
assistant church warden.  I accept that he attends and helps in the church.

23.  Taking all relevant factors into account and weighing them in the
balance, I find that the second Appellant's private life ties here are
outweighed by the public interest in removal in view of the first
Appellant's poor immigration history and fraudulent behaviour.  I find that
it would be reasonable for her to go to Nigeria in view of her young age,
her parent's [sic.] connections with that country and her father's
immigration history."


9.   The approach evident therefrom, significantly the factoring in of the
"father's immigration history" in assessing whether it would be reasonable
for the Second Appellant to go to Nigeria is incompatible with the correct
approach now identified in KO (Nigeria). It is on this basis that it is
common ground before me - and I accept - that the linked decisions of the
First-tier Tribunal Judge were in error of law. (It is to be acknowledged
that given the dates the Judge would not have had the benefit of
consideration of the decision of KO (Nigeria), but that is to no avail.)


10.  The decisions in the appeals require to be remade, applying the
correct law. Mr Kotas on behalf of the Secretary of State informed me that
there is a case listed before the President on 13 February 2019 in which it
is expected guidance will follow as to the approach to cases such as the
instant case in light of the decision in KO (Nigeria).  He also suggested
that there was a possibility that a further case was to be linked to it to
allow a wider scope of consideration of potential issues.  Although he was
unable to furnish me with any greater particulars, I accepted what he said.
 On that basis, it is suggested that this Tribunal should not proceed to
remake the decision forthwith.


11.  Mr Georget, who adopts that approach too, further invited my
consideration to the fact that the Appellants might thereby be afforded an
opportunity to file further evidence in the appeal.  When pressed on this
he suggested that a report might be commissioned to say something of the
impact on the Appellant of possible removal.  However, no concrete steps
appear to have been taken in this regard and I remind myself that in the
ordinary course of events Appellants are expected to be in a position to
proceed to remaking decisions in appeals immediately after the error of
law.  Otherwise, Mr Georget directed my attention to the passage of time
since the previous decision which, given the age of the Appellant, he
suggested was a more significant period of time than it might be for an
older person - noting also that during this time she had commenced a new
school year.  However, no new specific event or new circumstance was
otherwise identified.


12.  In my judgement the matters raised by Mr Georget in respect of
possibly obtaining further evidence were too vague and speculative to
justify an adjournment in themselves.


13.  I have given careful consideration to the appropriateness or otherwise
of adjourning this matter to await guidance from another part of the
Tribunal - albeit the most senior member of the Tribunal.  In this context,
I am mindful of the observations and comments of Lord Carnwath giving the
judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), in particular at paragraph
14:

"It is profoundly unsatisfactory that a set of provisions which was
intended to provide clear guidelines to limit the scope for judicial
evaluation should have led to such disagreement among some of the most
experienced Upper Tribunal and Court of Appeal Judges.  Rather than attempt
a detailed analysis of all these impressive but conflicting judgments, I
hope I will be forgiven for attempting a simpler and more direct approach."


14.  Plainly, what is set out in KO Nigeria is  intended  to  reconcile  any
    conflict in the authorities by offering a simple and direct approach to
    'reasonableness'. What is required is

         an evaluation of what is reasonable for the child;

         bearing in mind best interests;

         and bearing in mind the Zoumbas principle, that the child is not to
         be blamed for matters for which she is not responsible;

         but in the real world situation of where the parent or parents  are
    expected to be;


         which usually mean that the ultimate  question  will  be  -  is  it
         reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right
         to remain to the country of origin.


15.  I hesitate to conceive of what might yet further be set out by  way  of
    simplification or clarification in  any  forthcoming  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal.


16.  However, during the course of discussion some doubt as to the
correctness of such a straightforward approach was aired by reference to
the issue of how - if at all - the very poor immigration history (or in
some cases criminal conduct) of a parental applicant should be factored in,
or whether it could never sound in a case once section 117B(6) was
satisfied.  There may also be scope for discussion as to where KO leaves
the 'powerful reasons' test referred to in MA (Pakistan).


17.  On balance I was just persuaded that the more prudent approach was to
await the outcome of any guidance from the President.


18.  Accordingly, the appeal is adjourned to be listed in due course for a
further hearing to remake the decision in the appeal with the benefit of
any guidance from the President.


19.  The parties are at liberty to file and serve any further evidence upon
which they might wish to rely, and are at liberty to file and serve any
written submissions upon which they might wish to rely in light of any
guidance from the President or otherwise.


                              -    End  -
