
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11438/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2016                  |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Celestine sunday ikpade-iwediuno
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Khalid, Counsel instructed by Chancery CS
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal ruling that the decision of the Secretary of State  made
on 20 April 2016 refusing the  applicant  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom was unlawful and had to be decided again.

It is a feature of this case that a similar decision was made by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Phull in November last year when she decided that a  decision
was not in accordance with the law because the Secretary of  State  did  not
give proper regard for the interests of a  child  or  children.   I  am  not
seized with any possible appeal against Judge  Phull's  decision  but  I  do
make the point that the powers of the Tribunal have  been  changed  recently
and it may be that a different statutory regime operated  when  Judge  Phull
was considering the appeal. Nothing that I say here  is  to  be  seen  as  a
criticism of her decision.

In the case before me the only permissible grounds of appeal are  those  set
out under Section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in
their present form effective from  October  2014,  subject  to  transitional
provisions, and it is a feature of the "new" grounds of appeal, if I can  so
describe them, that that the Tribunal can no longer treat  as  a  ground  of
appeal the contention that the decision was not in accordance with the  law.
 Notwithstanding this change, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  this  case
effectively decided that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

In my judgment the decision is wrong and  has  to  be  set  aside  for  that
reason because it was a decision determining a ground that the Tribunal  had
no power to consider.  But even if I am  wrong  about  that  the  judge  was
wrong  because,  although  it  is  feature  of   this   case   that   little
consideration has been given to the interests  of  the  child  there  is  no
reason to think the Secretary  of  State  had  the  appropriate  information
before her. The Tribunal can decide the best interests of the child.

The Tribunal has been reminded of the decision in JO and Others (Section  55
duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) where the President of  this  Tribunal
emphasised, not for the first time, that the obligations  under  Section  55
of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 mean what they say  and
that  the  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a  properly  reasoned  decision
concerning the welfare of the child where there is evidence to support  such
a decision. However the decision in JO also made it  clear  that  ordinarily
the Secretary of State's duties are limited to  making  a  decision  on  the
information that  has  been  given.  Although  there  might  conceivably  be
occasions where, in order to guard the welfare of a child, the Secretary  of
State is under a duty to make further enquiries  that  is  certainly  not  a
general or freestanding obligation. Rather it is a necessary  "backstop"  to
prevent a decision that is harmful to a child.

In this case the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  should  have  made  a  decision
doing the best he could on the evidence that he had got.  Ironically  it  is
perhaps as well that he did not take that course because  it  is  not  clear
that a bundle of evidence about the circumstances of the child had  actually
found its way onto the papers.  Evidence  had  been  prepared  and  was  not
considered by the Judge but I am not able to say that  it  was  ever  before
him.

It is quite clear to me that the decision needs to  be  set  aside  and  the
case needs to be decided again, I  find  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
actual merits of the appeal have only been looked at once by the  First-tier
Tribunal. It was facts relating  to  the  same  applicant  but  a  different
decision that was dealt with on the previous  occasion.   It  is  absolutely
clear to me that the proper Tribunal for dealing with this at least  at  the
first instance is the First-tier Tribunal where proper consideration can  be
given to the evidence that the parties seek to produce.

On the last occasion  it  was  dealt  with  on  the  papers.   That  is  not
appropriate for a case such as this and I  direct  that  there  be  an  oral
hearing because this case is not suitable for consideration on the papers.

I further direct that the case be heard again in  the  First-tier  Tribunal;
that the original Appellant, the present Respondent, do prepare and serve  a
fresh paginated bundle containing all the documents on which he  intends  to
rely including witness statements to stand as evidence-in-chief without  the
need for further questions no later than ten days before the date fixed  for
hearing; no interpreter is required.  Time estimate of two  hours.   If  the
original Appellant neglects to comply  with  these  directions  then  it  is
likely that the Tribunal will make  a  decision  on  the  evidence  that  is
before it which may not be what the Appellant wants to achieve.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2017                |





