
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11739/2015
      HU/11745/2015
      HU/11748/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Liverpool                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 August 2017                   |On 5 September 2017                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                       Master KITM, Miss MBNM, Mr MIM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                           v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Adewusi, Crown & Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer

                 _______________________________

                 DECISION & REASONS
                 _______________________

1. The appeals came before me for an error of law hearing on 28 April 2017.
In a decision and reasons dated 22 May 2017, I concluded that the First
tier Tribunal Judge had erred materially in law and I adjourned the appeals
for a hearing de novo. A copy of that decision is appended.

2. The resumed appeals came before me for hearing in Liverpool on 4 August
2017, when I heard evidence from the Sponsor and her husband, [NA] and
submissions from both parties. I have recorded the evidence and submissions
in full in my record of proceedings.

Hearing

3. The Sponsor confirmed the contents of her statement, signed at the date
of the hearing. She stated that in respect of the available accommodation
that there were 3 large bedrooms and 2 sitting rooms and that it was
envisaged that the children would sleep in two rooms - one for the 2 boys
and one for her daughter. When cross-examined she stated that she joined
her husband in the UK in January 2014 and that at that time, her children
were living with her sister, Juliet, who lives in Benin city. It was put to
her that in her witness statement she said that the children were living
with her sister but at the last hearing she said that the children were
living with her cousin, Godwin since December 2016 and that they had had
problems with her sister. It was also put to her that in her husband's
witness statement dated 1 June 2016 he said that then they were living with
her cousin. The Sponsor stated that their problems had started in June and
that she thought they moved in July/August but still had some of their
stuff there e.g. clothes until December.

4. The Sponsor stated that the children were now living on their own in
Benin City on Eastman St. The eldest is 17 and they had been on their own
since December 2016 when Godwin found a house for them. She said that the
eldest had just finished his exams and the younger two are going to school.
She said that she made the decision as to which schools they attend. The
Sponsor said that she had been back to Nigeria in February 2017. From
examination of the passports, there was an entry clearance stamp on 8.2.17
to Lagos and exit on 20.217 in the Sponsor's husband's passport. The
Sponsor's passport shows re-entry to UK on 21.2.17. The Sponsor stated that
the purpose of the visit was to stay with her children and that they lived
with them for 2 weeks in Benin and had slept at their house for a couple of
nights. The Sponsor stated that they had stayed with her uncle because she
was worried about her husband being kidnapped. On the other nights the
children came to her uncle's house to stay with her and her husband.

5. The Sponsor stated that she had started to work in the UK in November
2014 and had worked since that time although she had changed her job. She
had lived with her husband since her arrival and prior to that she had
lived at 30 Irogwe St. in Benin. She stated that she had not applied for
her children to come with her at the same time because her husband could
not meet the financial requirements of the Rules. In re-examination, Mr
Adewusi asked why she had concerns as to her husband's safety in Benin and
she stated that the area of Benin where her children live is not safe and
as a white man there are not many there and the area her uncle lived in is
more posh. She did not want her husband to have problems as a foreigner. In
respect of their living conditions, she stated that they had a mattress on
the floor where they sleep. This is apparent from the photographs of her
visit. She said that the children could not stay with her uncle because he
is married with a wife and children.

6. The Sponsor's husband, [NA] then gave evidence and confirmed the
contents of his statement. In cross-examination by Mr McVeety, he was asked
to confirm whether the reason he amended his statement was because the
children are living by themselves now, which he confirmed. When asked when
the children left the Sponsor's sister he stated that he was not sure but
he thought it was in 2015 if he remembered right. [NA] confirmed that they
went to Nigeria in February 2017 and that they had stayed with a family
member - one of the Appellant's uncles. He also confirmed that the children
came to stay with them at that time. He said in response to the question as
to how often they spoke to the children on the phone that there was not
always power and it can go down for a couple of days. [NA] said he was
still employed in the same job since 2007.

7. In re-examination by Mr Adewusi he said that he did not apply for the
children to come at the same time as the Sponsor because his wages were not
sufficient in terms of the immigration laws, but they hoped the Sponsor
could start work straight away and could then apply when they had enough
money. He said it took about a year for her to find work and in the
meantime he was the only provider and they had to save up. He confirmed
that the children are living on their own. [NA] said that his stepson
passed out on the street last week as he was not eating as the person
supposed to be giving them food was not doing that. He added that one of
their aunts belted them: she is from Lagos and they were staying in her
family's house. [NA] said that he had had stern words with her when he
found his stepdaughter crying; that he had heard argument and slaps and
then when she came in crying he had asked her. He said that apparently it
happened to the youngest son as well but he went outside so he did not get
the chance to see him. When asked who made the decision about the schooling
of the children he said that he was him and the Sponsor. [NA] said that
everything that is needed they arrange and that they tell the children if
it does not happen to tell them but the children are scared to tell them as
they are scared of being belted.

8. In response to my questions, [NA] confirmed that he and his wife are
paying for the children's accommodation and that they transfer money via a
man rather than Western Union because it is cheaper ie. he charges �10 -
and they send �200-�300 every month depending on the exchange rate. [NA]
said that he sends the money to his wife's cousin, Godwin and his wife do
the shopping for the children and take it to them. He said that they left
rice for the children but Godwin and his wife took it. He said that he and
his wife had met on the internet and then in Manchester. He was asked again
about when the children moved to live from Juliet to Godwin and whether
this was in 2015 or 2016 and he said that he has a very bad memory, that he
suffers from depression and has had a breakdown.

9. Further to my questions, Mr McVeety asked what Godwin's wife is called,
to which he replied that she is called Patricia. He was then asked why the
Western Union transfers are all in the name of Patricia not Godwin and he
said that this was because it will be her who picks the money up and that
she takes the ID and everything. Mr McVeety said that on those documents
there is a question Patricia needs to ask and that is: what is her sister's
name? The answer is Mabel but Mabel is not her sister's name because Mabel
is the Sponsor and she is the cousin of her husband. [NA] stated that
Nigerians all call each other brother and sister even if they are only
friends. When asked why they did not send money directly to the elder boy,
[NA] said that they are trying to get a bank account set up for him but it
just does not happen straightaway because he is under 18 and needs a
signatory. Mr McVeety put it to the witness that his wife has other family
in Nigeria so why not send to another uncle or someone who is trustworthy?
[NA] said that he is in Lagos and he did not know if he could transfer
money on to Benin because they have never done it this way. He said that
the person who hit one of the children is called Nata and she is his wife's
uncle's wife's sister and that this had taken place in the house they were
staying in, in Benin. He said that she lives in Lagos but came when they
were there. When asked why the children are living on their own rather than
where he and his wife stayed in Benin he said that the house in which they
are staying is being built and belongs to another member of the family and
they would put the children there if they could. He said that that owner
lives in Saudi Arabia and they were granted the privilege of staying there
as a courtesy because there was nowhere else they could stay in Benin. He
said he did not have a contract to show that they were paying rent for the
children's accommodation available for inspection at the Tribunal and that
they send money to Patricia to pay the landlord.

10. There were no further questions or re-examination.

11. In his submissions, Mr McVeety asserted that, from the evidence in the
witness statements and the oral evidence there are serious issues regarding
a lack of consistency. The Sponsor gave many different answers as to when
matters occurred: June, then December, then between the two. He pointed out
that there were no up to date witness statements and no up to date evidence
and if the children were living on their own, as was asserted in oral
evidence, there is no documentary evidence. The whole story does not make
sense. If the children are living on their own and vulnerable then why are
the Sponsor and her husband continuing to send money to someone who is
stealing it. He submitted that the Upper Tribunal has not been given a
credible or consistent account as to who is looking after the children,
where they are and where they are living and that there are massive
inconsistencies as to how and when they moved. Consequently, the Sponsor
cannot show sole responsibility and on the balance of probabilities the
test is not met

12. In the alternative, Mr McVeety submitted that the adequacy of financial
support was in issue. In respect of [NA]'s finances, employment by itself
at the date of consideration would not be enough; there was no employer's
letter in accordance with Appendix FM-SE and it is necessary to meet every
single requirement in accordance with paragraph 2(c) viz length of
employment, gross annual salary and employment start date. The Sponsor  had
not worked for more than 6 months at the date of decision and thus fails
under Appendix FM-SE, which provides that she needs to show she has worked
for over 12 months, as identified in the refusal decision. He accepted that
the financial requirement is met otherwise based on the couple's monthly
salaries it exceeds �27,000, but the evidential requirements of the Rules
were not met at the date of decision. Mr McVeety submitted that it would be
necessary to make a new application in order to succeed under the
Immigration Rules and Appendix FM-SE.

13. In respect of Article 8 outside the Rules, Mr McVeety submitted that
this only comes into play if I were to find the Sponsor has sole
responsibility for her children but that the financial requirements cannot
be met and that Article 8 is not a general dispensing right. He submitted
that it would be proportionate for the Appellants to make a new application
for entry clearance and that an application made under the Rules would be
more beneficial than one made or decided outside the Rules.

14. In his submissions, Mr Adewusi submitted that it is clear from the
evidence of the couple that they do have sole responsibility, no matter who
is there in Nigeria and that [NA] has visited twice despite the fact that
the FCO do not advise this and he would have no reason to travel to Nigeria
otherwise. Mr Adewusi accepted that only one of the visits [18.8.12-
26.8.12] pre-dated the date of decision. The Sponsor left Nigeria on 3
January 2014 to join her husband in the UK. He submitted that the absence
of evidence eg rent receipts; a bank account; a child of 17 getting money
and spending it was a cultural issue and why money is being sent to an
adult. He submitted that full information as to how the money is being
spent is also hard to come by as the children are scared of saying they are
only getting dribs and drabs.

15. Mr Adewusi clarified that there was no new evidence before the Upper
Tribunal in addition to that submitted to the First tier Tribunal and that
he was seeking to rely on the evidence in the bundle previously submitted
to the ECO, which includes money transfer receipts. In respect of the issue
of financial support, Mr Adewusi submitted that, despite the fact that they
are unable to meet the requirements of Appendix FM - SE there has been a
recent amendment to the Immigration Rules which means that if the financial
requirement cannot be met third party support is permitted and this should
be taken into account.

16. In respect of Article 8 outside the Rules, Mr Adewusi submitted that,
based on the oral and documentary evidence the family life of [NA] needs to
be considered under Article 8 of ECHR, given that the refusal impacts on
his family life. His wife has been expecting the children to come and stay
with her so they can all live together as a family. The children have
accepted their step-father and he has sent money and taken responsibility
along with his wife. As the carer of these children they intend to have the
children with them in the UK and lead their private and family life fully.
He submitted that the judgment in Beoku Betts should be considered along
with the impact on the children who are not able to join their parents in
the UK. Mr Adewusi sought to rely on the fact that the couple have now
travelled to Nigeria twice which is costing a lot of money. Mr Adewusi
submitted that the family's Article 8 rights had been unlawfully interfered
with and the decision of the ECO was disproportionate with regard to
maintaining immigration control to the UK.

Decision and reasons

17. The issues I am required to determine are whether the Sponsor has sole
responsibility for her three children and/or whether there are serious and
compelling family or other considerations which makes exclusion of the
children undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for their
care and whether the financial requirements of the Rules were met: EC-C
1.6.(b) and (c)  and E-ECC 2.1. The date of decision is 19 October 2015.

18. I have carefully considered the evidence of the Sponsor and her
husband, which was inconsistent as to when the children ceased to live with
the Sponsor's sister, Juliet. The Sponsor stated that it was in June 2016;
then stated in was in December 2016 and then that it was in July/August and
finally in December 2016 they moved to live with her cousin, Godwin. [NA]
stated that they moved in 2015 and then later stated that he has a bad
memory and could not say whether it was in 2015 or 2016. The difficulties
are compounded by the fact that the statements submitted on behalf of the
Sponsor and her husband were signed and dated 4 August 2017 but it is clear
that they date from an earlier time, when they were living with the
Sponsor's sister and in fact are in identical terms to the earlier
statements of 12 January 2016. Whilst the oral evidence of both witnesses
is that the children left the home of the Sponsor's sister to move to live
with the Sponsor's cousin and his wife and are now living on their own, I
accept Mr McVeety's submission that there is no evidence other than the
oral evidence to support this contention, which is, in any event, post
decision.

19. However, the issue is not so much who the children are living with but
whether, at the date of decision, the Sponsor retained sole responsibility
for their care and upbringing "whether the parent has continuing control
and direction over the child's upbringing, including making all the
important decisions in the child's life" cf. TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT
00049.  Whilst there is some evidence of money transfer receipts and also
telephone records, although these have not been particularised, there is
insufficient evidence before me to find that at the date of decision the
Sponsor had sole responsibility for her children. There is no letter from
either her sister, Juliet nor her cousin, Godwin as to the role they play
or have played in caring for the children and the Sponsor's ongoing role
since she came to the United Kingdom to join her husband. For the avoidance
of doubt I accept that the Sponsor is the mother of the three children but
on the balance of probabilities it has not been proved that she has sole
responsibility for them.

20. I further accept the submission of Mr McVeety that, at the date of
decision, the Sponsor was unable to meet the financial requirements of the
Rules with reference to Appendix FM-SE because she had been working for
less than 12 months. Although in her oral evidence the Sponsor stated that
she had started work in the United Kingdom in November 2014, the evidence
before the ECO dated from December 2014 up to July 2015, when the
applications for entry clearance were submitted. Mr McVeety accepted that
the financial requirements of the Rules were now met, taking account of the
income of both the Sponsor and her husband, however, this was not the
position at the date of application or decision.

21. It follows from my findings above that the appeals under the
Immigration Rules fall to be dismissed.

22. I have gone on to consider whether there are compelling circumstances
that justify consideration of the appeals with regard to Article 8 of ECHR,
outside the Immigration Rules cf. Secretary of State for the Home
Department v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The evidence of the
Sponsor and her husband is that the children are now living on their own,
however, they were inconsistent with each other's evidence as to when the
children left the home of their aunt, Juliet to live with the Sponsor's
cousin, Godwin and it is entirely unclear when the children left Godwin's
home to live on their own. [NA] made serious allegations in his oral
evidence that one of the children had been beaten by a female relative
whilst they were visiting Nigeria, but there is no supporting evidence e.g.
by the Sponsor in her evidence, or in the form of a letter or statement
from the child concerned. In his witness statement, [NA] made the even more
serious allegation that his stepdaughter had been attacked "by her nephew
sexually and had to run to my wife's cousins for safety" but he did not
make any reference to this incident in his oral evidence and again, it was
unsupported by any other evidence e.g. from his wife or from the child
concerned.

23. Consequently, whilst I accept that there is a genuine and subsisting
relationship between the Sponsor and her children so as to amount to family
life and that the Sponsor's husband is fully supportive of the applications
for entry clearance and I understand that the ongoing separation from the
children is causing both the Sponsor and her husband distress, I cannot
accept the veracity of their evidence absent support from reliable sources,
due to the inconsistencies set out above and the lack of clarity as to the
children's current circumstances, caused at least in part by the failure of
their representatives to put forward up to date witness statements and
evidence.

24. I have concluded, in light of the above, that there are no compelling
circumstances to justify consideration of the appeals outside the
Immigration Rules. It remains open to the Appellants to make new
applications for entry clearance, which may well succeed if properly and
reliably evidenced.

25. However, for the reasons set out above, the appeals cannot succeed with
reference to the Immigration Rules as at the date of decision.

26. The appeals are dismissed.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

4 September 2017
