
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11421/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated                |                                              |                              |
|And via Skype                                 |On 28th January 2021                          |                                              |                              |
|On 5th January 2021                           |                                              |                                              |                              |
|                                              |                                              |                                              |                              |
|                                              |                                              |                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                            OLUYEMI KOLEWOLE OJO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Peer & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were given
orally at the end of the hearing on 5th January 2021.

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to attending
via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were able to
participate in the hearing.




This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's refusal of his human rights claim.

The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, sought leave to remain in the UK on
the basis of a right to respect for his family life, specifically his
relationship as an active, albeit non-resident father to his dual EU
(Romanian)-Nigerian national son, a five-year old boy, 'J'.

On 9th December 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Frantzis (the 'FtT')
dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the appellant's
human rights claim, including on the basis of a proportionality assessment.
The appellant appealed, and I allowed the appeal, setting aside the FtT's
decision, but preserving the FtT's findings of fact at ï¿½[25] to [35] of her
decision, in the error-of law decision annexed to this decision, under the
title, 'Annex - error of law decision'.  I regarded it as appropriate that
the remaking be retained by the Upper Tribunal, noting the preserved
findings and limited issues to be considered.

The issues in this appeal

The issues before me were whether, in the context of a human rights claim,
the appellant satisfied elements of the Immigration Rules, which were
relevant to a proportionality assessment. The appellant accepted that he
did not meet all of the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  In the
proportionality assessment, Mr Dhanji invited me to carry out a classic
'balance sheet' exercise.

In starting with a review of the appeal through the lens of the Immigration
Rules, in discussion with the representatives, I focussed on the provisions
relating to limited leave to remain as a parent (sections ending 'LTRPT'),
and the facts as they had developed since the original FtT hearing.  J's
mother now had settled leave to remain, as did J, albeit he was just under
three months short of his 7th birthday.  Ms Everett confirmed for the
purposes of Section R-LTRPT.1.1 that although there was no valid
application for limited leave to remain, the applicant did not fall for
refusal on grounds of suitability.  There was an eligibility issue
potentially with regard to English language proficiency, but it need not be
met where an applicant met the requirements of sections E-LTRPT.2.2 to 2.4
and EX.1.

Having explored with the representatives, it appears that the appellant did
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, except for the purposes of
EX.1(a), because while J had settled status, he was not a British citizen
and had not lived in the UK continuously for at least seven years preceding
the date of the application.  A similar (but not identical) analysis would
be relevant for the purposes of whether J was a 'qualifying child' for the
purposes of Sections 117B(6) and 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002, noting the FtT's findings, which I preserved, that it
would not be reasonable to expect J to leave the UK; and that the appellant
had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with J.  However, J was
not a qualifying child, by virtue of his 7th birthday not being until March
2021.  I was also conscious that the maintenance of effective immigration
controls was in the public interest, for the purposes of the
proportionality assessment.

In terms of the documents and bundles, I was provided two bundles on behalf
of the appellant which I have marked 'bundle 1' and 'bundle 2,' and it was
mainly 'bundle 2' to which I was referred and in particular, the witness
statements of the appellant and his former partner, the mother of J, Ramona
Burza.  I heard oral witness evidence from both the appellant and Ms Burza,
on which they were cross-examined.  I summarise the gist of the evidence
below and whilst I have considered the documents to which I was referred by
the representatives, for the sake of brevity, I do not repeat all of the
documents or evidence which I was referred to.

The appellant's evidence

In terms of the appellant's witness evidence, very broadly speaking, he
reiterated his immigration history and his parental relationship with J;
the fact that he has had a job which enabled him to provide financial
support to J; and his view that there was no substitute for an absent
father, nor was modern means of communication an adequate substitute.  He
had been a part of J's life for the entirety of J's life.

In oral evidence, the appellant added that he had contact with J every
weekend and in particular sought the agreement of his employers for time
off during school holidays in order to assist with childcare.  He collected
J from school and was able to name both J's teacher and headteacher. He
described how J would call him if he were running late to pick him up,
which illustrated the close connection between the two.

He and Ms Burza took joint decisions in relation to J and at the very
least, she would not take decisions without his knowledge.

Ms Burza's evidence

Ms Burza had provided a brief letter by way of a witness statement at page
[B46] of 'bundle 2', which reiterated the genuine and subsisting parental
relationship between J and the appellant.  J was now old enough (being 7 in
March) to know the appellant; and have a close bond with him. When asked
about who took decisions in relation to J, she had taken the decision about
the choice of primary schools, but with the appellant's knowledge and he
had never raised an issue.  The appellant and Ms Burza were in discussions
about arranging for private tuition for J to take the '11-plus' exam for
the local grammar school, which the appellant was very supportive about and
was willing to pay towards.

Ms Burza reiterated that while she had a close relationship with J, if the
appellant were late, for example, then J may ask where his father was and
so there was a certain amount of neediness on J's part about wanting to
know where his father was and a close relationship between the two.  In
particular, whilst J was young and not yet 7, she anticipated that over the
next couple of years their relationship would be a critical one because in
her view, boys in particular needed a role of their father in their lives.
J as attached to his father and she believed that it would be really harsh
if the appellant were removed.

The Respondent's submissions

Ms Everett noted the preserved findings; accepted that the appellant had an
active parental relationship with J and addressed the first issue of
whether it would be in the best interests of J for the appellant to remain
in the UK.  Clearly, that was the wish of both parties and so it was likely
to be in J's best interests psychologically.  However, there was a slight
nuance in that on the evidence before me, I was invited to find that Ms
Burza was J's primary carer and in that sense, she had sole parental
responsibility on all issues and there was no evidence that J's welfare
would be hugely compromised.  It seemed likely that at this stage J's
mother would be able to explain the reasons for J's father leaving the UK
and J would not have a sense of being abandoned.

In terms of the proportionality assessment, on the one hand J was nearly a
'qualifying child' but on the other hand, age was not a bright line, was of
significance and had been referred to in statute and therefore should weigh
on the respondent's side in the proportionality assessment.  Both partners
could put in place mitigating measures, for example the relationship could
continue meaningfully via visits and telecommunications and it was an
acceptable outcome, even if not the preferred outcome or in J's best
interests, which of course was not a trump card.

The appellant's submissions

Mr Dhanji submitted that the only reason why the appellant could not meet
the test of Section 117B(6) was that J was not 7 years old until March
2021.  In a balance sheet analysis, weight could be attached to the family
life and it was not appropriate, for example, to apply Section 117B(4) and
(5) as the relationship here was between parent and child.  There were the
preserved findings, in particular at paragraph ï¿½[34] of the FtT's decision
that it was in J's best interests to remain with his mother in the UK, but
the missing gap that I had identified in the error of law decision was
whether the best interests were in maintaining the status quo, i.e., with
the appellant also remaining in the UK.  On the basis of indications from
Ms Everett, it was in those best interests, and even noting that that was
not a trump card, those best interests must weigh heavily.

Against that in the proportionality assessment, Mr Dhanji accepted that
there should be weight attached to the maintenance of effective immigration
control but equally, in terms of the weight that such public interest
should have, this needed to be considered in context.  The appellant had
initially appealed when his EEA residence card (which he obtained as the
partner of Ms Burza) had yet to expire, so that the appellant had always
been in the UK with the knowledge of the UK government and without
breaching any law.  It could not be appropriate to disregard the fact that
the appellant was less than 3 months' off meeting the requirements of
Section 117B(6) and in those circumstances the proportionality balance lay
in the refusal of leave to remain being in breach of the appellant's
Article 8 rights.

Discussion and conclusions

First, I expressed my appreciation to both representatives for their clear
and focussed submissions, particularly in identifying the core issue in
this case, which is around the proportionality assessment.  As has been
accepted, Ms Burza herself has indefinite leave to remain under the EU
Settlement Scheme, (see page [104] of 'bundle 2') and although I have not
seen this document, Mr Dhanji has confirmed his client's instructions and
has seen a copy of a letter which confirms that J similarly has the same
grant of leave and he has no reason to believe that that letter is not
genuine.  Accordingly, Ms Everett, without having seen the letter, was
content, on the basis of Mr Dhanji's understanding, not to dispute the
issue.  I therefore find that both Ms Burza and 'J' have indefinite leave
to remain, at the date of this hearing.

I also find, in light of Ms Everett's submissions, that it would be in the
best interests of J for the status quo to be maintained, namely that both
of J's parents remain in the UK, which is consistent with the oral evidence
of the parents as to the close parental relationship between the appellant
and J; and the support that he provides to J. In particular and what has
been preserved from the FtT's previous findings is that the appellant has
an active and committed relationship with J, seeing him on a regular basis,
namely at weekends at least; remains in regular contact; assists Ms Burza
in terms of school pick-ups; is aware of, for example, and has had dealings
with, J's schoolteachers, albeit on his own evidence, he may not have
particularly close dealings with J's friends. He is nevertheless actively
involved in discussions around J's schooling.  Even if, and I find it is
likely, that Ms Burza decides upon the lion's share of the decisions in
relation to J's life and is J' primary carer, I accept that particularly in
the context as has been identified of the upcoming tuition for the grammar
school examinations, there are important decisions which remain joint ones
and indeed the evidence, unchallenged, of the appellant and Ms Burza is
that the couple are jointly meeting the costs of the examination tuition,
so that the engagement extends beyond joint decision-making to financial
support. The appellant has had a sustained, active involvement throughout
J's life.

I am, however, conscious that even where it is in J's best interests for
the status quo to be maintained, that is not a "trump" card in terms of the
balance sheet assessment when considering the proportionality of the
respondent's decision.   I am also conscious that, as accepted by Mr
Dhanji, the appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration
Rules, the lens through which the human rights claim may initially be
considered, and I am equally conscious for the purposes of Section 117B(1)
of the 2002 Act that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
in the public interest. I also bear in mind that Section 117B(6) of the
2002 Act does not apply, but only because J misses the '7-year' residence
requirement by just over two months.

While the appellant is proficient in English and is not a drain on the
public purse (he works and financially supports 'J'), these are neutral
factors.

On the other side of the balance-sheet, in favour of the appellant, and
while I accept the submission of Mr Dhanji that although there is no "near-
miss" principle in these cases, the weight attached to the public interest
in these circumstances has to be considered in the context that 'J' will be
7 years old on 24th March 2021.  That is a relevant factor in the
proportionality assessment and should not be discounted, in relation to
family life between the appellant and 'J', both directly and indirectly, in
terms of the support that the appellant provides to Ms Burza.

In addition, in relation to the weight to be attached to that family life,
it is not reduced by any application of Sections 117B(4) or (5) of the 2002
Act, as neither is applicable to a family relationship between a parent and
child, in other words, limited weight should not be attached because of
either the appellant or 'J' has or has had 'precarious' or unlawful status.
The appellant has made an application outside the Immigration Rules, while
still in possession of an unexpired EEA Residence Card, so is not seeking
to flout the Immigration Rules.

Considering both sides of the 'balance sheet', I conclude that it is the
deep and committed parental relationship between the appellant and 'J' for
the entirety of J's life, and just at the stage that 'J' will need the
appellant more, as a father figure, that tips the proportionality
assessment in the appellant's favour.  Maintenance of such a relationship
via modern means of telecommunication, even if mitigating the loss to some
extent, will simply provide no replacement for the quality and depth of the
existing relationship, and even if J is able to understand that he has not
been deserted by his father, the appellant's removal will have a
substantial impact on J, which alternative arrangements cannot mitigate.

Taking into account all of the circumstances, I conclude that the decision
to refuse leave to remain is disproportionate and is in breach of the
appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR in respect of his right to respect
for his family life.

The decision of the Secretary of State is therefore not upheld, and the
appellant's appeal succeeds.

Decision

The appellant's appeal on human rights grounds succeeds.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   19th January 2021





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has succeeded.  I regarded it as appropriate to make a fee  award
of ï¿½140.




Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   19th January 2021




ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11421/2019 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30th September 2020                  |On                                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                            OLUYEMI KOLEWOLE OJO

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:              Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Peer &
                           Co Solicitors, via Skype
For the respondent:             Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office
                           Presenting Officer, via Skype

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   These are the approved record  of  the  decision  and  written  reasons
    which were given orally at the end of the  hearing  on  30th  September
    2020.

2.   Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended  the
    hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not  object  to  the
    hearing being via Skype and I was satisfied  that  the  representatives
    were able to participate in the hearing.

3.   The appeal is by Mr Ojo (the appellant) against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Frantzis (the 'FtT'), promulgated on  9th  December
    2019, by which  she  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his application for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  the
    right to respect for the appellant's family and private life,  pursuant
    to article 8 of the ECHR. The appellant's family life is his subsisting
    parental relationship with his son  aged  5,  ('J')  an  EU  (Romanian)
    national, whom it was initially claimed had settled status in the UK.

4.   In essence, the  appellant's  claims  involved  the  following  issues:
    whether J had settled status in the UK, based on  which  the  appellant
    asserted that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules relating
    to limited leave to remain as the parent of a child with settled status
    in  the  UK;  and  whether  the  appellant  met  the  English  language
    requirement  of  paragraph  E-LTRPT.5.1-.5.2  of  appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The same issues impacted on  whether  the  appellant
    met the requirements of section EX.1;  and  the  respondent  separately
    considered whether refusal of the appellant's application would  result
    in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    GEN.3.2. The respondent also considered and  rejected  the  appellant's
    application by reference to his private life.

The FtT's decision

5.   The FtT made a careful analysis of the evidence, running from ï¿½[24]  to
    [43] of her decision.  She correctly reminded herself of  section  117B
    of the Nationality,  Immigration and Asylum act 2002,  identified  that
    section 117B(6) was not applicable on  the  basis  that  J  was  not  a
    qualifying child (ï¿½[25]) because he was not a British national and  had
    not resided in the UK  for  seven  years,  and  so  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of section 117D of the 2002 Act.   For  the  same  reason,
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT  and
    section EX.1(a) of appendix FM.  Even had  paragraph  E-LTRPT  applied,
    while the FtT noted that the appellant's English appeared very good  at
    the hearing before her, (ï¿½[27]) the appellant did not have evidence  of
    the required English language competency, or  an  exemption  from  that
    requirement. The appeal could nevertheless be  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

6.   The FtT  found  (at  ï¿½[28])  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with J, which  while  section  117B(6)
    was not applicable, was plainly relevant to a proportionality analysis.
    Whilst the appellant and J's mother were no longer in  a  relationship,
    there was consistent evidence of the appellant featuring prominently in
    J's life as a constant father figure,  seeing  him  every  weekend  and
    taking time off during the school  holidays  to  be  with  him.  J  was
    described as attached to the appellant, with strong feelings  for  him.
    The FtT did  not,  however,  accept  that  J  slept  overnight  at  the
    appellant's home, as this was contrary to J's  mother's  evidence,  but
    the FtT accepted that the appellant nevertheless  assisted  J's  mother
    and step-brother, albeit J's mother  was  responsible  for   J's  daily
    life.

7.   Having considered the evidence as  a  whole,  the  FtT  concluded  that
    article 8 ECHR  was  engaged  in  relation  to  respect  for  both  the
    appellant's family and private life.  The FtT reminded herself that  at
    the heart of the appeal was a five-year-old boy, J. In  the  article  8
    analysis, the FtT regarded the sole remaining question as  whether  the
    refusal of leave to remain was proportionate.  The appellant spoke good
    English and worked, paying  taxes.   He  had  an  active  role  in  J's
    upbringing. The FtT found that it would not be in J's best interests to
    leave the UK with his mother and step-brother (the step-brother  had  a
    different father) and relocate to Nigeria (ï¿½[33] and  ï¿½[34]).  In  that
    respect, the FtT did not accept the respondent's conclusions about  the
    ability of J to relocate.

8.   Nevertheless, the FtT regarded  the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  as
    proportionate, noting that neither J's mother, also  an  EU  (Romanian)
    national, nor J, nor the appellant had settled status in  the  UK.  J's
    mother was the primary carer for J and contact  between  the  appellant
    and J could continue, even in the event of the appellant's removal. The
    FtT concluded that her conclusion may have been different had J or  J's
    mother had settled leave to remain.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

9.   The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially  that  the
    FtT had erred in failing to  consider  whether  it  would  be  in  best
    interests of J  for  both  parents  to  remain  in  the  UK,  namely  a
    maintenance of the status quo; the FtT had failed to attach  sufficient
    weight to J's best interests; and at ï¿½[39] of the reasons, the FtT  had
    erred in taking into account, in the  proportionality  assessment,  the
    fact that the appellant did not have settled leave to remain, which  by
    implication, impermissibly applied tests by analogy to section  117B(4)
    and 117B(5) of the 2002 Act, neither of which were applicable.

10.  Permission  was  initially  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 4th June 2020.  She  regarded
    it as at least arguable that the FtT had erred in her assessment of J's
    best interests, noting that he was a  dual  EU/Nigerian  national;  and
    further, that it was arguable that the FtT had misdirected  herself  by
    attaching weight to the appellant's immigration status,  when  weighing
    the importance of his family life with J.  The grant of permission  was
    not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

11.  I found the submissions of both Mr Dhanji  and  Ms  Isherwood  helpful,
    concise and to the point. They assisted me in identifying the scope  of
    the issues and deciding those issues.





The appellant's submissions

12.  The appellant did not seek to  now  argue  that  J  was  a  'qualifying
    child' for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Indeed,  Mr
    Dhanji was aware of Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith's decision in MM
    v SSHD (section 117B(6) - EU citizen  child)  Iran  [2020]  UKUT  00224
    (IAC), which made clear that an EU  national  child  was  not,  without
    more, a 'qualifying child', and he did not  seek  to  argue  that  that
    proposition was incorrect.

13.  Instead, this was an appeal based on  human  rights  (article  8  ECHR)
    outside the Immigration Rules. The core of the appeal was that the  FtT
    had taken into account matters that she ought not (the appellant's, J's
    and his mother's lack of  settled  status)  and  failed  to  take  into
    account relevant factors, specifically whether the maintenance  of  the
    'status quo'  of  co-parenting  was  in  J's  best  interests,  in  her
    assessment of the proportionality of the refusal of leave to remain.

14.  The FtT had made findings of fact at ï¿½[27] to  ï¿½[31]  of  her  reasons;
    analysed J's best interests at ï¿½[32] to ï¿½[35] and  then  drew  together
    her conclusions at ï¿½[36]  onwards.   The  appellant  did  not  seek  to
    criticise the findings (particularly the findings about the appellant's
    active role in J's life). Rather, there was a gap in  the  analysis  of
    J's best interests in maintaining the status quo and the weight  to  be
    attached to those best interests.  At ï¿½[33], the FtT had  analysed  why
    it would not be in J's best interests to leave the UK with  his  mother
    and move to Nigeria.  At ï¿½[34], the FtT had analysed why it would be in
    J's best interests to maintain the structure and stability of his  life
    with  his  mother.   While  the  FtT  had  made  findings   about   the
    relationship between J and the appellant, the FtT had not  gone  on  to
    analyse the best interests of the status quo in the same  way  she  had
    analysed the best interests of J not  leaving  the  UK  and  not  being
    separated from his mother.  Mr Dhanji readily accepted  that  J's  best
    interests were not a "trump card", but the  lack  of  analysis  of  the
    status quo, particularly where the appellant was an  active,  important
    figure  in  J's  life,  had  undermined   the   FtT's   proportionality
    assessment.

15.  The final ground of appeal related to the FtT's reference at  ï¿½[39]  of
    her decision to the immigration  history  of  J,  his  mother  and  the
    appellant, explicitly in the context of the proportionality assessment:



    "On the Respondent's side of the balance, I take account  of  the  fact
    that on my findings, the appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules.
     Neither J nor the Appellant's mother are, as yet, settled in  the  UK.
    On authority, considerable weight is to be placed on  the  Respondent's
    policy on the public interest (as set out in the Immigration Rules).  I
    take account of the fact that  the  Appellant's  leave  in  the  United
    Kingdom has never been settled."

16.  These were impermissible factors to take against the appellant, in  the
    proportionality exercise,  noting  that  neither  section  117B(4)  not
    section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act applied.





The respondent's submissions

17.  Ms Isherwood agreed that in  the  context  of  a  human  rights  appeal
    rather than the EEA Regulations, the focus on the FtT's proportionality
    assessment was key.  I needed to consider the FtT's reasons as a  whole
    and not take issue with passages  of  the  reasons  in  isolation.   In
    reality, the appellant's challenges were disagreements with  the  FtT's
    conclusions. The FtT had made detailed findings and the  argument  that
    the FtT had failed to take into account the maintenance of  the  status
    quo in the proportionality exercise was plainly not correct,  as  ï¿½[35]
    of the reasons refer to the FtT considering how, and  to  what  extent,
    the appellant assists J's mother and to what extent J's mother would be
    able to cope on her own.   The FtT had also considered  in  detail  the
    strength of the relationship between the appellant and J at ï¿½[29].

18.  In relation to the final ground, I needed to read ï¿½[39] in the  context
    of the remainder the reasons from ï¿½[39] to ï¿½[42].  The reference to the
    lack of settled status of the parents and J was not a  negative  factor
    but merely a statement of fact.

Discussion and Conclusions

19.  I conclude that the FtT's analysis did contain errors  of  law  on  the
    grounds identified in the grounds of appeal.  The  FtT's  decision  was
    clearly structured; her findings were of equally admirable clarity; and
    she correctly identified the law, and the core issues. This was  not  a
    case where the appellant met the Immigration Rules and by the  time  of
    the hearing, Mr Dhanji did not seek to argue as such (the appellant had
    previously argued that J's EU citizenship, where alone or  as  part  of
    'pre-settled' status under the EU Settlement Scheme, was equivalent  to
    his being a 'qualified child, but this was not pursued).  The  FtT  had
    correctly identified the  sole  issue  in  this  case,  concerning  the
    proportionality of the refusal of leave to remain, the final element of
    the classic analysis set out in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

20.  I accept Ms Isherwood's submission  that  the  FtT  had  made  detailed
    findings in relation to the appellant's relationship with J (ï¿½[29]) and
    how the appellant assisted J's mother with the school and  nursery  run
    and during holidays, where  the  appellant's  work  schedule  permitted
    (ï¿½[35]).  However, the FtT's analysis at ï¿½[35], in  terms  of  how  the
    appellant fits into J's  daily  life,  as  a  non-resident  but  active
    father, is in clear contrast to ï¿½[33] and [34]. As  a  reminder,  ï¿½[33]
    and ï¿½[34] follow a sub-heading referring to section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  (in  other  words,  J's  best
    interests). ï¿½[33] begins:

    "As to J's best interests, I note that the decision letter argues  that
    the respondent's decision does  not  require  J  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom....but that there is nothing  preventing  your  ex-partner  and
    child accompanying you to Nigeria... "

 9. In the remainder of ï¿½[33] and [34], the FtT  explains  clearly  why  it
    would not be in J's best interests to  relocate  to  Nigeria  with  his
    mother and the appellant, and instead it would be in J's  interests  to
    remain with his mother in the  UK.    At  ï¿½[34],  the  FtT  once  again
    analyses the facts through the lens of J's best interests:

    "Maintaining the structure and stability in J's life afforded  by  [his
    mother] is plainly in J's best interests."

10. In contrast, when considering the status quo of how the appellant  fits
    into family life in the UK, while ï¿½[35] describes how the appellant  is
    involved, in practical terms, the FtT then does not  go  on  to  decide
    whether maintenance of the status quo is in J's best interests.   While
    in some cases, the conclusion is so self-evident that it  need  not  be
    stated, the omission at ï¿½[35] has to be seen  in  the  context  of  the
    FtT's explicit reasoning  about  the  best  interests  of  J  in  other
    scenarios (the  family  relocating   to  Nigeria  at  ï¿½[33];  or  being
    separated  from  his  mother  at  ï¿½[34]);  and   the   FtT's   apparent
    reservations in ï¿½[35] about the extent of the  appellant's  involvement
    with J, because of the limits  on  the  appellant's  ability  to  offer
    practical support as a result of his long working hours; and the  FtT's
    discussion about J's  mother's  ability  to  cope  in  the  appellant's
    absence, as she has a support  network  (a  sister)  and  a  supportive
    employer. J's mother's ability to cope without the appellant  may  well
    be relevant in assessing whether J's best interests are outweighed in a
    proportionality assessment, but ï¿½[35] does not state this. This goes to
    the heart of how the lack of a conclusion on whether J's best interests
    are for the status quo to be maintained, feeds into the proportionality
    assessment. While  in  many  other  respects   the  FtT's  reasons  are
    detailed and clear, the omission in reasoning at ï¿½[35] is material.




11. On the final ground, I also accept Mr Dhanji's submission that the  FtT
    placed negative weight on the lack of  the  appellant's,  J's  and  his
    mother's  'settled  immigration   status,'   in   the   proportionality
    assessment.  Ms  Isherwood's  submission  to  the  contrary  cannot  be
    sustained on the plain reading of ï¿½[39]:

     "On the respondent's side of the balance I take into account the  fact
    that on my findings the Appellant does not meet the Immigration  Rules.
    Neither J nor [the appellant's mother] are, as yet, settled in the UK."



12. At the end of ï¿½[39], the  FtT  took  account  "of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's leave in  the  UK  has  never  been  settled."   The  FtT's
    reiteration of family members' lack of settled status  at  ï¿½[42],  when
    she states, "Balancing all of the features in this appeal I  have  come
    to  the  view  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  proportionate  to
    immigration control. Neither J,  his  mother  nor  the  appellant  have
    settled status in the UK..." does not detract from the clearly negative
    weight she attaches to the lack of status.




13. Ms Isherwood did not suggest that the FtT was correct in regarding  the
    lack of settled status as a factor counting against the appellant,  and
    I agree with Mr Dhanji that it is at least unclear why it should  count
    against the appellant.  Sections 117B(4) and (5) of the  2002  Act  are
    clearly inapplicable: 117B(4) applies to relationships with  a  partner
    or private life established at a time  when  a  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully - not, of course, the same as having precarious status;  and
    117B(5) applies to private life.  Neither section applies to a parental
    relationship.  At the very least, the FtT's reasons  for  counting  the
    lack of settled status against the appellant are not  fully  explained.






14.  Both  issues  identified  above  go  to  the   FtT's   assessment   of
    proportionality.  It is not possible to conclude that had FtT addressed
    J's best interests in the maintenance of the status quo  and  explained
    more fully the impact of the lack of settled status, the FtT would have
    reached the same conclusion on proportionality. Accordingly, the errors
    are material, so that the FtT's decision is unsafe  and  cannot  stand.
    However, given the detailed and unchallenged fact-finding, while I  set
    aside the decision, I do so preserving the FtT's findings.  That  being
    said, the family's circumstances may well have changed since the  FtT's
    decision, particularly in light of applications under the EU Settlement
    Scheme.

Decision on error of law

15. There are errors in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, such  that
    it is unsafe and must be set aside.  However, I preserve the First-tier
    Tribunal's findings of fact at ï¿½[25] to ï¿½[35] of her decision.

Disposal

16. With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, the preserved findings and the limited scope  of  the  legal
    issues, the parties' representatives were agreed that it is appropriate
    that the Upper Tribunal remakes the FtT's decision which has  been  set
    aside.

Directions

17. The following directions shall apply to  the  future  conduct  of  this
    appeal:

    29.1 The Resumed Hearing to  remake  the  appeal  will  be  listed,  if
         possible  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keith,  via  Skype,  time
         estimate two hours, on 21st December 2020;

    29.2 The  appellant  must  make  any  application  to  adduce  any  new
         evidence, pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008, by 4pm on 7th October 2020;

    29.3 The respondent may respond to that  application  by  4pm  on  14th
         October 2020;

    29.4 The parties shall  agree  and  produce  a  consolidated,  complete
         bundle and witness statements (not  an  addendum  to  the  previous
         bundles) for use at  the  Resumed  Hearing,  not  later  than  23rd
         November 2020;

    29.5 The appellant shall ensure that appropriate  arrangements  are  in
         place for him to be able to give evidence via Skype.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside, subject to the preserved findings of fact.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  7th October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
