
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11191/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2020                           |On 16 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                           Mr Phuriwat Vichienarat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Widdup promulgated on 13 September 2019 dismissing his human
rights appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 12 April
2016 to refuse him further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the
spouse of a person present and settled here, Miss Wimonkasem.

There are two grounds for that decision.  First, that the Secretary of
State considered that the appellant had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC
speaking test certificate from ETS and second, that there were no
insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the United
Kingdom and that removal would not be disproportionate.  It is, I think,
unnecessary to recite the history of this appeal, which has already been
before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is set out in the decision of Judge
Widdup and is not material to the issues before me.

The judge heard evidence and concluded at paragraph 47, having had regard
to the evidence and the burden on the respondent to prove dishonesty, that
that burden has not been discharged and that the allegation supporting the
paragraph 322(5) point was not made out and accordingly the projection that
the applicant did not meet the suitability requirements S-LTR.1.6 were not
made out.  The judge then went on to consider whether the suitability
requirements of Appendix FM were met and considered paragraph R-
LTRP(d)(iii), which in turn required him to consider EX.1.  The judge
concluded that EX.1 was not made out nor was he satisfied that paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) was met nor did he consider that Article 8 would be breached
by requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed on the grounds that the judge had erred in that, put
simply, having concluded that the dishonesty allegation was not met, he
should then have considered whether the Immigration Rules, in this
particular case R-LTRP(c), were met rather than R-LTRP(d).  It is also
stated that in any event the appellant did meet the requirements of R-
LTRP(c) in that he had shown that his income was over the threshold, that
this was supported by the necessary evidence and that he also met the
English language requirement.  Permission to appeal was granted by
Designated Judge McClure on 8 January 2020.

When the appeal came before me it was accepted by Ms Cunha that there was a
material error of law in the decision in that the judge had failed properly
to engage with the correct provisions of the Immigration Rules, that is R-
LTRP(c), not (d).  On that basis, I set the decision aside for it to be
remade, reserving the finding that there had been no dishonesty and to
consider whether the requirements of R-LTRP(c) were met.

It was accepted by Ms Cunha that those requirements were met in light of
the evidence of the appellant's wife's earnings both in the forms of a
letter from her employer, wage slips and bank statements which were
consistent with that.  It was also accepted that the appellant met the
requirements of the English language requirement in the form of a
certificate from Trinity College showing a pass at CEFR Level B 1.1.

In the light of these concessions and having considered the matter for
myself, I conclude also that all the requirements of R-LTRP(c) were met.
That is because the appellant did have leave to remain for a period in
excess of six years at the date on which he made the application for
further leave to remain.  Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied
that the appellant did meet all the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Accordingly, and in line with the decision of the Upper Tribunal in OA, I
am satisfied that there could of course be now no public interest in
removal of the appellant in light of the finding that the requirements of
the Immigration Rules are met and accordingly, I am satisfied that removing
the appellant would as he meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules
be proportionate.  I therefore remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on
human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date 2 March 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
