
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11237/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 January 2018              |On 4 May 2018                   |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr saturday idada
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kamran, International Immigration Advisory
                    Services
For the Respondent:    Mr. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 10.2.74. He entered
the UK on 21.5.08 as a visitor with leave until 5.9.08. The Appellant then
overstayed and made a false 14 year long residence application on 8.3.11 by
paying an apparent employee of the Home Office ï¿½2000, which was refused on
14.4.11. He made an application for leave to remain on the basis of his
private and family life on 15.2.16, due to the fact that his partner, C,
has a British child and gave birth to a son by the Appellant on [ ] 2014.
He appealed to the First tier Tribunal against a decision made by the
Respondent on 28.4.16, refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.    The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Beg for hearing on
18.9.17. In a decision promulgated on 26.9.16 she dismissed the appeal. An
application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on
3.11.17 on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge erred in her
approach to the child, C, who is a British citizen and was thus a
qualifying child under section 117D and EX1 of Appendix FM of the Rules and
the Judge failed to consider this on the basis that she was not the
biological child of the Appellant [18] and that the Judge further erred in
failing to analyse whether the Appellant had established a genuine and
subsisting relationship with C and whether it was reasonable to expect C to
leave the United Kingdom.

Hearing

3.    At the hearing before me, Mr Bates accepted that C could be a
qualifying child in light of the Judge's acceptance at [29] that the
Appellant had established a family life with his partner and the children,
but he maintained the position that the issue is the reasonableness of
expecting the children to leave the UK.

4.    Mr Kamran submitted that, if the correct approach had been taken, the
Appellant would have met the Rules viz EX1. He submitted that the Judge had
erred in failing to consider the best interests of the children involved,
one of whom was a British citizen. See [18]. Mr Kamran stated that the
Appellant played an active part in caring for the children as his wife
worked nights four days a week and that C. had never been to Nigeria.

5.    In his submissions, Mr Bates stated that at [21] the Judge referred
to PD and others [2016] UKUT 00108 and that SF and others [2017] UKUT 00120
(IAC) and [13] of the Appellant's representative's submissions relied on SF
and the reference to the Home Office policy on Family Migration, August
2015 therein that it is not reasonable to expect a British child to leave
the United Kingdom. In respect of the Home Office policy, he submitted that
this does envisage a family split where there is a very poor immigration
history. On the facts of this case it is clear from [15] of the decision
that there has been significant deception given that the Appellant made a
false 14 year long residency application and the Judge had been entitled to
have regard to this, albeit he acknowledged that the Judge made no specific
reference to the Home Office policy in her findings. However, she did at
[27] find that temporary separation would not be disproportionate and thus
it would not be contrary to the principle in Zambrano. Mr Bates submitted
that family life had been formed in precarious circumstances; the Appellant
has made a conscious effort to deceive; the Judge has considered all the
relevant factors in substance and looking at the factors that the Judge has
considered, the fact she did not consider the reasonableness of C leaving
the UK is not material.

6.    There was no response on the part of Mr Kamran to these submissions.

My findings

7.    It is clear from [13] of the Appellant's representative's submission
that it was asserted that the refusal decision failed to engage with the
position of C and that the relevant Home Office policy states that it is
not reasonable to expect a British child to leave the United Kingdom. The
test pursuant to EX1(a) is whether: (i) the applicant has a genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with" the qualifying child. A "parental
relationship", as distinct from "parent" is not defined in the Rules,
however, in R (on the application of RK) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC)
the Upper Tribunal found that:

    "1.     It is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
    responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship.


    2.     Whether a person  who  is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
    "parental relationship" with a child for the purposes of  s.117B(6)  of
    the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  depends  on  the
    individual circumstances and whether the  role  that  individual  plays
    establishes he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.


    3.     Applying that  approach,  apart  from  the  situation  of  split
    families where relationships between parents have broken  down  and  an
    actual or de facto step-parent exists, it will be  unusual,  but  not
    impossible,  for  more  than  2  individuals  to   have   a   "parental
    relationship" with a child. However, the relationships between a  child
    and  professional  or  voluntary  carers  or  family  friends  are  not
    "parental relationships".

8.    At [18] of the decision, the First tier Tribunal Judge rejected the
contention made on the Appellant's behalf that the requirements of EX1(a)
were met, on the basis that his son had not lived continuously in the UK
for at least 7 years (which is not disputed) and because C is not his
biological child and her mother is her primary carer. At [23] the Judge
found that the Appellant looks after the children mostly at night when his
partner is at work and takes them to sports activities (swimming and
gymnastics regarding C:[10]) and at [29] that the Appellant has established
family life with his partner and children.

9.    However, the Judge failed to consider whether the Appellant has a
parental relationship with C. I find, based on the evidence, the
jurisprudence and the Judge's findings of fact set out above, that it is
clearly arguable, as was accepted by Mr Bates on behalf of the Respondent,
that the Appellant has stepped into the shoes of a parent in relation to C
and that he does have a parental relationship with her. Thus the finding of
fact that the Appellant is not the biological parent of C is not
sufficiently reasoned or detailed so as to find that the Appellant fails to
meet the requirement of EX1(a) of Appendix FM. It follows that I find a
material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Beg.

10.   In light of the fact that EX1(a) provides that if there is a genuine
and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child, consideration then
needs to be given to whether, taking into account their best interests as a
primary consideration it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
leave the UK, this aspect requires further consideration and determination,
in light of the evidence.

Decision

11.   I find a material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
Beg. The appeal is remitted to be re-heard in light of my directions below.

                          ________________

                       DIRECTIONS
                          ________________

1.    The appeal is remitted for a hearing before the First tier Tribunal,
to be listed before a Judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Beg.

2.    The scope of the appeal is confined to:

    (i)    whether, as a matter of fact, the Appellant has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with C;


    (ii)   if so, whether or not it would be reasonable to expect C to
    leave the UK, taking into account her best interests as a primary
    consideration.

3.    If the Appellant wishes to rely upon any additional evidence this
should be served in accordance with rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the Tribunal and the Home Office Presenting
Officers Unit 5 working days before the re-listed hearing date.

4.    The time estimate is 1 hour.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

15 January 2018
