
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11801/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2021                            |On 2 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               malvina Gjergji
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a female citizen of Albania against the decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
respondent, by an Entry Clearance Officer, on 17  June  2019  refusing  her
entry clearance as the wife of a person present and settled in  the  United
Kingdom.

2. Her husband is a British citizen.   It  is  accepted  that  theirs  is  a
genuine marriage.  The difficulty in the case is that the appellant was not
able to satisfy the respondent that her husband had the necessary means  to
ensure her financial independence.  Her main difficulty with  the  case  is
that the appellant's husband could not produce the required documentation.

3. In his skeleton argument produced for  the  hearing  Mr  Wilding  accepts
that the appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   He
contended there were two reasons for this.  The appellant could not produce
a "statement of account" issued by HMRC because HMRC no longer issued  such
documents and  the  requirement  in  the  Rules  was  otiose.   The  second
difficulty is that the appellant's husband's documentation did not  support
in the prescribed way his claim to be paid certain sums.   In  summary  and
for the purposes of introduction it was the appellant's case that the  bank
statements as a whole show such clear evidence of sufficient means that the
appeal ought to be allowed on human rights grounds.

4.  I  begin  by  considering  carefully  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision and reasons.

5. The judge set out, correctly, the history of the appeal and the  personal
circumstances of the appellant so far as they are relevant  and  identified
the issues raised by the Entry Clearance Officer and also  the  documentary
evidence produced before him. There are appropriate self-directions in law.
 For the purposes of this appeal the important parts of  the  decision  and
reasons begin at paragraph 28 under the heading "Discussion and Findings".

6. The judge said that it  was  the  appellant's  case  that  the  sponsor's
declared income for the tax year ending 5 April  2018  comprised  of  three
elements.  These were: �9,600 in respect of his employment  as  a  salaried
director of ARG, �8,666 in respect  of  dividends  paid  because  he  is  a
shareholder in ARG and �20,754 in respect of his self-employed income.

7. The required minimum income from a supporting partner at  this  time  was
�18,600.

8. It appears therefore at first blush as though the appeal  ought  to  have
been allowed.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge looked  carefully  at
the evidence in support of these claimed sums.

9. The claim to receive an income of  �9,600  as  a  salaried  director  was
uncontroversial.

10.  The  claim  to  have  received  a  dividend  payment  of   �8,666   was
problematic.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that the  sum
of �8,666.67 was paid as a dividend to the  sponsor.   The  judge  said  at
paragraph 58 that he accepted that there were unaudited accounts  from  ARG
showing a profit of �26,000 which was divided into thirds of �8,666.67  and
that sum would be paid to each of the three partners  who  had  established
ARG.  However, as the judge also noticed, the unaudited  accounts  for  the
tax year ending 2019 showed  dividends  of  �50,000  but  no  evidence  was
provided to show that anybody had been paid any of the  money.   The  judge
noted that he could find nothing in the sponsor's bank statements  relating
to dividends being paid other than a reference to  a  dividend  payment  of
�5,000 made on 26 March 2018.  The balance of �3,666.67 (�8666.67 one third
share of �26,000 less �5,000 shown in  the  statement)  was  attributed  to
authorised cash withdrawals but the cash withdrawals could  not  be  traced
into the bank account.

11. The judge's reference to the tax  year  ending  2019  and  the  lack  of
evidence about tax being paid is criticised but I  am  satisfied  that  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge, far from considering  irrelevant  material,  was
looking for evidence that might make more sense of the accounts and was not
able to find it.

12. The point is that there was a  fundamental  mismatch  between  what  the
judge expected to be in the bank statements because of what was said to  be
due in the accounts and what he could find.

13. The judge found at paragraph 56 that the sponsor's evidence  about  cash
withdrawals was contradictory and the judge was:

  "left with the impression that he did not really know what withdrawals he
  had made.  Furthermore I was not  directed  to  any  payment  from  ARG's
  accounts that was said to relate to the dividend payments  to  the  other
  directors of ARG during this tax year."

14. This is not a finding that the sponsor was dishonest  but  that  he  was
unreliable because he was  inaccurate.   This  is  not  surprising  if,  as
appeared to be the Sponsor's evidence,  he  was  taking  cash  out  of  the
business in a somewhat cavalier way.

15. Neither was the judge impressed with the evidence of receipt of  �20,754
in respect of self-employed income.

16. Certainly the appellant's partner produced  an  accountant's  report  on
the unaudited accounts of "Roberts Rental Properties" showing that, in  the
tax year ending 5 April 2018, a profit  was  allocated  between  the  three
people  engaged  in  the  joint  enterprise  including  the  sponsor.   The
allocated income was �20,754.  There is  a  degree  of  sloppiness  in  the
accounting here.  The appellant was described as one  of  three  "partners"
but there is later correspondence indicating that the joint venture was not
a partnership but a  trading  arrangement  which  produced  profit  to  the
benefit of the appellant and,  presumably,  the  other  investors  although
their involvement is not important to these proceedings.

17. The judge described the inappropriate use of  the  word  partnership  as
"sloppy" and did not regard it as telling evidence of  the  reliability  of
the accounts.  However, the judge was concerned at an inconsistency in  the
evidence about the distribution of the profit from the join venture.  There
was a joint venture agreement produced at the hearing on the second hearing
day which referred to the current sponsor contributing  one  third  of  the
capital to set up Robert's  Rentings.   However,  notwithstanding  that  he
contributed a third the entitlement from the profits was said to be 25.72%.
 There was absolutely no reason why those involved could  not  have  agreed
almost any percentage but it is curious that a  percentage  less  than  33%
would be made available to somebody who was said to have  come  up  with  a
third of the set up investment.  The judge said that  this  "does  raise  a
question mark about the reliability of the information provided  about  the
Sponsor's role in RR".  The judge noted that there was a transfer from  the
bank account of RR to the sponsor in the sum of �10,000 during the tax year
ending April 2018 but that is clearly rather less, in fact less  than  half
of the required sum.  The judge described this as failing  to  provide  the
required evidence.  This  is  an  imperfect  phase  because  there  was  no
particular evidence was "required" before him but the judge  did  conclude,
with regret, that he did not  find  the  evidence  "sufficiently  clear  to
enable me to conclude that the financial requirements of Appendix FM  would
be met in any event."

18. It is quite plain from the Decision and Reasons that the judge  was  not
saying that the appellant or, more realistically, the  appellant's  sponsor
was dishonest.  The judge did not say that the appellant's sponsor was  not
earning enough money to support her.  The  judge's  finding  was  that  the
financial situation was too unclear to be satisfied.

19. The judge noted that there was no evidence to show  that  expecting  the
appellant to wait while a better presented and further application was made
would cause enduring harm to the appellant's relationship with her  partner
and there was no persuasive reason advanced to show that the sponsor  could
not return to Albania and indeed live with the appellant there if  that  is
what he chose to do. The judge did not suggest that this  was  a  realistic
alternative but it was possible.

20. In the last paragraph the  judge  decided  that  the  evidence  had  not
persuaded him that the appellant had shown  that  the  circumstances  exist
that "make requiring her to reapply unduly  harsh  or  even  unreasonable".
The judge decided it  followed  that  a  disproportionate  interference  in
private and family life had not been established and dismissed the  appeal.



21. In considering the appellant's case  I  rely  heavily  on  Mr  Wilding's
skeleton argument.  I have not ignored the oral  submissions.   I  dictated
this decision the day after the hearing and they are very much in  my  mind
but I see nothing there that adds in any significant  way  to  the  written
material before me.  This is not to criticise anybody.  It is for the  good
reason that the written material was done well.

22.  Ground  1  complains  there  is  a   material   error   of   fact   and
misinterpretation of the Immigration Rules.   The  criticism  is  that  the
judge bothered himself with evidence about tax being paid and this was  not
a requirement of the Rules.  With respect this misses  the  point.   It  is
common ground  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  Rules.   The
reference to problems with tax not being paid are not reasons  to  say  the
appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules  but  reasons  to  say
that the judge has not been given a complete  picture  of  the  appellant's
financial circumstances.  That is all that  the  judge  meant  and  it  was
plainly a conclusion  that  was  open  to  him.   The  judge  explained  in
painstaking  care  why  he  found  the  evidence  of  the  declared  income
unsatisfactory and the fact that he was looking for income and evidence  of
taxes has not altered this  finding  in  any  way.   Rather  I  see  it  as
indicative the judge who, correctly, was  looking  at  the  evidence  as  a
whole.  Certainly he was not constrained by the requirements of  the  Rules
when they could not be met and is illustrative of why  the  evidence  as  a
whole was unsatisfactory.

23. Ground 2 complains there is a misapplication of the  Rules  and  Article
8(2).  There is criticism that the judge found that the appellant  had  not
served a form SA302 and advances as the reason for this that they no longer
exist.  I have seen no evidence directly  on  that  point.   I  would  have
preferred it if there had been evidence although I accept Mr Wilding's oral
submission that the evidence they had been able to produce is silent on the
point supporting his contention that they are no longer available.  If that
were the sole reasons for dismissing the appeal  then  I  would  have  been
concerned.  It is not.  The problem was not the SA302 or lack of it but the
"ends not tying up" in the way I have already indicated.

24. It is not particularly important that the judge did  not  say  that  the
evidence about the earnings was wrong.  I do not agree  with  Counsel  that
the judge did not say that the evidence was unreliable.  It is quite  clear
that it was not persuasive  for  the  reasons  that  have  been  given.   I
disagree fundamentally and respectfully with Mr  Wilding's  submissions  on
the evidence.  I read the decision differently.

25. It said in Ground 3 that the judge had  accepted  that  the  appellant's
sponsor earned at least �24,600 and that was more than sufficient  to  read
the Rules.  That is a potentially good point.  I have not been able to find
anything that shows that the judge did accept that  was  the  income.   The
ground is premised on the judge  accepting  the  "undisputed  gross  annual
income of �24,600".  This is clearly the  aggregate  of  the  salary  as  a
director of ARG  Building  Services  Limited  in  the  sum  of  �9,600  and
transfers into the business account of Robert Rentals of �10,000 and a bank
transfer from ARG Building Services Limited bank account  of  �5,000.   The
judge did not agree that these were sums paid as indicated.  The judge  was
looking for the claimed income which was larger than the sums indicated and
found payments of the sums indicated.  There is no basis  for  saying  that
the �10,000 was paid as an income from the business even if  it  came  from
the business account.  The claimed sum was much more and it  could  not  be
traced.  The judge was not satisfied with the evidence as a whole and  that
is the point that the grounds have missed.   It  does  not  follow  that  a
person who claims an income of say �20,000 and proves a transfer of �10,000
has had an income of �10,000.  It leaves unexplained why  the  much  higher
sum was claimed.  Yes the money was transferred but  the  unreliability  of
evidence as a whole means the judge was entitled not to  consider  that  as
proved income, which is what the judge did.

26. Ground 3 again is built on the same premise which for the reasons  given
I reject.

27. The judge had not lost sight of the fact that  this  was  an  Article  8
claim, which is why he was looking for potential harm arising from  further
delay to see how that impacted on the balancing exercise.

28. It is perfectly plain from reading the decision  as  a  whole  that  the
judge was not satisfied that the sponsor was dishonest  but  was  satisfied
that his affairs were so muddled and improbable  that  the  evidence  about
income was unreliable.  That was a permissible decision and illuminated the
Article 8 balancing exercise.  No-one is suggesting that  this  is  a  case
that ought to be allowed on human rights grounds if the appellant cannot be
supported at least to the extent required by the Rules and  the  conclusion
by  the  judge  that  the  sponsor  had  not  established  the  income  was
permissible.  It  follows  that  I  dismiss  the  appeal.   The  First-tier
Tribunal had not erred in law.

Notice of Decision

29. This appeal is dismissed.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 February 2021               |







