
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11401/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype Remote Hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2021                             |On 11th August 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                            Mr Hari Prasad Gurung
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is an adult dependent son of Mr Ram Prasad Gurung, a retired
Gurkha soldier, and he appealed against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Colvin, who in a decision promulgated on 7th August 2019 dismissed
the appeal of the appellant.  That decision was found to contain errors of
law and the decision was set aside in its entirety.

There was contention before Upper Tribunal Judge Gill who set aside the
decision as to whether this matter should be remitted back to the First-
tier Tribunal because the appellant's representative submitted that it was
necessary for the Tribunal to disentangle lies from truth, not least that
the sponsors admitted that they had lied to the effect that the appellant
had never worked in Nepal.  However, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill did not find
that the case was sufficiently complex and adjourned the matter for a
resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

It was accepted that the appellant's father served in the British Army for
thirteen years prior to his retirement in 1972.  He was issued with entry
clearance in December 2009 and settled in the United Kingdom on 16th
September 2010 and joined by his wife in May 2011.  The respondent accepted
that the appellant was under the age of 18 at the time of his father's
discharge from the army such that an application for settlement may have
been made prior to 2009 had the option been available to him.

It was accepted by Mr Jesurum before Upper Tribunal Judge Gill that the
appellant could not satisfy all the requirements of the Home Office policy
set out in Annex K of "Adult Children of Former Gurkhas" policy dated 22nd
January 2015 and the appeal was therefore only under Article 8.

This was the appellant's second application for entry clearance in order to
settle with his parents.  His first application was refused in August 2015
but evidently dismissed in February 2017 because the First-tier Tribunal
Judge did not accept the appellant enjoyed family life with the sponsors or
that he was financially dependent upon them.  Subsequently however,
Jitendra Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 was
promulgated.

In the instant appeal the parents admitted that they had told an untruth in
their witness statements filed before the First-tier Tribunal such that the
appellant had never worked in Nepal (paragraph 27 of the judge's decision).
 That paragraph also recorded the apology of the parents, who explained
they were advised not to refer to the appellant's work if he were to be
successful in his visa application.

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill reasoned that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
finding that the appellant had not shown that he was financially reliant
upon his parents was largely based on the fact that the judge had no
evidence that showed he had made any efforts to obtain employment but the
question the judge should have considered was whether there was a de facto
dependence and not whether financial dependence was necessary.  In effect,
the judge was concerned not with the credibility of the appellant's claim
that he was financially dependent upon the sponsor but whether it was
necessary for him to be dependent on the sponsors.  Rai significantly
changed the approach to be undertaken in the assessment of family life in
applications relying on Article 8 by adult dependent children of Gurkha
servicemen and thus the reliance on Devaseelan guidance was misplaced when
assessing family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin had relied on the
previous findings of Judge Herlihy.  The judge should have independently
considered family life and if the judge found that the appellant enjoyed
family life she should have considered proportionality.

Written submissions were made on behalf of the appellant for the rehearing
before me and it was acknowledged that the dispute appeared to be whether
the facts demonstrated the engagement of Article 8(1).

Those written submissions set out the following. The questions were first,
whether there was support between the appellant and his mother which was
real or effective or committed, Rai at paragraph 36 and secondly, whether
the appellant's conduct in this case was sufficient to outweigh the
historic injustice and justify refusal.

Article 8 family life between adults requires "something more exists than
normal emotional ties" as per Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  Relevant factors included who were the near
relatives and the nature of links and where and with whom the appellant had
resided in the past and forms of contact (paragraph 24 of Kugathas).  A
degree of emotional dependence was required as per R (Gurung) [2013] EWCA
Civ 8 (paragraph 50).  Voluntary separation did not end family life as
cited in Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at paragraph 50 and nor did the
attainment of majority end family life (Etti-Adegbola v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1319 (paragraph 23)).  Continued
presence in the family home and the fact that a dependent child had not
established a family of their own were relevant factors under AA v United
Kingdom [2012] Imm AR 1 at paragraph 49, which was approved in R (Gurung)
at paragraph 46.  At paragraphs 36 to 37 Lindblom LJ found that
"dependence" means "real support", "effective support" or "committed
support".

Family life could exist without dependency, Patel and Others v Entry
Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17.  At paragraph 14 of Patel
Sedley LJ found that "what may constitute an extant family life falls well
short of what constitutes dependency".

A compelling case was not required because the Rules did not provide for
all forms of family life between adults and nor did they address the
injustice.  The terms of the policy did not indicate where the balance of
proportionality should be struck.  The policy is not an Immigration Rule,
and the approach taken to proportionality in R (Gurung) at 43 was rejected
by the Court of Appeal.  The two year separation requirement of the policy
arguably ignored the chronology of the injustice which in turn frustrated
the policy's stated purposes.  The policy required dependence, which test
was higher than that of support.  Article 8 did not require as the policy
did emotional and financial dependence.  Finally, the policy acknowledged
at paragraph 27 that even when its terms were not met it would be necessary
to take account of the principles in R (Gurung) and Ghising.

It was accepted that the previous decision concerning the appellant was the
starting point but Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702  did no more than
provide guidance and was subject to the overriding principle that there was
a fundamental obligation to decide each new application on its individual
merits.

It was submitted that the sponsor father did not know that his son was
working from the date the family left until 2016 and that the appellant
lived with his father until departure.  The appellant's bank statements
showed a correspondent cessation of salary deposits and the appellant
continues to live in the family home.  The sponsor father supported and
continues to support the appellant financially by paying money to him from
his army pension, by sending money through informal means and through
remittances.  The appellant is in daily contact with his parents and the
emotional impact of separation and of contact was described by the
witnesses.  The appellant's parents have returned regularly to Nepal to be
with the appellant (as per the passports) and staggered their departures in
order to spend longer with him and do not stay longer owing to their fear
of losing their benefits.

The strength of the emotional bond was corroborated by the evidence of
Surya Bahadur Gurung, who served alongside the sponsor and is now his
neighbour.  He confirmed that he talks to the sponsor on a regular basis
and described his helplessness and not having his son with him.  He had
witnessed the calls and their effect on the sponsor and had witnessed the
reunion of the appellant with his mother in Nepal.

His evidence was further confirmed by Jas Kumari Gurung, who confirmed that
she saw the appellant's mother daily and had witnessed her talking to the
appellant and confirmed that the mother talks to the appellant in the
morning and the evening and appears very anxious if she has not spoken to
him and was often in tears after the call.  This evidence should be seen in
the light of the cultural practice of Nepal and it was submitted that
family life existed prior to departure and that family life had been
preserved through travel to Nepal, albeit this was restricted by financial
constraints.

The fact that the appellant does not need to rely on his parents and the
support is voluntary would be irrelevant to whether family life were
protected by Article 8.  Individual choice is protected and even where such
choice may be controversial and reciprocal reliance was relevant in that
parents may come to rely on their children.

In terms of proportionality in a historic injustice case Section 117A will
not assist the respondent where Article 8 is engaged, as per Rai at
paragraphs 55 to 57.

The observation in Gurung at paragraph 38 is that the historic injustice is
one factor to be weighed against the immigration control.  It is the fact
of injustice which provided "such a strong" argument for the "vindication"
of Article 8 rights.  Unless the respondent relies on something more than
the ordinary interests of immigration control the historic injustice will
normally require a decision in the appellant's favour.

In relation to the appellant's own dishonesty in concealing evidence, this
is not classified as being serious enough to warrant an altered result
because first, although criminality or bad immigration history as per
Ghising paragraph 60 "may" outweigh powerful factors on the appellant's
side and although the appellant's conduct constituted "bad" immigration
history, and it was certainly poor, this was conduct towards the lower end
of the spectrum.  Secondly, in the case of Gurkha veterans themselves, it
was only in cases where there was "adverse information of a serious nature"
that cases would be refused.  Thirdly, there are further matters specific
to the case which weighed on the appellant's side, (1) the sponsor served
for the Crown well in excess of four years necessary to achieve settlement,
he served in conflict, he had to way 37 years for the injustice to be
corrected and the family suffered financially as a consequence of the
injustice.

Ms Everett indicated that family life remained in dispute but the reliance
on that was largely based on previous deception maintained to the Secretary
of State and that casts doubt on the reliability of the evidence.   She
submitted it was very difficult to get a clear picture.

At the hearing both the sponsor Mr Ram Prasad Gurung, and his wife Mrs AS
Kumari Gurung, attended to give oral testimony together with Ms Surya
Bahadur Gurung, Jaskumari Gurung and Major Udaibahadur Gurung MBE. The
witnesses adopted their statements and tendered themselves for cross
examination.

The sponsor adopted his witness statement of 3rd December 2020 and 8th
February 2019 and confirmed that he started sending money to his son from
the date he came to the UK when he started to get benefits, which was after
five or six months.  He also stated that since September 2010 his son could
have access to his army pension fund of 25,000 per month and he stated that
this continued throughout the time he had been in the United Kingdom, and
he was still doing so.

The sponsor's wife and appellant's mother attended and gave oral testimony
and adopted her statement.  She told the court that she did not know
exactly when her son had told her that he had worked in Nepal but then she
found out her son had worked when she attended the Tribunal in April 2019.
She came to the UK in 2011 and at first, she would buy calling cards to
contact her son but now she used Viber.  She confirmed under cross
examination that she spoke to her son very often.   She stated that she
thought her son did not tell her he was working because the money he
received was insufficient. She stated that she did not know what he was
doing all day and he would just go out of the house in casual clothes and
come home at around 4 to 6 pm. They were both busy and did not discuss it.
She was asked if she was so close to him how did she not know he was
working. Neither she asked nor he informed her about it.

Major Gurung attended and adopted his statement and Surya Gurung and
Jaskumari Gurung (friends) also attended the hearing and adopted their
statements.

Ms Everett relied on the two decisions.   The challenge to family life was
maintained.  The evidence has demonstrated even further that there is no
family life, there was no cultural relativist evidence it would be common
to not know what their son was doing, and it was inconceivable that they
did not know he was working.  She submitted that perhaps the lie
perpetrated by the appellant and maintained to the tribunal was something
that his parents were aware of.  Normally if family life were found because
of the historic injustice that was the end of the matter but in this case,
there was weight to be afforded to public interest because of the deception
and the balance in relation to proportionality should go against appellant.


Mr Jesurum made oral submissions that the appellant had lied in his first
application and to the Entry Clearance Officer in second application and in
his statement to the Tribunal.  It was only at the door of the court on the
day of the hearing that the matter was revealed. The case was about the
sponsor as well as the appellant.  The sponsor was of good character and
was discharged from the army with an exemplary record and his character and
integrity were vouched for.   If the support is real or committed it came
within article 8(1) even if the family member may be lying and undeserving.
The cultural importance of family was high in Gurkha families. Mr Jesurum
pointed to the daily contact between the mother and the son which included
video calls.  Mrs Jaskumari had witnessed the effect of contact and gave
evidence to that effect.

As to the deception, taken within the spectrum of immigration offending it
was not at the highest end and whether it could be characterised as bad
deserved subjective evaluation.  The approach to Gurkha cases was
compensatory and the family life of both appellant and sponsor was
implicated. The penalties for attempting to obtain leave by deception were
set out by Section 24A of the Immigration Act 1971  and a person guilty of
an offence under this section is liable (a) on summary conviction, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding
the statutory maximum, or to both; or (b) on conviction on indictment, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or to a fine, or to both.

Analysis

The starting point is the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy of
February 2017 further to Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702.  That
decision was made on 15th February 2017 and recorded the evidence of the
sponsor that he had visited Nepal three times since coming to the UK at
that time and had moved permanently from Nepal on 16th September 2010.  He
stated he paid for his son's rent and gave his son 25,000 rupees per annum.
 He also stated he had given the family home to the eldest son.

At paragraph 4.6 of Judge Herlihy's decision, the sponsor was recorded as
saying that since his son had left school, he had never had a job and he
confirmed that he had not in oral evidence.  The sponsor's wife also at
that hearing stated that her son had not had any job in Nepal although he
had done some farming on the family farm, which is now owned by the eldest
son.  "She confirmed he had done nothing since 2011."  I note that Judge
Herlihy did find that there was evidence of limited financial support by
the sponsor to the appellant but it was found to be "relatively recent".
Judge Herlihy, however, found no family life, albeit that the appellant was
26 at the age of the application and remained unmarried.  She was not
satisfied he was financially and emotionally dependent on the sponsor.
Judge Herlihy did not believe that the appellant had never worked.  As it
transpires, she was correct. Subsequent to that decision, however, has been
the authority of Rai, which is cited at length above.

There was now evidence before the Tribunal and since the decision of Judge
Herlihy that the appellant had in fact been appointed as a laboratory
assistant on 22nd February 2010 by the Manipal Teaching Hospital.  The
father settled in the UK on 16th September 2010 and the mother joined him
on 12th May 2011.

It would appear that, as cited by Judge Herlihy, the sponsor's eldest son
and younger daughter were the first to get married and become independent
and another son, Ramesh, also married.  The further evidence before this
Tribunal shows that the appellant obtained a Nepal Health Professional
Council registration certificate and registered as a "Lab Assistant of
Third Level" on 2nd March 2009.  Indeed, the appellant was appointed as a
laboratory assistant by the Manipal Teaching Hospital.  The appellant was
also recorded as a student of the Pokhara Technical Training and Research
Centre in 2007 (prior to the departure of the parents).  The appellant
earned 9,779 rupees per month at the Manipal Teaching Hospital, but his
employment ended in July 2016.

In his witness statement dated 3rd December 2020 at paragraphs 4 and 5, the
sponsor stated that the appellant was, after 2005 "studying in some
training centre while living in Pokhara.  I forgot what he told me about
the name of the institute and what course he was doing."

At paragraph 5 the sponsor states that in 2009 their area in Nepal became
unsafe for living and he and his wife moved to Pokhara with the appellant.
He added:

"He [the appellant] would then leave the house in the same clothes that he
wore at home.  He would leave sometimes at 9, sometimes and 10 (sic) and
sometimes even later.  ...  He never wore any uniform or smart clothes.  I
did not check with him where was going as long as there was no news of
trouble.  ...",

and at paragraph 9:

"From time to time, I would scold him and remind him that he needs to find
work and start to earn on his own.  Since, in our culture, we do not talk
back to elders, I did not expect Hari to talk back.  I forgive him for not
telling me about his secret employment."

Paragraph 10:

"I did not know my son was working",

and at paragraph 12, "when I found out that Hari was previous employed, I
was surprised.  I was upset at Hari for not telling me that.  I asked him
why he would hide that information".

Albeit the decision of Judge Colvin was set aside, and I place no reliance
on any findings, there is a record of the oral evidence-in-chief given by
the sponsor as follows:

"He said that he made the previous statement about his son not working
after he was advised that his son would not get a visa if he mentioned
about working.  He can say now that he made a mistake as he knew that it
was not true at the time.  It was when he was at the Tribunal on the last
occasion he realised about his son working."

That appears to demonstrate that the sponsor despite his integrity is
willing to mislead the court.

Indeed, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in her decision dated 27th February 2020
made the following observation:

         "6.  In the instant appeal, the sponsors admitted that they had
         told an untruth in their witness statements filed in the appeal
         before the judge when they said that the appellant had never worked
         in Nepal (para 27 of the judge's decision).  Para 27 of the judge's
         decision records that they were apologetic and explained that they
         were advised not to refer to the appellant's work if he was to be
         successful in gaining a visa."

Additionally, I find the sponsor's statement of 3rd December 2020 is
surprising.  I do not accept that the sponsor would not know the appellant
was working they were that close and lived together (particularly as he had
known his son had attended college) and I note that the appellant secured
employment prior to the sponsor and his wife leaving Nepal.  Not least,
they confirmed that they had their meals together at home (paragraph 8 of
the December 2020 statement). I am asked to accept that there is a very
close emotional relationship and indeed there was a continuing and close
relationship to this day.  I simply do not believe that the sponsor and his
wife did not know their son was employed or as the wife stated in her oral
evidence that they were very close, but she did not know where he was
going.  The sponsor gave evidence to the effect that children in their
culture and family were obedient and responsive to their parents.

In his witness statement of 23rd March 2019 at paragraph 6 the appellant
states when he was in Nepal,

"I used to give them company in Nepal.  We used to talk with each other all
the time.  I would used to read newspaper to my dad, I used to help mother
in cooking and tidying up the house.  I used to go out with them for
general walk around the neighbourhood.  We spent all our time together".

I also note that the appellant also stated in his witness statement of 23rd
March 2019 that his parents could not afford to send him to college and
that at paragraph 12:

         "I have not been able to find any work in Nepal due to my history
         and education.  I have been receiving money from my father.
         Without this support, I will not be able to survive."

In his second statement of 3rd December 2020 the appellant accepted that he
had lied and that he had worked for the Manipal Teaching Hospital as a lab
assistant and since then he had been unemployed. The job with Manipal
Hospital was terminated on 15th July 2016.

Bearing in mind the guidance from Rai identified above, the essential
points are that the appellant is a 32 year old unmarried man and has been
living in rented property in Pokhara since his father came to the UK.

On careful examination of the bank statements it would appear that the
sponsor transferred to the appellant's Standard Chartered account 25,000
Nepalese rupees twice in 2014, eleven times in 2015, twelve times in 2016,
twelve times in 2017, twelve times in 2018, ten times in 2019 until one
payment transfer on 1st January 2020.  In his oral testimony the sponsor
stated that the appellant could access the army pension in the sum of
25,000 rupees per month.  It would appear from the Standard Chartered bank
statements of the sponsor and his wife that in 2020 to September, nine
transfers of 25,000 rupees were made to the appellant.  The sponsor stated
that he topped up this amount with approximately 6,000 to 7,000 rupees per
month via transfers.  The remittance slips showed that there are transfers
of approximately 6,600 Nepalese rupees from October 2019 through to October
2020.

The staff salary credited to the appellant's account from 2014 (those were
the only accounts available) appeared to be approximately 16,000 to 17,000
rupees per month.  His letter of appointment dated 22nd February 2010
indicated an initial monthly salary of only Rs 9779.

I do not accept the appellant's or sponsor's written or oral evidence on
this, but I do accept the documentary proof that there has been
longstanding support of the appellant which is in excess of his salary
(even at the increased level), and which leads me to conclude that indeed
his parents were supporting him financially whilst they lived in the UK,
Fand he lived in Nepal.  Bearing in mind the sponsor is retired and
claiming pension credit, I find it unlikely he would make payments which
are well in excess of the son's salary to the sum of approximately 7,000
rupees if it was not necessary.

The question said to be pertinent in Rai is whether family life existed
when the sponsor departed from Nepal and whether it endured.  I find that
both requirements are fulfilled.  As held in Rai at paragraph 42

         'the fact that he and his parents would have applied at the same
         time for leave to enter the United Kingdom and would have come to
         the United Kingdom together as a family unit had they been able to
         afford to do so, do not appear to have been grappled with by the
         Upper Tribunal judge under article 8(1). In my view they should
         have been. They went to the heart of the matter: the question of
         whether, even though the appellant's parents had chosen to leave
         Nepal to settle in the United Kingdom when they did, his family
         life with them subsisted then, and was still subsisting at the time
         of the Upper Tribunal's decision. This was the critical question
         under article 8(1)'.

I accept that they were living together prior to the sponsor's and mother's
departure (not least because it is unlikely the mother would remain alone).
 I find that the relationship has endured because I place reliance on the
witness statements of Major Udai Bahadur Gurung, Mr Surya Bahadur Gurung
and Mrs Jas Kumari Gurung that there is a close emotional attachment
between the appellant and sponsors, and they are in frequent contact.
There was nothing to suggest that these witnesses would tell anything other
than the truth and the Major has a distinguished career.  I also note that
the sponsor has visited Nepal but no doubt the limited occasions on which
he has visited Nepal, that is the three times up until 2017, is due to the
financial restrictions and the parents would prefer to pay for their
child's living expenses.

I therefore accept that there is real and effective and/or committed
support which has continued, notwithstanding I find that the sponsor's and
appellant's evidence have severe limitations.

It is clear, having found family life, that the threshold of engagement is
a low one further to AG (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2007] EWCA Civ 801.  Albeit the interference is in accordance
with the law for the purposes of immigration control and maintaining the
rights and freedoms of other.

I turn to the question of proportionality.  Section 117A and B of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 do not apply as per Rai.  Even
after giving the policy of the Secretary of State considerable weight the
failure to meet the primary terms of the policy is insufficient to outweigh
the historic injustice because the policy requires the application of
caselaw.

R (Gurung) at paragraphs 42 and 43 identifies the strength to be afforded
to  adult dependent children in Gurkha cases not least because had they
been able to make applications to settle prior to the children reaching the
age of majority they would have made those applications at the time.

         42.  .... the crucial point is that there was an historic injustice
         in both cases, the consequence of which was that members of both
         groups were prevented from settling in the UK. That is why the
         historic injustice is such an important factor to be taken into
         account in the balancing exercise and why the applicant dependant
         child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has such a strong claim
         to have his article 8(1) right vindicated, notwithstanding the
         potency of the countervailing public interest in the maintaining of
         a firm immigration policy. ...'.

         43.    ...If a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic
         injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a time when his
         dependant (now) adult child would have been able to accompany him
         as a dependant child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason
         for holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult child to
         join his family now...'.

The question is the weight to be given to the appellant's own dishonesty.
Although I find that the sponsor and his wife have not been candid with the
court I consider that their interests still need to be taken into account
as per Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 9.

Ghising & Ors (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) (Nepal) [2013] UKUT
56 at paragraph 60 states that criminality or a bad immigration history may
outweigh the powerful factors on the Appellant's side, but they normally do
not do so.

         '60...Thus, a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour may
         still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed. But, if
         the Respondent is relying only upon the public interest described
         by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41 of Gurung, then the weight
         to be given to the historic injustice will normally require a
         decision in the Appellant's favour...'.

As Mr Jesurum conceded, the immigration history was a poor one, but the
question is whether it is so serious as to warrant the balance to be struck
in favour of the Entry Clearance Officer?  I turn to the 'Gurkhas
discharged before 1 July 1997 and their family members policy', which
states as follows at paragraph 152 of the bundle:

         "It is only where adverse information of a serious nature is
         received about the applicant - for example, evidence of any serious
         criminal activity - will the application normally be refused.  In
         cases where there is evidence of serious criminal activity, the
         normal threshold should be met in order for the case to be
         considered for refusal of settlement.  The threshold is a custodial
         sentence of at least 12 months if the offence was committed in the
         UK or, if committed outside the UK, the offence would have been
         punishable by a custodial sentence of at least 12 months if it had
         occurred within the UK.  See Appendix Armed Forces suitability
         requirements and General grounds for refusals. If such information
         comes to light, you should refer the case to a senior caseworker in
         the normal way."

As Mr Jesurum submitted, the offence of putting in false information could
be construed as an attempt to obtain leave by deception, which, under the
Immigration Act 1971 Section 24A may attract a sentence of not exceeding
two years.  There were no sentencing guidelines on attempting to obtain
leave by deception or what would be likely to lead to a sentence of
imprisonment for a first offence put before me save that Section 24A reads
as set out above.  The appellant has not to date been charged or convicted
but I can reasonably conclude from the relevant provision under the
Immigration Act 1971 that a summary conviction may attract a six-month
sentence and a fine or both.  On the basis of the admission of the
appellant so far, the prospect of a summary conviction rather than
conviction on indictment is more likely.  On that basis even if the offence
were to attract the most serious penalty on summary conviction that
sentence of six months would not warrant exclusion under the policy or be
characterised as serious criminality.  I make clear that the conduct is not
in any way condoned but, in the circumstances, and relying on the policy as
set out in the appellant's bundle,   I find on balance that the conduct in
this case has, only marginally, not been serious enough to strike the
balance against the appellant and I therefore allow the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 5th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
not least because of the circumstances of this matter.



Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 5th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
