
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12567/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|via Microsoft Teams                  |On 27 August 2021                    |
|On 16 August 2021                    |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Ms Tanka Maya Gurung                              |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Entry Clearance Officer                           |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Others present via Teams:  The sponsor and his wife who were attended by Ms
                        Angdali Sherpa of Everest Law Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of  Nepal  born  on  10  June  1984,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grey  (hereafter
    the "judge") promulgated on 29 December 2020 following a hearing on  14
    December 2020 held remotely via Cloud Video Platform by which the judge
    dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds against a decision of  the
    respondent of 12 June 2019 to refuse her application of 19  March  2019
    for entry clearance in order to join her father, Mr Lal Bahadur  Gurung
    (the "sponsor") in the United Kingdom on the  basis  that  she  enjoyed
    family life with the sponsor and that the decision was disproportionate
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The sponsor is a retired Gurkha settled in the United Kingdom.  He  had
    served in the Gurkha Brigade for over 15 years. He  was  discharged  in
    1977. He settled in the United Kingdom in April 2016. In February 2017,
    his first wife, Gaumati Gurung, and  his  youngest  daughter,  Sharmila
    Gurung, joined him to settle in the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellant had previously applied for entry clearance in 2017.  That
    application was also refused. Her  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Clemes  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 13 December 2017.

 4. At the hearing before the judge, the appellant was represented by Mr  R
    Jesurum who also settled the grounds in support of the applications  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal.

 5.  Four  grounds  were  advanced  in  the  appellant's  application   for
    permission to appeal, which may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  Ground 1 is that the judge erred in failing  to  engage  with  the
         submission advanced by Mr Jesurum that Judge Clemes  had  erred  in
         law in reaching his finding that the appellant did not enjoy family
         life with the sponsor on the evidence before him, in  that  he  had
         applied the wrong test in reaching his  finding,  and  that,  as  a
         consequence, the guidance of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Devaseelan  v
         Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  *  [2002]  UKIAT  702
         should not be applied to his finding that  the  appellant  did  not
         enjoy family life. The judge  failed  to  resolve  the  appellant's
         submissions and as a result further erred in law by simply applying
         Devaseelan.

    (ii) Ground 2 is that the judge erred in reaching her finding that  the
         appellant had an alternative source of income. This issue had never
         been raised by the respondent in  the  decision  or  in  the  Entry
         Clearance Manager's review of the decision or by  the  respondent's
         representative in cross-examination or in  submissions  or  at  any
         time. Accordingly, the appellant had  not  had  an  opportunity  to
         address the judge on the issue and, if she had  been  afforded  the
         opportunity, further evidence would have been adduced.

    (iii)    Ground 3 is that the judge erred in reaching her finding  that
         contact between the appellant and the sponsor had reduced to once a
         week and that this was due to a lessening of  the  emotional  bonds
         between the sponsor and the appellant. The  reasons  given  by  the
         judge were inadequate and she  took  no  account  of  and  gave  no
         reasons for rejecting other evidence that was clear and  consistent
         as to the nature of the contact.

    (iv) Ground 4 is that, whilst the judge correctly identified  the  test
         as to whether or not family life  was  being  enjoyed  between  the
         appellant  and  the  sponsor  as  being  whether  there  was  real,
         committed or effective support, she failed to apply it.

 6. At the hearing, I heard submissions from Mr Moriarty  who  adopted  the
    grounds in their entirety. In relation to ground 1, he referred  me  to
    the decision of Judge Clemes. At para  16(a)  of  his  decision,  Judge
    Clemes said that it was for the appellant  to  satisfy  him  "that  she
    [was] wholly emotionally dependent on  the  sponsor  in  terms  of  her
    emotional and financial positions". Mr Moriarty submitted that, as this
    was the wrong test, the judge erred by  taking  the  finding  of  Judge
    Clemes that the appellant did not enjoy family life with the sponsor on
    the evidence before him as her starting point pursuant to Devaseelan.

 7. In relation to ground 2, Mr Moriarty helpfully referred me to paras  19
    and 20 of the witness statement dated 9 March 2020 of the  sponsor.  At
    para 19, the sponsor had said that  his  pension  was  accumulating  in
    Nepal; that when he was in Nepal for 1 ï¿½ months in 2019,  he  took  the
    money from his army pension and distributed it amongst his children. He
    also used the money to pay off any loans and credits that his  children
    had taken. At para 20 of his  statement,  he  said  that  none  of  his
    children in  Nepal  have  independent  income  and  that,  without  his
    pension, they would not be able to survive.

 8. In relation  to  ground  3,  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    explanation given by the witness  Mrs  Indira  Gurung  at  the  hearing
    before her for the reduced frequency of calls by the appellant  to  the
    sponsor, being that as a result  of  the  lockdown  the  appellant  was
    confined to her remote village  and  unable  to  make  the  journey  to
    purchase charge cards for her telephone. However, the judge stated that
    she could not understand how this  would  have  prevented  the  sponsor
    making calls to the appellant (para 56 of the judge's decision).

 9. Mr Jesurum contended in the grounds that Mrs Indira  Gurung  had  given
    evidence that the appellant's inability to charge her card  also  meant
    that the sponsor could not make telephone calls to her.  There  was  no
    witness statement from Mr Jesurum in support of the  assertion  in  the
    grounds that the explanation given by Mrs Indira  Gurung  was  relevant
    not only as evidence of the reason for the appellant not being able  to
    call the sponsor but also as evidence of the reason why the sponsor had
    been unable to call the appellant.

10. Having examined the judge's record of the  proceedings  ("RoP"),  I  am
    satisfied that the questioning of Mrs  Indira  Gurung  related  to  the
    reasons why the sponsor had been unable to call the appellant.

11. In relation to ground 4, Mr Moriarty submitted that the judge  had  not
    applied the correct test in reaching her  finding  as  to  whether  the
    appellant enjoyed family life with  the  sponsor,  partly  because  her
    finding in this regard was informed by Judge  Clemes'  finding  on  the
    same issue and partly because of the errors she had  made  herself,  as
    contended in the other grounds.

12. In her submissions in response, Ms Everett  did  not  accept  that  the
    judge had erred in law as contended in ground 1. She submitted that the
    judge was aware of the submissions of Mr Jesurum on the issue. She drew
    my attention to para 49 of the  judge's  decision  from  which  it  was
    clear, in her submission, that the judge had made her own finding  that
    the appellant enjoyed family life with the sponsor as part of a  family
    unit at the time of the sponsor's departure from Nepal in  April  2016.
    Ms Everett submitted that it was clear from the judge's reasoning  that
    she had made her own findings concerning the existence of  family  life
    as at the date of the hearing before her.

13. In relation to ground 2, Ms Everett accepted that  the  judge  had  not
    considered paras 19 and 20 of the sponsor's witness  statement.  It  is
    fair to say that Ms Everett's position as to whether or not  the  error
    was material changed, from her initial position that the error was  not
    material to her final position when she accepted that it  was  material
    to the judge's overall finding that family life did not  exist  between
    the appellant and the sponsor.

14. In relation to ground 3, Ms Everett submitted that  it  was  not  clear
    that there was an explanation before the judge as to why the  sponsor's
    calls to the appellant had reduced.

15. Ms Everett then stated that what troubled her most was that  the  judge
    had found that there was family life  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor at the time of the sponsor's departure from Nepal and  she  had
    made a specific finding that  the  appellant  had  not  established  an
    independent family of her own (para 55) which taken together  with  any
    errors of law in relation to grounds 2 and 3 meant, in her  view,  that
    it was difficult to defend the judge's decision as a whole.

16. I then invited submissions as to the appropriate disposal in the  event
    that I concluded that the judge had materially erred in law.

17. Mr Moriarty requested that the appeal be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing on the merits although he said that he was
    aware that many appeals were being retained in the Upper  Tribunal  for
    re-making.

18. However, as I pointed out  to  the  parties,  the  judge  had  made  an
    important finding at para 49, that the appellant  enjoyed  family  life
    with the sponsor at the time of his departure from Nepal,  the  benefit
    of which the appellant should not be deprived lightly.

19. I then asked Ms Everett what her position was in relation to whether or
    not the appellant had been financially supported by the sponsor for the
    entire duration of his separation  from  the  appellant  following  his
    departure from Nepal.

20. Ms Everett accepted that it is difficult to see how I could  reach  any
    finding other than that the appellant had been financially supported by
    the sponsor for the entirety of such period given that: (i)  the  judge
    had found the sponsor a credible witness; and (ii) her finding that the
    appellant had not formed an independent family.  Ms  Everett  therefore
    accepted that I should re-make the decision on the appeal and allow the
    appeal.

21. I am very grateful to Ms Everett who adopted a very  fair  approach  to
    the appeal.

22. It is now necessary for me to explain  the  reasons  for  my  decision,
    especially given the very detailed  assessment  by  the  judge  of  the
    evidence before her.

23. In my judgment, there is no substance in ground 1. Whilst it is correct
    that the judge did state more than once (see, for example, para  45  of
    her decision) that it was not for her to consider submissions  advanced
    to undermine the decision of Judge Clemes and whilst it is correct that
    the judge did state that the findings of Judge Clemes were her starting
    point, the reality is that she did in fact assess the evidence herself,
    applying the correct test (see para 45) and reaching her own finding on
    the question whether there was family life between  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor at the time of the sponsor's  departure  from  Nepal.  This
    much is clear, for example, from para 49 of her decision which reads:

         "49. I am satisfied that the appellant lived  in  the  family  home
             with her mother and father and siblings at  the  time  of  the
             sponsor's  application  for  settlement.  At  this  point  the
             appellant  was  studying  and  would  have   presumably   been
             supported by her father. [pic]The  evidence  from  Sarmila  is
             that the appellant fulfilled a role as carer to  her  parents,
             preparing  their  meals  and  washing  their  clothes.   There
             appeared to be a relationship of mutual  support  between  the
             parents and  appellant  at  this  time.  Whether  the  sponsor
             considered the appellant to be a  dependant  of  his  at  this
             point was a matter considered by Judge Clemes. [Judge  Clemes]
             inferred from the sponsor's failure to declare  the  appellant
             as a dependant in his visa  application  and  the  failure  to
             include her photograph on the  2013  kindred  roll,  that  the
             appellant was not truly dependant on her  father.  I  consider
             that [Judge Clemes] was entitled to draw inferences from these
             omissions that informed the decision, together with  a  number
             of other factors, on whether there was family  life  in  2017.
             However, if dependency is read down to mean real, committed or
             effective support, and particularly in view of the  fact  that
             the appellant and sponsor were cohabiting, I am satisfied,  on
             balance, that despite the fact the appellant was 31 years  old
             at the time she enjoyed family life with the sponsor  as  part
             of a family unit at the date of  the  sponsor's  departure  in
             April 2016. I must consider for the purposes  of  this  appeal
             whether that family life has been severed by the separation of
             the appellant and sponsor for the last 3 years  and  8  months
             whilst they have been living on separate continents."

24. Ground 1 is therefore not established.

25. Ground 2 is established, for the following reasons:

    (i)  At para 51 onwards of  her  decision,  the  judge  considered  the
         evidence of remittances from the sponsor to the appellant which, on
         the evidence, was shared by the appellant with  her  siblings  with
         whom she resides in Nepal. The judge found, inter alia, that  there
         was ample evidence of financial support having been  given  to  the
         appellant by the  sponsor  and  that  the  payments  have  remained
         consistent throughout almost the entire period  since  the  sponsor
         settled in the United Kingdom (para 52).

    (ii) However, the judge found that, for a period of 8 months from  late
         September 2018 until June 2019, the amount of the  remittances  was
         such that it was likely to  be  the  case  that  there  were  other
         sources  of  income  that  may  indicate  that  the  appellant  had
         established an independent life or at least was dependent upon  her
         brothers for financial support (paras 52 and 54).

    (iii)    I am satisfied, as Ms Everett accepted, that, in assessing the
         evidence of financial support during the  period  of  8  months  in
         question, the judge overlooked  considering  the  evidence  of  the
         sponsor at paras 19 and 20 of his  witness  statement,  i.e.  that,
         during his visit to Nepal  in  2019,  he  distributed  monies  that
         accumulated from his army pension to  his  children  in  Nepal  and
         settled credit that they had accumulated.

    (iv) The judge found the sponsor a credible  witness.  She  found  that
         there was ample evidence of the appellant being  supported  by  her
         father and that the payments  had  remained  consistent  throughout
         almost the entire period since the sponsor settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom. It was only in respect of the specific period of 8  months
         that she expressed any concerns in her assessment of whether  there
         was financial support. For the reasons given  at  (i)-(iii)  above,
         she erred in her assessment of the evidence of financial support in
         respect of this 8-month period.

    (vi) In these circumstances, I am driven to  conclude  that  the  judge
         erred in reaching her finding that the low level of remittances for
         the period of 8 months showed that the appellant may  have  had  an
         alternative source of income, in  that  she  failed  to  take  into
         account relevant evidence in reaching that finding. In addition,  I
         am driven to conclude that her error was material to  the  outcome.
         This is because her finding concerning the 8-month period fed  into
         her overall finding that evidence of the remittances before her and
         the fact that the appellant was living in the family home were  not
         sufficient in themselves to demonstrate the level  and  quality  of
         support necessary to establish family life (last sentence  of  para
         54).

26. Ground 3 is established, for the following reasons:

    (i)  The RoP shows that Mrs Indira Gurung was questioned by  the  judge
         about the frequency of calls by the sponsor to the appellant  (page
         5 of the RoP and the unnumbered page immediately  before  it).  The
         RoP shows that Mrs Indira Gurung said, in answer to questions  from
         the judge:


         Qn:  Contact parents + Tanka Maya - how often?
         Ans: Mother used to call almost every  day  -  especially  festival
             time She'd be very upset.


         Qn:  Has that changed? (i.e. used to be really every day)
         Ans: After lockdown began - does not call as often


         Mr J:
         Qn:  Why doesn't call as much since lockdown?
         Ans: They live in a village in rural area + can't by re-charge card
             when  they  want  -  that  could  be  reason  don't  call   so
             frequently.

    (ii) Given that the  questioning  concerned  the  sponsor  calling  the
         appellant, the explanation given by Mrs Indira  Gurung  related  to
         the  reduction  in  frequency  of  calls  by  the  sponsor  to  the
         appellant. This was therefore evidence that should have been  taken
         into account by the judge. It is clear from para 56 of her decision
         that the judge overlooked considering  this  evidence  because  she
         said, at para 56: "Even accepting the practical  difficulties  that
         have been encountered across the globe as a result of  restrictions
         due to the pandemic, I  do  not  understand  how  this  would  have
         prevented the sponsor, with Sarmila's assistance, making  calls  to
         the  appellant,  although  I  appreciate  it  may  impact  on   the
         appellant's ability to initiate the calls herself."

    (iii)    The evidence of Mrs Indira Gurung was relevant to the  judge's
         finding that the frequency of contact between the sponsor  and  the
         appellant had reduced.

    (iv) In deciding whether the error was material, I have noted that  the
         judge said at para 60 as follows:

         "60. Here I do not find that there is that  'something  more'  than
             the normal ties of love and [pic]affection  between  an  adult
             child and a  parent.  Judge  Clemes  found  that  family  life
             between the sponsor and appellant did not exist and  that  the
             appellant had family  life  with  her  remaining  brothers  in
             Nepal. I  accept  that  family  life  with  her  brothers  and
             [pic]family life with her parents and sister in the UK are not
             mutually exclusive. The  sponsor  accepted  that  nothing  had
             changed since the 2017 decision. Although there  is  [pic]more
             witness evidence available to me than was before Judge Clemes,
             this could have been available in 2017 and, in  any  event,  I
             find does not present a materially different [sic] position to
             that assessed in 2017. Considering the evidence in the round I
             find that the emotional ties between  the  appellant  and  her
             family in the  UK  are  less  now  than  they  were  in  2017,
             particularly with regard to the frequency of telephone contact
             between them. The appellant is now 36 years  of  age  and  has
             lived without her father for over  three  and  a  half  years.
             During this  time  the  telephone  contact  between  them  has
             reduced. Although regular remittances have  been  made,  these
             have been for varying amounts and  there  have  been  gaps  in
             payment which is  suggestive  of  other  sources  of  finances
             available to the appellant and her brothers. I  find  that  in
             the years since the sponsor settled in the  UK  the  appellant
             has developed a life independent of him.  In  the  years  that
             have passed it appears that Sarmila has taken over the role as
             her parents' carer and the appellant  would  have  social  and
             emotional support from the siblings with whom she resides."

         (My emphasis)

    (v)  I have already said above that the error established by  ground  2
         was material to the outcome. It is also clear, from  para  60,  the
         error established by ground 3 is also material to the outcome.

27. For the reasons given above, I set aside the decision of the judge.

28. In view of the submissions of Ms Everett,  I  proceed  to  re-make  the
    decision on the appeal.

29. In view of the fact that Ms Everett said that it was difficult  to  see
    how I would not  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal, I can be brief in giving my reasons for allowing the appeal  on
    human rights grounds. My reasons are as follows:

    (i)  In relation to the factual issue that was the subject of ground 2,
         i.e. as to financial support, the sponsor was found credible by the
         judge. She accepted that there was ample evidence to show that  the
         appellant has been financially supported by  the  sponsor  for  the
         entirety of the period since the sponsor settled in the UK save for
         the period of 8 months that I have already discussed above.  Taking
         into account the evidence at paras  19  and  20  of  the  sponsor's
         witness statement, I am driven  to  find  that  the  appellant  has
         established that she has been financially supported by the  sponsor
         at all times since he settled in the United Kingdom.

    (ii) Accordingly there is no reason to suppose that she had or  has  an
         alternative source of income and/or that  she  has  been  employed.
         Whilst I note that this was one of the reasons why the judge  found
         that the appellant had established an independent life,  it  cannot
         feature as  a  reason  for  me  to  find  that  the  appellant  has
         established an independent life. There is no other basis upon which
         I could reach such a finding.

    (iii)    In relation to the factual  issue  that  was  the  subject  of
         ground 3, the evidence of Mrs  Indira  Gurung  explains  why  phone
         calls by the sponsor to the appellant have reduced in  more  recent
         times, following the imposition of the lockdown. The judge accepted
         the explanation in relation to the reduced frequency  of  calls  by
         the appellant to the sponsor, as is clear from the sentence I  have
         quoted above from para 56 of the judge's decision.

    (iv) I bear in mind that  the  judge  found  it  significant  that  the
         sponsor knew  very  little  about  the  appellant's  education  and
         studies and could not recall her health studies or degree course in
         education (para 57).

    (v)  Nevertheless, taking into account the judge's finding  that  there
         was family life between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  when  the
         sponsor settled in the United Kingdom and  given  my  reasoning  in
         relation to the financial support and contact between the appellant
         and the sponsor in the period since the  sponsor's  departure  from
         Nepal and given, further, that the appellant continues to  live  in
         the family home which is in the name of her  mother,  there  is  no
         basis upon which I could reach any  finding  other  than  that  the
         appellant has established, on the balance  of  probabilities,  that
         she and the sponsor continue to enjoy family life with  each  other
         and have done so at all times since the  sponsor's  departure  from
         Nepal. There is no basis upon which I could reach any finding other
         than that the appellant has not established a life  independent  of
         the sponsor.

    (vii)     In  relation  to  proportionality,  the  respondent  has  not
         advanced any justification for the interference with the  right  to
         family life between the appellant and the sponsor  other  than  the
         ordinary interests of immigration control.  Applying  the  decision
         of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas  /  British
         Overseas Citizens - historic wring - weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC),
         I am therefore satisfied that the decision is disproportionate.

    (ix) For the reasons  given  above,  I  re-make  the  decision  on  the
         appellant's appeal by allowing the appeal on human  rights  grounds
         (Article 8).

    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of any error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside.

    The Upper Tribunal  has  proceeded  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal. The decision on the appellant's appeal  is  re-made
    by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8).



Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  Date: 17 August 2021


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

