
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 July 2021                               |On 18 August 2021             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Service Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago.  Her date  of  birth
    is 21 April 1993.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moffatt)
promulgated on 30 September 2019 allowing the Appellant's appeal.  My error
of law decision reads as follows:

"20. Ms Panagiotopoulo submitted that the finding of the judge at [54] is a
finding that there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life.
However, I do not agree.  A proper reading of [53] and [54], discloses that
the judge was concerned with the Appellant's private life on return.  There
was no consideration of insurmountable obstacles because the judge accepted
that A would not accompany the Appellant.

21.  Ms Panagiotopoulu submitted that it is clear the judge accepted the
Secretary of State's submissions that there were no insurmountable
obstacles because he went onto consider Article 8 outside of the Rules.  I
must consider whether the absence of a reasoned decision concerning
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Trinidad and Tobago
is an error of form or substance.

22.  The judge first turned his attention to the possibility of family life
in Trinidad and Tobago, when assessing Article 8 outside of the Rules.  He
attached significant weight to whether A would as matter of fact return
with the Appellant.  At [57] the judge made some findings about the
difficulties faced by A should he accompany the Appellant.  However, these
findings are far from sufficient to satisfy the insurmountable obstacles
test, properly applying Agyarko.  However, they are findings that informed
the judge's decision under Article 8.  The failure to determine the
insurmountable obstacles test in this case affected the evaluation outside
of the Rules.  While the judge said that there is a strong public interest
in the maintenance of effective immigration control, it is unclear what, if
any, weight he attached to the policy of the Secretary of State as
expressed in the Rules when assessing proportionality in this case.

23.  It may have been open to the judge to conclude that the Secretary of
State's decision disproportionately interfered with the Appellant's rights
under Article 8; however, the judge in this case did not make a reasoned
finding under EX1.1 and this infects the overall proportionality
assessment.  Ground 1 is made out.

24.  In respect of the second ground of appeal, I also find that this has
been made out.  The Appellant's status here has been unlawful since she
became an overstayer.  The judge did not make it clear how he factored this
into the proportionality assessment and applied s.117B(4)(b).  The
Appellant's case was advanced on the basis that it was not her fault that
she had not regularised her status. This is a relevant factor that the
judge was entitled to consider and attach weight to, but he does not
properly engage with the issue.  The findings at [56] are insufficient and
do not disclose a properly reasoned application of s.117B(4)(b).  The judge
does not make it clear what he accepted from Mr Richardson's skeleton
argument and why.  Having seen this document, the submissions refer to
precarious family life.  However, the Applicant's relationship with A was
established when she was in the United Kingdom unlawfully. The only period
of leave the Appellant has ever been granted was 6 months when she
initially came to the United Kingdom in 2009.

25.  The error of law is material.  I set aside the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal.

26.  There was no further evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

27.  There is no reason to go behind the findings of fact made by the First-
tier Tribunal in respect of credibility.  There was no cross-appeal.  The
judge accepted that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.  The issue
is proportionality.

28.  Ms Panagiotopoulou applied for an adjournment.  She said that there
was up to date medical evidence on which the Appellant seeks to rely.  The
Appellant had recently instructed IAS to represent her.  There had been a
delay in seeking paperwork from the previously instructed solicitors, the
documents having been received the day before the hearing.

29.  I granted the adjournment.

         I make the following directions;-

          1. The Appellant is to serve and file all evidence on  which  she
             relies not later than 21 days before  the  hearing.   (If  the
             Appellant seeks to rely on the Chikwamba  point  (Chikwamba  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department v SSHD [2008]  UKHL
             40, her solicitors are reminded that  the  relevant  date  for
             consideration of Article 8 is the date of  hearing  and  their
             attention is drawn to Younas (section  117B(6)(b);  Chikwamba;
             Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 00129).

          2. If the Appellant proposes to call live evidence,  up  to  date
             witness statements must be served and filed not later than  21
             days before the hearing.

          3. The Appellant is to serve and file a consolidated  bundle  not
             later than 7 days before the hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The Secretary of State's application is allowed.

         The matter is adjourned for a face to face resumed hearing."

The matter came before me on 13 July 2021 in order to remake the appeal.

The Law

The Statutory Regime

 2. The Secretary of State's case is that the Appellant does not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements with reference to Appendix FM.  The  Secretary
    of State therefore considered whether EX.1. applies in the  Appellant's
    case.

"EX.1.   This paragraph applies if:

(a)  ...

(b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK, or in the UK
with refugee leave, or humanitarian protection, in the UK with limited
leave under Appendix EU in accordance with paragraph GEN.1.3.(d), or in the
UK with limited leave as a worker or business person under Appendix ECAA
Extension of Stay in accordance with paragraph GEN.1.3.(e), and there are
insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
outside the UK.

EX.2.    For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable obstacles'
means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together outside
the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very serious
hardship for the applicant or their partner."

 3. Part 5A of the 2002 Act has been  in  force  since  25  July  2014  and
    establishes the present regime under the rubric "Article 8 of the ECHR:
    public  interest  considerations".   Section  117A  of  the  2002   Act
    addresses the application of the public interest regime;  Section  117B
    details the public interest considerations applicable in all cases.  It
    reads as follows:

         "117B    Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
                all cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of the United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are able to speak English, because
                    persons who can speak English -

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of the United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons -

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a person at a time when the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life
                    established by a person at a time when the person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to
                    deportation, the public interest does not require the
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom."

Case Law

There have been a number of cases concerning Article 8 and the relevant
issues in this appeal.  I have attempted to summarise the primary findings
in those cases which have a bearing on this case.

    Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC

      i)  The  expression  'insurmountable  obstacles'  is  now  defined  by
         paragraph EX.2 as meaning

'very significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or
their partner in continuing their family life together outside the UK and
which could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
applicant or their partner.'

     ii) Interpreting the expression in the same sense as in the  Strasbourg
         case law, leave to remain would not normally be  granted  in  cases
         where an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route  was
         in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless  the  applicant  or
         their partner would face very serious  difficulties  in  continuing
         their family life together outside  the  UK,  which  could  not  be
         overcome or would entail very serious hardship.

    iii) Where such difficulties do not exist, however, leave to remain  can
         nevertheless  be  granted  outside  the   Rules   in   'exceptional
         circumstances', (in circumstances in which refusal would result  in
         unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  individual  such  that
         refusal of the application would not be proportionate).

    TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109

      i) The Tribunal should  consider  the  insurmountable  obstacles  test
         within the Rules before considering the  exceptional  circumstances
         test outside the Rules.

     ii) The Tribunal should undertake an evaluation of  the  insurmountable
         obstacles test within the Rules in order to  inform  an  evaluation
         outside the Rules because  that  formulates  the  strength  of  the
         public policy in immigration control. The policy of  the  Secretary
         of State as expressed in the Rules is not  to  be  ignored  when  a
         decision about Article 8 is to be made outside the Rules.

    GM (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1630,

      i) The legislation and rules must  be  construed  in  a  way  that  is
         consistent with Article  8.   The  policy  of  the  rules  must  be
         accorded "significant weight", but there must be a "limited  degree
         of flexibility".

     ii) The test to be  applied  outside  the  rules  is  whether  a  "fair
         balance" is struck between competing public and  private  interests
         (and not one of exceptionality).

    iii) The test is to be applied on the circumstances  of  the  individual
         case evaluated "in the real world".

     iv) There is a need for  "real  evidence"  and  the  list  of  relevant
         factors is  "not  closed"  but  is  in  practice  "relatively  well
         trodden" and includes personal conduct, social  and  economic  ties
         and delay.

      v) There is no requirement to give  "little  weight"  to  family  life
         formed while immigration status was "precarious".

    CL (India) [2019] EWCA Civ 1925

      i) An "insurmountable obstacle" to return does not mean  an  inability
         to return.

     ii)  In,  the  Court  suggested   a   three-stage   approach   to   the
         insurmountable obstacles test  under  the  Immigration  Rules:  (i)
         whether the alleged obstacle to continuing family life outside  the
         UK amounts to a very significant difficulty, (ii)  if  so,  whether
         the difficulty is one  which  would  make  it  impossible  for  the
         applicant and  their  partner  to  continue  family  life  together
         outside the UK and, (iii) if not, whether, taking  account  of  any
         steps which could reasonably be taken  to  avoid  or  mitigate  the
         difficulty, it would nevertheless entail very serious hardship  for
         the applicant or their partner (or both) - [35] to [36].

In the case of Kaur, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 the Court of Appeal considered
insurmountable obstacles to family life in the context of paragraph EX.1.
of the Immigration Rules (IRs).

The court stated as follows:-

"23. Since the decision of the Deputy Judge in this case, the meaning of
'insurmountable obstacles' has been definitively stated by the Supreme
Court in Agyarko.  Lord Reed, with whom the other Justices of the Supreme
Court agreed, referred to Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17, GC,
saying:

'42. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber identified, consistently with earlier
judgments of the court, a number of factors to be taken into account in
assessing the proportionality under article 8 of the removal of non-settled
migrants from a contracting state in which they have family members.
Relevant factors were said to include the extent to which family life would
effectively be ruptured, the extent of the ties in the contracting state,
whether there were 'insurmountable obstacles' in the way of the family
living in the country of origin of the non-national concerned, and whether
there were factors of immigration control (for example, a history of
breaches of immigration law) or considerations of public order weighing in
favour of exclusion: para 107.

43.  It appears that the European court intends the words 'insurmountable
obstacles' to be understood in a practical and realistic sense, rather than
as referring solely to obstacles which make it literally impossible for the
family to live together in the country of origin of the non-national
concerned.  In some cases, the court has used other expressions which make
that clearer ... 'Insurmountable obstacles' is, however, the expression
employed by the Grand Chamber; and the court's application of it indicates
that it is a stringent test.  In Jeunesse, for example, there were said to
be no insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of the family to Suriname,
although the children, the eldest of whom was at secondary school, were
Dutch nationals who had lived there all their lives, had never visited
Suriname, and would experience a degree of hardship if forced to move, and
the applicant's partner was in full-time employment in the Netherlands: see
paras 117 and 119.'

24.  Lord Reed went on to refer, at paragraph 44, to the fact that the July
2012 version of the Rules (which was applicable in that case, and is
applicable in this) did not define the expression 'insurmountable
obstacles'.  With effect from July 2014, however, Appendix FM was amended
by the addition of paragraph EX.2, which states -

'For the purposes of paragraph EX.1(b) 'insurmountable obstacles' means the
very significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or
their partner in continuing their family life together outside the UK and
which could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the
applicant or their partner.'

25.  Lord Reed concluded that that definition was consistent with the
meaning given to the phrase by the decisions of the European Court of Human
Rights.  He therefore concluded that the meaning of the phrase under the
2012 version of the Rules was the same as it is now under paragraph EX.2.
He continued:

'45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), 'insurmountable obstacles' are treated
as a requirement for the grant of leave under the Rules in cases to which
that paragraph applies.  Accordingly, interpreting the expression in the
same sense as in the Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not
normally be granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain under
the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless the
applicant or their partner would face very serious difficulties in
continuing their family life together outside the UK, which could not be
overcome or would entail very serious hardship.  Even in a case in which
such difficulties do not exist, however, leave to remain can nevertheless
be granted outside the Rules in 'exceptional circumstances', in accordance
with the Instructions: that is to say, 'in circumstances in which refusal
would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual such
that refusal of the application would not be proportionate'.'

26.  Having considered the nature of the Rules and the Instructions given
by the SSHD as to their application, Lord Reed concluded that they are
compatible with Article 8, though of course a specific application of the
Rules and instructions to the facts of a particular case may be open to
challenge as incompatible with Article 8.  He then went on to consider the
case of an applicant whose immigration status is precarious:

'49. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber said, consistently with earlier
judgments of the court, that an important consideration when assessing the
proportionality under article 8 of the removal of non-settled migrants from
a contracting state in which they have family members, is whether family
life was created at a time when the persons involved were aware that the
immigration status of one of them was such that the persistence of that
family life within the host state would from the outset be 'precarious'.
Where this is the case, the court said, 'it is likely only to be in
exceptional circumstances that the removal of the non-national family
member will constitute a violation of article 8': para 108.

50.  Domestically, officials who are determining whether there are
exceptional circumstances as defined in the Instructions, and whether leave
to remain should be granted outside the Rules, are directed by the
Instructions to consider all relevant factors, including whether the
applicant '[formed] their relationship with their partner at a time when
they had no immigration status or this was precarious'.  They are
instructed, at para 3.2.7d: 'Family life which involves the applicant
putting down roots in the UK in the full knowledge that their stay here is
unlawful or precarious, should be given less weight, when balanced against
the factors weighing in favour of removal, than family life formed by a
person lawfully present in the UK.'  That instruction is consistent with
the case law of the European court, such as its judgment in Jeunesse.  As
the instruction makes clear, 'precariousness' is not a preliminary hurdle
to be overcome.  Rather, the fact that the family life has been established
by an applicant in the full knowledge that his stay in the UK was unlawful
or precarious affects the weight to be attached to it in the balancing
exercise.

51.  Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled to
remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance of this
consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration control might
otherwise be.  For example, if an applicant would otherwise be
automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the weight of the public
interest in his or her removal will generally be very considerable.  If, on
the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in the UK unlawfully - was
otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at least if an application
were made from outside the UK, then there might be no public interest in
his or her removal.  The point is illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba
v Secretary of State for the Home Department.'

52.  It is also necessary to bear in mind that the cogency of the public
interest in the removal of a person living in the UK unlawfully is liable
to diminish - or, looking at the matter from the opposite perspective, the
weight to be given to precarious family life is liable to increase - if
there is a protracted delay in the enforcement of immigration control. ...'

...

45.  I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in which Lord Reed (at
paragraph 51 of his judgment in Agyarko) referred to Chikwamba.  It is
relevant to note that he there spoke of an applicant who was 'certain to be
granted leave to enter' if an application were made from outside the UK,
and said that in such a case there might be no public interest in removing
the applicant.  That, in my view, is a clear indication that the Chikwamba
principle will require a fact-specific assessment in each case, will only
apply in a very clear case, and even then will not necessarily result in a
grant of leave to remain."

In the case of Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT
00129 the court considered the Appellant's Chikwamba argument and set out
the approach taken to it which is summarised in the headnote as follows:-

         "(1) An appellant in an Article 8 human rights appeal who argues
             that there is no public interest in removal because after
             leaving the UK he or she will be granted entry clearance must,
             in all cases, address the relevant considerations in Part 5A
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002
             Act') including section 117B(1), which stipulates that 'the
             maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
             interest'.  Reliance on Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 does
             not obviate the need to do this."

The Hearing

At the resumed hearing it was a matter of concern that a bundle comprising
389 pages was served on the Tribunal one day before the hearing and on the
Secretary of State on the morning of the hearing.  Therefore, the matter
had to be put back in order to allow Mr Kotas time to consider the new
bundle.  On consideration of the bundle it was clear that there was no
further evidence from the witnesses.  I stated to Mr Mukherjee that I
presumed that it was not intended to call live evidence, bearing in mind my
directions.  However, Mr Mukherjee explained that the solicitors were only
put in funds shortly before the hearing.  He intended to call the Appellant
to give evidence concerning her mental health and A and H in order to
provide evidence of support given to the Appellant.  I permitted the
Appellant and witnesses to give evidence relating to the Appellant's mental
health since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and support given
to her by A and H and A's financial situation to address a Chikwamba point.

The Appellant's immigration history is that she arrived in the UK on 17
June 2009, having been granted a six month visit visa.  She overstayed.
She made an application for leave to remain on 18 July 2013.  On 5
September 2013 the application was refused by the Secretary of State.  The
Appellant made further representations which were refused by the Secretary
of State on 29 May 2018.  It is that decision which the Appellant appeals.

The Appellant's Evidence

The Appellant adopted her witness statements of 24 December 2018 and 6
August 2019.  She gave oral evidence at the hearing.  This can be
summarised.  The Appellant had been treated by Central Wandsworth and West
Battersea Community Health Team since 2016.  She first attempted suicide
that year.  She then received home treatment from the Mental Health Team
from 2016 to 2017.  She received help from the Psychosis Team and saw a
nurse called Zoe for three years once a week.  The purpose of this was to
assess her psychosis (seeing things and hearing voices).  She was still
feeling suicidal and depressed.  She remained with the Psychosis Team from
2017 to 2020.  After 2020 she received treatment from Shalini.  She is a
recovery coach.  She started seeing her in February 2020.  They had face-to-
face meetings before the pandemic.  She helps the Appellant with
alternative thinking, low self-esteem issues and helps her to feel better
about herself.  She helps with anxiety.  She informed the Appellant about
the STEPS Programme because she thought that she needed extra help.  This
programme is for people diagnosed with emotionally unstable personality
disorder (EUPD).  She explained that the condition causes what she
described as "emotional tornadoes".  She breaks down and is unable to
speak.  She feels suicidal and has negative thoughts.  She started a
sixteen week course with STEPS.  She has now completed week 8.  She hopes
to continue with Shalini after she completes the course and have a follow-
up with her GP.

She has a good support network here.  Her husband and family are
supportive.  They love her.  Losing this support will affect her
negatively.  She cannot really express how it would negatively affect her.
On days when she cannot get out of bed A talks to her.  He tells her that
he loves her and they pray together.  She feels very supported by him.

She looks after her grandmother in the UK.  She helps her take medication.
She shops for her and attends appointments with her.  If the Appellant is
having a bad day she withdraws from people and in these circumstances she
will telephone her grandmother.

She does not have a relationship with her mother.  She does not know her
real father.

In cross-examination, the Appellant said that when she mentioned her mother
to Dr Gupta she meant her grandmother.  She calls her grandmother mother
because she raised her.

She does not know whether she had permission to receive treatment on the
NHS.  However, she mentioned at the Courtyard Clinic for HIV patients that
she had problems with immigration and they said that they do not deny
anyone treatment.

A's Evidence

A adopted his two witness statements of 21 December 2018 and 6 August 2019
as his evidence-in-chief.  He gave oral evidence.  He confirmed that he
lives with his mother, sister and the Appellant.  He pays 60% of the
household expenditure.  His sister pays 40% of the family expenditure. If
he was to go to Trinidad with the Appellant the family in the UK would
experience financial difficulties because he is the main breadwinner. He
earns approximately �1,847 before tax.  In addition, he receives commission
bringing his average monthly earnings to �2,000 before tax.

He gave an example in evidence of an incident in February 2021 when he left
work in order to support the Appellant.  His mother had called him to say
that she had cut herself.  He returned home and he comforted her and re-
assured her that everything would be alright.

H's Evidence

H attended the hearing and gave evidence.  He adopted his witness statement
as his evidence-in-chief.  He confirmed that he is like a de facto brother.
 He supports both the Appellant and A.  A cannot always help the Appellant
because he is employed whereas H is self-employed and is more flexible.  He
is able to leave work more easily and help the Appellant, ensuring that she
is eating sufficiently, taking medication and getting out of bed.  He is
aware that the Appellant supports her grandmother here.

Submissions

Mr Kotas addressed me on the issue of insurmountable obstacles.  He
referred to Kaur and Younas.

He referred me to A's witness statement of 21 December 2018, specifically
paragraphs 6 and 7.

"6.  I confirm that it is not possible for me to follow my wife to Trinidad
and Tobago as I have a settled life in the UK.  I have never been to
Trinidad and Tobago and it will not be possible for me to move there
leaving my settled life, job and especially my mother in the UK.  I cannot
leave my mother, my family and my job and just migrate to a country where I
have never been.  If I am forced to leave the UK with my wife then it will
breach of my (sic) human right (sic) too.

7.   I confirm that I along with my wife, my mother and family members have
developed a very strong and private and family life in the UK.  All of them
have written supportive letters."

These reasons, Mr Kotas submitted, are not sufficient to establish
insurmountable obstacles.  The Appellant and her husband would have a home
and a support network in Trinidad.  Insofar as Chikwamba is concerned, this
is not a case that is bound to succeed.  Whilst the Sponsor has given oral
evidence concerning the level of his earnings, there is no contemporaneous
evidence.  It cannot be said with certainty that entry clearance will be
granted.

In any event, Chikwamba does not obviate the need to consider Part 5A
factors.  The Appellant is an overstayer, albeit she came here as a child.
She has worked full-time in breach of immigration laws.  Her relationship
with A was formed in precarious circumstances.

He referred me to the preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

Mr Mukherjee made submissions.  He relied on EB (Kosovo) at paragraph 12:-

"12. Thus the appellate immigration authority must make its own judgment
and that judgment will be strongly influenced by the particular facts and
circumstances of the particular case.  The authority will, of course, take
note of factors which have, or have not, weighed with the Strasbourg court.
 It will, for example, recognise that it will rarely be proportionate to
uphold an order for removal of a spouse if there is a close and genuine
bond with the other spouse and that spouse cannot reasonably be expected to
follow the removed spouse to the country of removal, or if the effect of
the order is to sever a genuine and subsisting relationship between parent
and child.  But cases will not ordinarily raise such stark choices, and
there is in general no alternative to making a careful and informed
evaluation of the facts of the particular case.  The search for a hard-
edged or bright-line rule to be applied to the generality of cases is
incompatible with the difficult evaluative exercise which article 8
requires."

The test applies in this case.

There are insurmountable obstacles to A returning to Trinidad with the
Appellant.  It is a different factual matrix to that in Kaur.  In this
case, A and the Appellant live in a joint family home with A's mother and
sister.  There is a strong family unit.  A provides the basic income for
the family.  In these circumstances, severe financial difficulties would
ensue for that household which amount to insurmountable obstacles to A
being able to relocate for any extended period or indeed for any short time
because he does not have a lot of excess income.

The Appellant is a vulnerable person with a life-threatening disease.  She
has been under the supervision of the Mental Health Team since 2016.  She
has given detailed oral evidence about treatment since 2016.  She has had
periods of self-harming and suicidal ideation.  There is no reason to
disbelieve her evidence that there is no emotional connection between the
Appellant and her mother.

Findings and reasons

The only further evidence upon which the Appellant relied other than the
oral evidence at the hearing was a letter from Central Wandsworth and West
Battersea Community Health Team to the Appellant's GP, Dr P Gosney, of 18
March 2021 and in that letter it sets out the  diagnosis of the Appellant's
condition as depression and emotionally unstable personality disorder.  It
sets out her medication, mirtazapine 30mg ON and Symtuza.  The author of
the letter, Dr Gosney, states that he reviewed the Appellant over the phone
on 15 March and that she was recently accepted onto the STEPS Programme.
It states that the Appellant is compliant with her medication.  Her next
appointment with the Courtyard Clinic is in July.  At her last appointment
in January the clinic were happy with her CD4 count and viral load.  In
relation to her depression, Dr Gosney states that the Appellant thinks that
COVID-19 lockdown has had a big effect on her mental health.  She has
stopped finding enjoyment in activities.  She has had contact with her
grandmother, who is in a retirement home, and she has regular contact with
her friends but has been advised to limit social contact due to her HIV
diagnosis.  She is going out on her own to get some exercise.  Her sleep is
okay with medication although in the last few weeks this has worsened.  Her
appetite is described as normal.  In relation to EUPD, the Appellant
describes "random outbursts of emotions" and she last self-harmed about
three weeks ago by cutting her wrists.  Usually this would make her feel
better but in this case it made her feel worse.

There are preserved findings made by the First-tier Tribunal. The judge
accepted that the Appellant's husband (A) would not go to Trinidad with the
Appellant.  The judge found that there was no evidence that has been
produced to suggest that the Appellant's medical condition could not be
treated in Trinidad.  He found that the Appellant would have support from
her mother and stepfather, who are aware of her diagnosis and have been
offering support to her via electronic means.  The judge found that there
would be no language barrier because the Appellant had resided in Trinidad
for sixteen years as a child and is familiar with the culture there.  The
judge concluded that there would not be "insurmountable difficulties" for
the Appellant were she to be returned to Trinidad.

The judge found that the removal of the Appellant would amount to an
interference in the family life of both the Appellant and A.  The judge
found that should the Appellant be returned A would be forced to choose
between his wife and between his family here in the UK.  The judge said as
follows:-

"He has created a family life with the Appellant.  If he chose to go with
her, he would have to forgo these things.  He would be moving to a country
with different religious and cultural roots to those he has grown up with.
He would have no guarantee that he could secure work.  He has never been to
Trinidad.  Should he stay here he would have to rely upon electronic means
to continue his relationship with his wife.  For short periods, that may be
satisfactory, it is not suitable for sustaining marriage on a permanent
basis."

In relation to the evidence, the judge found that the Appellant was not
credible.  He noted that in the documentary evidence there were several
references to the Appellant's mother.  Similarly, there was reference to
the Appellant having a full-time job.  Both matters were in contradiction
to the Appellant's evidence.  However, the judge went on to find that the
Appellant and A are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  While he
found the Appellant not credible, he found A (and H, a friend who was
called to give evidence on the Appellant's behalf) credible.  The judge
found that it was more likely that should the Appellant be returned to
Trinidad and Tobago, A would not accompany her.

The Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the immigration rules. As
found by the First-tier Tribunal, she has family in Trinidad and Tobago.
She has not been honest about this aspect of her claim. However, I accept
that she was raised by her grandmother and so may have a closer
relationship with her than her own mother. However, there is family support
for her in Trinidad and Tobago.  There are no properly identified very
significant obstacles to integration, properly applying SSHD v Kamara
[2016] EWCA Civ 813

 Similarly there are no insurmountable obstacles ("very significant
difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner in
continuing their family life together outside the UK and which could not be
overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
partner") to family life continuing in Trinidad and Tobago. While it is
accepted that A will not accompany her to Trinidad and Tobago because of
his family commitments here, that is a matter of choice for him.   If he
did accompany her, there is insufficient evidence that there would be very
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing there.

The test is not whether it is reasonable to expect A to return to Trinidad
and Tobago with the Appellant. This does not reflect the statutory regime
and case law post EB (Kosovo). I have to consider where a fair balance
lies. There are a number of factors which are capable of supporting that
removal of the Appellant is not proportionate to the breach of her rights
under Art 8.  The Appellant has health problems. I accept that she has a
support network here, including support from A's family with whom she
resides and from a close family friend, H. While the Appellant has not been
honest about her own family in Trinidad, A and H have been found to be
credible witnesses in respect of the support that the Appellant needs and
receives from them and A's wider family. Their evidence is consistent with
that of the Appellant on this issue.  The Appellant is unwell. She receives
support from the Mental Health Services. I accept the medical evidence,
which includes evidence of self-harm.   She has a recognised disorder
(EUPD) for which she is prescribed medication. She was half way through a
16 weeks course at the time of the hearing before me and hopes when the
course has concluded to resume meetings with the recovery coach. I accept
that she has a support network here outside the family. She is provided
with care from the mental health team. She is also receiving treatment for
HIV.

I accept that the Appellant's removal will rupture family life. I accept
that A does not want to accompany her because his family here depends on
him for some financial support.  The Appellant and A live with his mother
and sister. I accept that he is the main breadwinner for the whole family.
I accept that the Appellant helps her grandmother here. (The evidence does
not establish Kugathas dependency ( Kugathas v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, which was not argued on behalf of the
Appellant, in any event.)

The Appellant cannot meet the requirement of the immigration rules.
Furthermore in respect of medical treatment, there is no evidence before me
that there is no available treatment which the Appellant can access in
Trinidad and Tobago. The burden of proof rests on the Appellant. The
maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest. The
Appellant's stay has been precarious and since 2009 unlawful. She has
remained here unlawfully during which time she has formed a relationship
with A.  She married A in 2012 when she had no leave.  She made an
application in 2013 as a spouse.  The application was refused in the same
year 2013 with no right of appeal. The Appellant remained here and the
Respondent agreed to reconsider her case.

The little weight provision under s.117B (4) applies to her relationship
with A.  I accept that she does not bear all of the responsibility for
overstaying because she came here as a child. I accept that family members
were remiss in failing to regularise her status. However, the Appellant, on
reaching adulthood two years after she came here, should have taken
responsibility for this herself.   She has made efforts to do this, but
only after she married.

The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2009, but she has spent
most of her life in Trinidad and Tobago.   She has family and support
there, as found by the First-tier Tribunal. A could if he wanted return
with her. I accept that this would entail a level of hardship for his
family here. However, his sister is also responsible for some of the
outgoings. There will be a family of 2 rather than 4 to maintain. I
reasonably infer that household costs would reduce accordingly. He does not
have children here. There is no evidence that he would not be able to find
work in Trinidad and Tobago.

Taking into account all matters and conducting an evaluative assessment of
the evidence, I conclude that a fair balance lies in favour of the SSHD in
this case.

There is no mileage in the Chikwamba point because the appeal falls to be
dismissed on Article 8 substantive grounds.  A was found by the First-tier
Tribunal to be a witness of truth. He gave evidence before me, about the
level of his earnings. There is no requirement to produce corroborative
evidence. There is no good reason for me not to accept his evidence on this
issue. Therefore I accept that this earnings would be sufficient to support
an application for entry clearance, providing he was able to produce all
the necessary paperwork, which was not before me.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 3 August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

