
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12165/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2018                           |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Mrs Anu Thapaliya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Nepal, date of birth 11 September 1987,
appealed against the decision of the Respondent, dated 22 May 2018, to
refuse an application made on 25 July 2017 for indefinite leave to remain
arising from her marriage to Mr Prakash Khanal, who was present and settled
in the United Kingdom as her partner.  Whatever other basis it was thought
to be made, the application therefore fell to be considered with reference
to Appendix FM.  The application was duly considered thereunder and
rejected on the basis that the Appellant had not acquired the necessary
period under the Rules to be able to obtain leave.  Her appeal against the
Secretary of State's decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge
Griffith, who on 16 October 2018 dismissed the appeal, upholding the bases
of the Respondent's decision and also refusing a claim under Article 8 ECHR
because the Appellant still had leave to remain in the United Kingdom until
October 2019 and no steps were being taken or have been taken to remove
her.

2.   The basis of the law under the Immigration Rules has changed numerous
times and been subject to a variety of changes in requirements.  This case
is a good example of the complexity of the Rules and the relationship to
guidance which has rendered making certain applications under the Rules
akin to minefields, particularly when there may have been switching or
changes arising in the basis on which a person remains.  What was said in
substance was that the applicant (Appellant) had completed a continuous
period of 60 months or five years and as such on a freestanding,
independent basis was entitled to succeed in the light of the transitional
provisions and law as it applied back before July 2012: Bearing in mind the
Appellant had originally been granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as
a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Partner Person from 29 June 2012.  There appeared to
me to have been a fundamental misunderstanding, not least given the
complexity of the Rules, that that date and the period of time acquired
after it, did not avoid what were the current requirements of the Rules at
the date of application.

3.   These were correctly set out by the Judge, who accurately summarised
the case being put and why the Judge made no criticism whatsoever of the
Appellant's conduct or credibility in making the claims of the required
period of leave in the UK and why.  The Judge explained the conclusion that
the Appellant's husband, Prakash Khanal, who has gathered his settlement in
January 2017, did not avail the Appellant as the Appellant had thought.
The matter was also, it is fair to say, correctly set out by reference to
the requirements of Appendix FM in the Reasons for Refusal Letter,
identifying the period required had not for the purposes of Appendix FM
been met.

4.   The matter was also helpfully repeated in a Rule 24 response sent to
the Appellant and a further copy provided today but dated 22 November 2018,
in which the Respondent set out the understanding that was being applied by
the Respondent to such applications based on long residence in the
following terms:

"From 6 April 2014 [bearing in mind that is the date when the transitional
provisions came to an end] all those granted leave to enter or remain as a
PBS dependant, who then wish to apply for leave as the partner of a settled
person (including where their partner who was a relevant PBS migrant gained
indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence) are required to
apply for leave under Appendix FM.


4.5.4.   This is because paragraphs 284 and 295D of the Immigration Rules
were amended to restrict switching by PBS dependants who have leave as the
partner of a relevant PBS migrant.  From 6 April 2014, they are not able to
switch into the Rules for partners of settled persons under Part 8 [of the
Rules].  The PBS dependant will either need to apply for indefinite leave
under the points-based system if they can qualify, or apply for limited
leave to remain as a partner under Appendix FM."

5.   As the comments note, these aspects and paragraphs cannot be read in
isolation.  The position therefore was that, most unfortunately, the
Appellant and her partner have been confounded by the change in the Rules
and its consequences as of April 2014.  Therefore the periods in which they
have been together, which are obviously of significance, did not count as
they thought it would and should.  Accordingly, I find the Judge in the
determination cogently set out the arguments and the decision is correct in
law.

6.   The difficulty that the Appellants have found themselves in, not least
due to the complexities of the Rules, means that their next application
would best be made with help from a specialist but that is a matter
ultimately for them to choose how to proceed.

7.   For these reasons therefore, I conclude the Original Tribunal made no
error of law.

DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

No anonymity order was sought nor is one required.


Signed                                  Date 9 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed.  Therefore, there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 9 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
