
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12135/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August 2021                   |On 21st September 2021               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                               Adefemi Adebisi
                   (also known as ODUNAYO PETER BABALOLA)
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's refusal of his human rights claim, in the context of a
deportation order having been made against him as a "foreign criminal" (as
defined by Section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002).  The deportation order was made as a consequence of the appellant's
sentence of 54 months' imprisonment for causing death by careless driving
whilst under the influence of drugs, specifically cannabis.  The appellant
had received the sentence on 7th February 2019 and a deportation order had
been made on 3rd July 2019 pursuant to Section 32(2) of the UK Borders Act
2007.

In terms of the appellant's wider history, the appellant, who is a citizen
of Nigeria, and who previously had indefinite leave to remain in the UK,
had originally entered the UK on 24th September 2004 on a student visa.  He
subsequently applied for permission to marry his now wife, Nicole Pryce, a
British citizen, on 15th October 2008; and he applied for, and eventually
obtained, indefinite leave to remain as the spouse of a British national,
on 16th February 2011.  The couple have two children: child "A", whose date
of birth is 8th October 2010; and child "B," born on 9th December 2015.
Both children are British citizens, and it has never been in dispute that
the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship both with Ms Pryce
and their children, living with them as a family, apart from the period of
his imprisonment and a brief period of separation, which I refer to later
in these reasons. Following his conviction on 21st December 2018 and
sentencing on 7th February 2019, the appellant was imprisoned and released
on licence, following the grant of immigration bail by a Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal, Judge Neville, on 26th May 2021.

The Respondent's refusal of the appellant's application

As noted in my error of law decision, which is annexed to these reasons,
and which I gave orally on 21st October 2020, the respondent considered the
appellant's family and private life, in refusing the appellant's human
rights claim.  The respondent accepted the relationships were as claimed
but did not accept that the effect of the appellant's deportation on Ms
Pryce and their children would be unduly harsh, on the basis that it would
not be unduly harsh either for them to live with him in Nigeria (the so-
called "go" scenario); or to remain in the UK without the appellant (the so-
called "stay" scenario).

In respect of the appellant's private life, the appellant had not been
resident in the UK for most of his life, having arrived aged 22 in 2004.
The respondent did not accept that the appellant remained socially and
culturally integrated in the UK, as a result of the seriousness of his
offending, but before me, Mr Lindsay says that the respondent has changed
her position and concedes that the appellant has remained integrated.
However, the respondent also asserts that, when considering the appellant's
circumstances through the lens of 'Exception 1' relating to private life
(Section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act) there are not very significant obstacles
to the appellant's integration in Nigeria, as he has received training and
an education in the UK as well as having worked in a variety of practical
employment roles in the UK that would assist in his integration in Nigeria.

Considering both the appellant's family and private life, the respondent
also maintains that there are no very compelling circumstances over and
above Exceptions 1 and 2 for the purposes of Section 117C(6) of the 2002
Act.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

Following the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll (the "FtT"),
promulgated on 6th March 2020, she dismissed the appellant's appeal on
human rights grounds.  The appellant appealed and in my error of law
decision to which I have already referred, I found that there was an error
of law in the FtT's decision and set it aside, whilst preserving the
finding that the appellant has genuine and subsisting relationships with Ms
Pryce and their children.  I also regarded it as appropriate to retain the
remaking of the appellant's appeal decision in the Upper Tribunal.

Following the error of law hearing, I conducted a Case Management Review
hearing by telephone on 25th March 2021, at which I gave directions.  These
included the disclosure of any expert report and responsibility for the
appellant to produce and agree a finalised paginated and indexed bundle.
Two aspects of compliance with the directions caused a significant delay
(one and a half hours) in the start of the hearing scheduled to take four
hours.  The first was that the bundle which had been directed to be served
by 31st July 2021 appears to have been sent to an incorrect email address.
Second, on the morning of the hearing and without criticism of Ms Khan
personally, she had indicated that the appellant had not appreciated the
need to adduce a further witness statement from the appellant's sister-in-
law, Nerissa Pryce, and was in the process of obtaining a witness statement
on the morning of the hearing.  One was eventually produced, and Mr Lindsay
did not object to its production, given its relative brevity and the fact
that Nerissa Pryce was not attending to give witness evidence.  Whilst the
late production of the evidence has not ultimately affected the decision,
it did cause was a substantial delay in the first part of the hearing.  I
mention this issue in these reasons as I do not encourage the production,
at such late notice, of evidence which could, it seems to me, have been
readily obtained well in advance of this hearing.

The Issues in this Appeal

I identified and agreed with the representatives that the issues in this
case were:

      a) whether the appellant meets the requirements of Exception 2, namely
         whether the effect of the appellant's deportation on his wife and
         children would be unduly harsh either in the "stay" or the "go"
         scenarios.  In doing so, I needed to consider the best interests of
         the two children;

      b) whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above
         Exceptions 1 and 2, in the context of the appellant's family and
         private life and also noting the factors set out in Section 117B of
         the 2002 Act as part of a balance sheet assessment These also
         include the appellant's family life with Nerissa Pryce and her
         daughter, with whom the appellant also lives.  The real focus in
         relation to Exception 1 was the extent to which there were very
         significant obstacles in relation to the appellant's integration
         into Nigeria.




The documents and evidence

I was referred to the following documents:

      c) an appellant's bundle ("AB") which included witness statements of
         the appellant and his wife, as well as the report of an independent
         social worker Christine Brown;

      d) a respondent's bundle that ran alphanumerically to several hundred
         pages. Ms Khan confirmed that the only part of that bundle she
         sought to rely on was the Sentencing Judge's remarks at divider B;

      e) an emailed copy of an unsigned witness statement of Nerissa Pryce;

      f) a loose copy of a bank statement for Nerissa Pryce which showed a
         common address with the appellant and his wife;

      g) the decision of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in refusing
         the appellant's appeal against his length of sentence (R v Adebisi
         [2020] EWCA Crim 1446); and

      h) the authority of Patel (British citizen child - deportation) [2020]
         UKUT 45 (IAC).

The appellant and his wife gave oral evidence before me.  What is notable
is that Mr Lindsay accepted the credibility of both witnesses as to their
evidence on the facts; and he also accepted the expertise and contents of
the independent social worker report prepared by Christine Brown.  There
were some omissions in the latter, as it did not refer to the fact of the
cohabitation of the appellant, his wife and their children, with Ms Pryce's
sister, her daughter, and their mother (nor was this referred to in the
witness statements) but I was not invited to draw any adverse credibility
as a result of the admission.  This is therefore not a case where it is
necessary for me to recite and resolve differences in evidence.  Rather, I
am able to make findings based on undisputed evidence and then analyse the
consequences of deportation both in respect of the appellant's private life
and also his family life, within the statutory scheme.

Findings of Fact

The appellant entered the UK in 2004; met Ms Pryce and married her in 2008
since when they have lived together, apart from a brief period of
separation of between three to four months in 2011/12 when, as the
appellant indicated in oral evidence, there was something of a disagreement
between him and his mother-in-law in whose home the couple live. The
appellant has never entered or remained in the UK unlawfully.  He came to
the UK on a student visa. His father funded his studies, as he had the
financial means to do so at the time. However, his father is now 70 years
old, having retired from the Nigerian Electricity Company and the
appellant's mother is 65 years' old and is a housewife.  Whereas when he
first came to the UK, at least in respect of his studies, he was dependent
upon his parents, more recently, the appellant has been remitting monies to
his parents.

The appellant described having had many jobs as a licensed security guard,
paying taxes and national insurance contributions and not wishing to be
reliant upon the state.  Ms Pryce, also works full-time, including during
"lockdown" and works in legal education administration for the University
of Law.  Immediately prior to the index offence, the appellant had worked
for Uber from 7th May 2016 and had completed 1,191 trips before the
incident.  He had had a clean driving licence for 10 years.  He had had no
previous criminal convictions.

In terms of the family setting, the appellant lives with his wife; their
two sons; the appellant's sister-in-law, Nerissa Price; and Nerissa's young
child.  Ms Pryce's mother also lives from time to time in the family home,
which in fact belongs to her, but she spends significant periods of time
away travelling, carrying out charity work.

Whilst the family home belongs to the appellant's mother-in-law, (and it is
where Ms Pryce and her sister have lived for around 20 years), when
working, the appellant contributed financially to the household expenses.
Nerissa Pryce's daughter was born in February 2017 and Nerissa Pryce's
statement describes the appellant as having a close relationship with his
children's cousin, treating her as a daughter and involving him in all of
the activities in which he assisted with his own children.  He is almost
like a second father.  Whilst the witnesses have been careful to add that
Nerissa Pryce's daughter has a continuing relationship with her biological
father and visits him on a regular basis, nevertheless the appellant plays
a significant part in Nerissa Pryce's daughter's life.  In summary, the
family are a close-knit one and Ms Brown, in her report, describes the
appellant's comments, at �3.4 (page [28] AB):

"We were a routine, normal happy family, we had friends, friends at church,
friends from Nigeria (living within the UK) friends from work.  We went on
family outings.  I came as a single man, now all my friends have got
families.  We are a consolidated solid network, a big network (of friends
and family).  Mr Adebisi described playing drums at his church and in other
settings and bands."

The appellant has not returned to Nigeria for the past 15 years, last doing
so in 2007 prior to his marriage to Ms Pryce. He confirms that this is not
because of any difficulty in relationships or problems in Nigeria. Rather,
because he has established a life in the UK and is focussed on his UK
family.

In terms of the events relating to the offence for which the appellant was
convicted, I have considered carefully the sentencing remarks of His Honour
Judge Raynor, a copy of which is in divider B of the respondent's bundle.
As all parties accept, the events are tragic.  The appellant was indicted
on one count of causing death by careless driving when exceeding the
specific limit for drugs.  He pleaded not guilty but was later convicted
after an eight-day trial.  The event had occurred on 1st October 2016 and
had caused the death of a 27-year-old lecturer, Joshua Hayes, who was a
popular, valued and gifted teacher at a college.  The appellant had been
working until in the early hours of the morning of 1st October 2016 as an
Uber driver.  He had decided to finish work for the night and had picked up
one final fare on his way home.  Initially pursuing the route suggested by
his "satnav", the appellant's passenger suggested he take a quicker route
and turn down a smaller side road.  At this time, Mr Hayes had fallen into
the road in question having staggered down the street when he was unsteady
on his feet and to some extent Mr Hayes's unsteadiness had been affected by
alcohol, although I do not in any way blame Mr Hayes for the events that
took place.  He lay in the road, about seven metres along from the turning
into the road, after a speed "hump" at the entrance to the street.  The
area was described by the Judge as reasonably well lit, with the appellant
using his headlights and there were no material obstructions interfering
with his line of sight.  The appellant struck Mr Hayes twice, the first
time with the car body and the second time when the front wheel went over
Mr Hayes.  The appellant then drove backwards in an attempt to clear what
he thought was an obstruction from under the car and it was only when he
got out of the car and looked beneath that he realised that he had struck a
person.  The appellant was described as distraught, seeking to give comfort
to Mr Hayes, who sadly died at the scene.  The police arrived and the
appellant provided a cannabis test which was negative.  The appellant then
volunteered that he had smoked cannabis about 26 hours earlier on Friday,
30th September and he was asked to provide a further sample of saliva which
tested positive.  That led to a blood sample being taken which revealed a
level of tetrahydrocannabinol or THC above the limit of two micrograms in
response to which a prosecution would follow as part of a zero-tolerance
approach to drug driving.

The prosecution, the Judge noted, did not have to prove impairment, just
that the appellant had cannabis in his system but nevertheless the expert's
evidence was that a level above five micrograms would result in an
unacceptable risk of involvement in a road traffic accident with an
impairment level broadly equivalent to the alcohol limit.  The appellant's
level of THC was 7 micrograms. The Judge noted that the appellant had taken
cannabis since 2008 when he first obtained his licence to drive.  He had
smoked normal weed, not skunk cannabis, around four to five times a week
and had not disclosed his cannabis habit to the taxi licensing authorities
or to the DBS authorities who carry out an enhanced check.  The Judge
accepted that when considering the Sentencing Council guidelines, the
appellant was not a dangerous offender, as defined as presenting a
significant risk of serious harm in the future by way of commission of
further offences. The Judge went on to consider that the appellant no
longer used cannabis and there was low risk of reconviction. Having been
sentenced, the appellant appealed against the length of his sentence to the
Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal recorded in its decision (R v Adebisi [2020] EWCA Crim
1446) the powerful personal victim statements from Mr Hayes's parents and
the effect that it had had upon Mr Hayes's family.  Whilst at �23 of its
decision, the Court of Appeal expressed some concern about the lack of
clarity in the sentencing remark as to which of the levels of the
Sentencing Guidelines applied to the appellant's circumstances,
nevertheless when read as a whole it appeared tolerably clear that the
Judge was focussing on two levels identified in the guidelines: a moderate
quantity of drugs; and a level of carelessness that was not much more
serious than "momentary inattention".  Whilst conviction did not require
the proof of impairment, nevertheless the fact of impairment was clearly
relevant to the seriousness of it and the Court of Appeal did not accept
that the quantity of drugs fell below the "moderate" level in the
guidelines.

I accept that the appellant has not sought to excuse or belittle the
consequences of his actions and the effect on Mr Hayes and his family; was
immediately distraught and was candid in his actions to the police; and, as
Mr Lindsay accepts, the appellant is at very low risk of re-offending, not
least because as well as receiving a prison sentence he also received a ban
on driving of seven years and three months.  The appellant is also required
to take an extended retest before he can legally drive.

I also accept the evidence that during his period of imprisonment, the
appellant has undertaken a number of practical courses which will assist in
his subsequent re-employment and his positive engagement with the prison
authorities is confirmed in correspondence from the careers adviser at HM
Prison Maidstone dated 10th May 2021 (page [50] AB) as well as a supporting
statement dated 26th November 2020 from the Family Services Unit (page [48]
AB) within the same prison, which commented upon his positive engagement
with his children, his strong bond with them, regular visits from his
children and every effort having been made to maintain the relationship
with them

This is consistent with the evidence both from the appellant, his wife, and
Ms Brown, that notwithstanding his absence from the family unit during the
period of his imprisonment from 2019 to 2021, the appellant has remained
part of a strong family unit, playing an important role in the upbringing
of his children and also having a close relationship with his sister-in-law
and her young daughter.

I turn next to the contents of Mr Brown's report.  I do not repeat the
contents in full and, whilst I have considered them, pick out the salient
points.  Ms Brown's expertise was not challenged, and Mr Lindsay accepted
her report as detailed and helpful to the issues that I was being asked to
consider.  I have already touched upon the family setting and also the
context of the appellant working as an Uber driver. The flexibility allowed
him to get his children ready for school and nursery each morning; to do
the "school run"; and take the older son to football (�3.13, page [31] AB)
and Ms Brown noted the low risk of reoffending on which I have already
commented (�3.18, page [32] AB).

Ms Brown also commented on the impact on the appellant's wife and children
of his period of imprisonment.  He had only been recently released from
detention when Ms Brown conducted her assessment on 31st May 2021.  Prior
to his imprisonment, the children had been used to their father being at
home other than when he was out working, and their absence had had an
impact.  The children nevertheless were able to physically see their father
when he was in prison regularly, which would not be able to be replicated
were the appellant to be removed to Nigeria.  During the period of
imprisonment, the children had been struggling to sleep in his absence and
he had maintained video access to the children, which was a costly process,
incurring some �5,000.  Ms Pryce and her mother had also been ill with
COVID and when restrictions were imposed in late December 2020 and the
children were home-schooled, they were upset, crying and confused.  Ms
Pryce had been unable to take their children to visit their father in
person for much of 2020, because of Covid.  The prison visits that had
occurred had helped the appellant's wife to maintain focus, and the family
bond between the appellant, her and their children.

Ms Brown described Miss Pryce's wider family network within London (�3.30,
page [36] AB) including two brothers, both with children of their own, all
of whom live within the London area, in addition to Ms Pryce's sister, with
whom she lives, with her mother.  The appellant's mother is one of seven
siblings, all with families of their own, albeit Ms Pryce described her
family as enjoying close relationships with one another but each with their
own respective commitments to family and work.  They saw one another often
for family gatherings but perhaps less so during the COVID restrictions
(�3.31, page [36] AB).

The appellant's children attend the same school that Ms Pryce attended
before she left to attend senior education in Jamaica, before returning to
take her degree at Kingston University in the UK where she had studied law.
 Ms Pryce has never visited, nor has any family ties or affiliations to,
Nigeria.

The couple's eldest child is now in year 5 of his primary education and
next year he will make his selection for his senior education, hoping to
transfer with his year cohort.  The younger child is currently in reception
year.   None are said to have any health issues or special educational
needs.

When the appellant was in prison, Ms Pryce described the youngest child
crying and often shouting at her and wanting the appellant, albeit unaware
of the precise circumstances of the appellant's imprisonment.  She sensed
that the older child was aware of his father's surroundings, and this was
something that they would have to discuss more fully with the child, to
explain the context.  The report described Ms Pryce, at �3.41 finding
herself alone, coping with two children and having to work from home in
addition to home-schooling during the Covid pandemic.  Whilst her sister
had tried to support her, she too had parenting and work commitments and
their mother was often away for long periods of time.  The children were
said to be delighted upon their father returning to the home environment
and were pleased to be able to "show off" their dad.  Ms Pryce feared a
breakdown in the family unit as he would not be able to see the children
grow and there would be no male figure.

Ms Brown's report also touches on her interviews with the appellant's
children themselves.  The eldest child had said that it was hard when his
father was absent and now he was back, he could "show him off" at school
and they were all together again.  He had missed his father and not being
able to see him in person, and it was now really good that he could see
him.  He wanted things to stay the same forever and was very happy with
him.  The youngest child was largely running in and out of the room, trying
to avoid Ms Brown, but sat happily on his father's knee unprompted.

In terms of her opinion and recommendations at section 4 of her report
(starting at page [42] AB) Ms Brown described the difficult period of the
appellant's imprisonment.  Ms Pryce had been without her long-term partner
and the father of her children and the children without their father.  The
eldest had grown from a young child aged 7, to now 10 years old and nearing
puberty and senior schooling, whilst the youngest had gone from a toddler
aged 2, to now attending school.  It was important, in Ms Brown's view, for
the early life structures to remain in place, particularly in the context
of the children having established a strong and happy family life prior to
the appellant's imprisonment.  Whilst these bonds were maintained in very
challenging circumstances during the appellant's imprisonment, this was not
really in a manner in which the children would have wanted to continue with
their relationship with their father and other means of communication such
as video chats were insufficient to replace in person contact and when he
was in prison, the children struggled to understand, on visits to him, why
he was not returning home with them.  More recently, the eldest child may
have come to know of his father's imprisonment and if he had not, it would
not be long before he did from those in the community who have seen the
media coverage of the event.  How the children will respond will depend, in
Ms Brown's opinion, in part, on their parents' management of this and it is
important this is done collectively.  At �4.5, (page [43] AB), Ms Brown
described the appellant's role in his children's lives as becoming ever
more critical because of what they have lived through.  It was important
for their parents to remain a visible force, including a physical force and
whilst parents may not always be able to live together, parents could still
provide unity by being a cohesive and visible force in their children's
lives including attending parents' evenings, taking their children to
extracurricular activities; and other activities at which the children
could boast, in a positive sense, of activities being undertaken with their
parents.  In contrast, Ms Brown described experiences of children who have
lost a parent, perhaps through deportation or long-term separation, and the
child feeling less worthy.  Ms Brown referred to the leading academic
material of the effect on such children, even with the ability for major
recovery.

Ms Brown described the potential adversity for both children (�4.10, page
[44] AB) as twofold: first, the adverse event of their father's offence and
his subsequent imprisonment, without the children's full knowledge of what
this involved; and second, the potential separation in the event of the
appellant's deportation.   The long-term impact would be for Mr Pryce to be
left alone to raise two children and to answer their many questions as to
why their father has left the family unit.  Ms Brown described the
appellant as a "good man" and a loving father to his two children.  To
remove the appellant would serve only to undermine their future childhood
progression and it would be contrary to their best interests, leaving
other, possibly outside agencies to manage the aftermath of the loss to the
family, instead of what would otherwise be a happy and functioning family
unit.

As to the ability of Ms Pryce to cope and look after her children if the
appellant were removed and she and her children were to remain in the UK,
Ms Pryce accepted that during the appellant's imprisonment, albeit for a
limited period of just over two years, she was able to continue to work
full-time from home, albeit it was a challenging period, particularly when
she was also having to home-school at the same time.  However, what she
also made clear was that the University of Law was now requiring its staff
to work full-time from its offices, something she had carried out for a
period prior to the COVID pandemic without the appellant, albeit it was
difficult and had resulted in expensive childcare.  Put simply, she had
been able to maintain a full-time job and do so working at her place of
work rather than a home setting, albeit in circumstances where there was a
significant cost.  She said that she would "have to cope" if the appellant
were removed.  She described only being able to rely upon the close family
network within London and the UK to a limited extent because she could not
depend upon them for extended periods of time.  Her relatives all had their
own responsibilities and careers.  By way of example, Nerissa, her sister,
with whom she lived, also worked full-time.  Ms Pryce had never
contemplated moving with the appellant to Nigeria and had no idea of the
environment there.  She was aware that some English was spoken in Nigeria,
but she did not speak Yoruba, the appellant's first language, and she had
no family unit or support network in that country.  She was aware of the
appellant's relatives in Nigeria, but nothing really beyond that.  The
entirety of her family setting, including: her mother's accommodation in
which she lived; the school setting which her children attended and which
she herself had attended; and the career that she had developed over the
years in London, was a stable one.  In contrast, she would not know where
to begin if the family were attempting to start again in Nigeria.  The
appellant described the inability to obtain work in Nigeria which was
precisely the reason that he had undertaken studies, aged 22, in the UK.
He had never managed to obtain work in Nigeria and even though he had
obtained a graduate degree, the Nigerian economy was burgeoning with
graduates who are unable to find work.  Whilst one of his siblings was
described as a "banker", in reality he was only "making ends meet" and his
parents were not able to financially support him.  Whilst he therefore did
not rule out the family connections, he did not accept that they would be
able to support him in the event of his return.  He admitted that he had
not considered or conducted any research into the ability to find work in
Nigeria, having carried out a number of roles in the UK; nor had he
investigated the possibility of schooling for the children; but what he did
add was that his father's ability to assist in funding education as he had
for the appellant was no longer a proposition for the appellant's children.

The respondent's submissions

Mr Lindsay relied upon the refusal letter and reiterated his concession
that the appellant was socially and culturally integrated into the UK.  The
respondent also accepted that the circumstances may be termed tragic and
that the appellant had no criminal intent but was criminally liable as a
result of his actions.  There nevertheless remained a very significant
public interest in deportation.  I needed to consider both the length of
the sentence and the circumstances of the offending.  Considering the
exceptions, the respondent accepted that the "stay" scenario with the
consequential split of the family unit would be a very difficult matter but
that there was a wider family unit and the possibility of support from the
wider family.  Whilst the respondent did not take issue with what the
independent social worker had said, the report had its limitations.  In
particular, it did not say what would happen in the event of the
appellant's removal and was silent notably about the fact that the
appellant and his wife also lived with other family members.  The threshold
of unduly harsh effects was a heightened one and was not met in either
circumstance.  Mr Lindsay accepted that there were strong matters in the
appellant's favour on both limbs but that in terms of the "go" scenario it
could not be assumed simply because the children and Ms Pryce were British
citizens that the rights and expectations of growing up as British citizens
and living in the UK would be lost; or that life would be worse in Nigeria.
 Moreover, in terms of the "stay" scenario, it had not been clear, but it
was far clearer now, that there was a wider UK family, with strong bonds,
including Nerissa. This did not ignore the appellant being described as a
father figure to his children's cousins and there would be undoubtedly
difficulties for Ms Pryce and their children, but not such that she could
not work or find a way to live.  Regarding the two children, nothing had
been shown that they had not been able to cope or engage with their
education in the appellant's absence.

In terms of the appellant's integration into Nigeria, the test of "very
significant obstacles" could not be met.  The appellant had lived in
Nigeria until aged 22, including a short period as an adult; retained close
family members there; spoke the language and there was no reason why, in
the sense of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 that he would not be able to
return as an insider and to set himself back up in Nigeria.

Considering the seriousness of the appellant's crime, I was asked to note
the Judge's sentencing remarks; the particularly serious nature of the
offence; and the fact that there was nothing that could replace the life of
the appellant's victim.  The appellant's appeal against his sentence had
been dismissed by the Court of Appeal.  Whilst it was right that the
appellant's voluntary disclosure and cooperation with the police could
weigh in his favour and no issue was taken with the witnesses' credibility,
nevertheless there was a public interest in deterring others.  It might be
not as strong as in other cases but there was some importance in the public
confidence of deporting those who have committed serious criminal offences.
 In summary, neither of the exceptions was met and there were not very
compelling circumstances over and above those two exceptions.

The appellant's submissions

The two witnesses, the appellant and his wife, were credible.  This was a
tragic case not only for the appellant's victim and his family but also for
the appellant.  The fact that the appellant had been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of more than four years set the bar at a certain level, but
it was also, even at an elevated level, one where deportation could still
breach the family's Article 8 rights.  I was asked to bear in mind the
unique nature of the circumstances.  This was not a run-of-the-mill case
where an individual had wilfully chosen to break the law and what society
expected of them.  The sentencing Judge had described the appellant as a
responsible driver who upon being involved in the accident was deeply
distressed and tried to help the victim.  The appellant was not dangerous,
and he was a generally competent driver and he had since stopped taking
cannabis.  He was compliant with the prison authorities and engaged
positively with them.  There was no value in "deterrence" in deporting the
appellant, as his crime was not intentional.  There was not, as there might
be in other cases, public interest in deporting those who consciously
sought to break the law.  As the case of AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA
Civ 1296 reminded us, even where I was considering a very compelling
circumstances case, I had to consider all of the circumstances of the case
and not just the offending but rehabilitation and the effect on the
appellant's British wife and children.

In terms of the viability of a "go" scenario, the appellant had not
returned to Nigeria since 2007; had never worked there and his parents, who
had initially funded him, had since retired and he was sending them
remittances.  He had left Nigeria because he could not get employment.  He
would be returning back with a wife not of Nigerian heritage and two
children who had never been there and had never attempted to manage living
there.  The lack of their ability to relocate tipped that into it being
unduly harsh, regardless of the children and the impact on the appellant's
children's cousin.

In terms of the "stay" scenario, the impact had been acknowledged by the
independent social worker, who had referred to impact on the children of
the appellant's absence.  Even during that absence whilst the appellant was
in prison, there had been regular visits, as demonstrated in the visitor
log, and separation would destroy the family.  What this meant was that the
destruction of the family would be unduly harsh and was tipped further into
becoming very compelling because of the extraordinary circumstances of the
offence.  If there were ever a case of there being very compelling
circumstances it was this case and if not met here, it was unclear as to
what else and in what other circumstances it would be met.  The appellant
was a member of a very close family, a key caregiver and it was not in the
public interest to subject the children to further turmoil.

The Law

I set out the relevant statutory provisions, without gloss, and the core
principles.

Sections 117A to C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
provide:

     "PART 5A

     Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

117A Application of this Part

(1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to determine
whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

(a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life under
Article 8, and

(b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
1998.

(2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
must (in particular) have regard -

(a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

(b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
considerations listed in section 117C.

(3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means the question
of whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private and
family life is justified under Article 8(2).

117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

(1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.

(2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because
persons who can speak English -

(a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because
such persons -

(a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(4)  Little weight should be given to-

(a)  a private life, or

(b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                       that is established by a person at a time when the
                  person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

(5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

(6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where-

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom.

117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
criminals

(1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

(2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

(3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced to
a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

(4) Exception 1 applies where-

(a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
life,

(b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

(c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.

(5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

(6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

(7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted."

There is an increasing scale of hurdles, to succeed in a human rights
appeal, ranging from a person who is not liable to deportation at all, who
may succeed on the basis of Section 117B(6), to the most significant hurdle
for foreign criminals who have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
of four years or more (this appellant's case).  However, where he cannot
meet 'Exception 1', or 'Exception 2', I can nevertheless consider his
circumstances through the initial lens of those exceptions when considering
"very compelling circumstances".

Noting the case of HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176; AA (Nigeria) v
SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296, when considering whether an effect is "unduly
harsh", I do not apply any notion of exceptionality or a baseline of the
"ordinary" effects of deportation on "any" child.  I accept that every
assessment of "unduly harsh" must have as its focus the effects on the
appellant's wife; child A and child B; and their cousin.  The wording
"unduly harsh" reflects section 117C(1), that the deportation of foreign
criminals is in the public interest, so it does not start off as a neutral
evaluation, but in the context of that public interest, the focus remains
on the effects on the children.  Unduly harsh effects may be commonplace
and are highly fact-specific, particularly as they centre on the effects on
individual children, by way of example, their ages; educational and
emotional needs; and the role played by the appellant.

The assessment of "very compelling circumstances", reflects the strong
public interest in deportation.  However, that public interest has a
moveable quality, i.e., the public interest may not have the same weight
for all serious foreign criminals; and at its heart, it is helpful to
assess very compelling circumstances through the "balance-sheet" approach,
weighing on the one hand, the factors in the appellant's favour,
holistically, against the strong (but not immovable) public interest in
deportation.  They include the effects on Nerissa Pryce and her daughter.

Whether or not there are very compelling circumstances, I also need to
consider the wider section 117B factors.

Discussion and Conclusions

Whilst the appellant cannot rely upon Exception1, as already noted, I can
consider whether there are very compelling circumstances through the lens
of Exception 1.  The first element of that, namely the period of time spent
by the appellant in the UK, is not met but the respondent accepts that the
appellant is socially and culturally integrated into the UK.  The nature of
that integration is important, with the appellant involved in his local
church since 2016 as well as having carried out a variety of jobs and he is
clearly somebody who is willing to work and is involved in his local
community.  Even whilst in prison, the appellant's willingness to assist
with the prison's careers service was evident.  He is somebody who, in
prison, positively engaged with the authorities and I have no doubt that
who would positively contribute and engage in the future with his wider
community.

Nevertheless, for the purposes of the third limb, I conclude that there are
not very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria,
were the appellant to return alone, without Ms Pryce and their children.
Whilst I have noted the appellant's evidence that he was unable to find
work up to the age of 22 despite being a graduate and also noting his point
that there are many graduates in Nigeria who may struggle to find jobs, I
am also conscious that in addition to his Nigerian academic qualifications,
the appellant has worked in a number of UK sectors as reflected in the
independent social worker report including in construction (�3.4, page [27]
AB), as an Uber driver; as a security guard; and also with qualifications
as a ticket inspector with Anglia Railways (see page [125] AB), health and
social care and auxiliary nursing (page [132]), CCTV operations (page
[114]), sterile cleaning and packing processes (page [115]) and preparing
to set up a digital business (page [103]).  I do not list all of the
qualifications, but I am satisfied that the appellant has had substantial
experience working over the years in the UK since 2004, during which time
he had helped fund his studies together with numerous courses, which means
he has more than the simple graduate qualification he had upon leaving
Nigeria.  He has candidly accepted that he has not done any research into
the Nigerian job market, and I would expect him, with the benefit of the
additional practical experience of work in the UK, be able to find
remunerative work in Nigeria to be able to support himself.  Whilst it has
not been suggested that he would need the financial support of his retired
parents or sibling, whom it is said is just about able to make ends meet,
nevertheless he has a number of relatives in Nigeria whom he remains close
to and no doubt even if not able to provide financial support, would
provide a support network upon his return to Nigeria.  He would not in any
sense be returning as an outsider and would, notwithstanding the fact that
he has not returned since 2007, be able to support himself and also, in the
event of a "stay" scenario, do so sufficiently that he would be able to
maintain at least social network contact with Ms Pryce and his two children
even if, as I accept, the couple would not be able to afford regular visits
between the two by way of travel to Nigeria.  In these circumstances,
therefore, Exception 1 is not met.

I turn to the question of Exception 2.  I separate this out into the two
scenarios, the "go" scenario and the "stay" scenario.  Mr Lindsay urged me
to consider the case of Patel (British citizen child - deportation) [2020]
UKUT 45 (IAC). Whilst I note the fact that the appellant's two children are
British citizens does not mean that it would be necessarily unduly harsh
for them to leave with Ms Pryce and the appellant as a family unit and that
some substantial interference with the rights and expectations that come
with being British citizens is possible without it being unduly harsh,
nevertheless I conclude that in the appellant's circumstances, the effect
of the "go" scenario would be unduly harsh upon Ms Pryce and the two
children.

I take as my starting point that it would not be in the best interests of
those two children but that is only one factor to consider.  More broadly,
the circumstances are where the two children and Ms Pryce live in the same
neighbourhood where Ms Pryce has lived for the vast majority of her life,
having lived in the same family unit since the age of seven, albeit with a
brief period of schooling in Jamaica.  Her extended family is within the UK
as are her siblings, with whom she has close connections.  Whilst I note
that the appellant had described having Nigerian friends, part of the
Nigerian diaspora community in the UK, nevertheless Ms Pryce has no
knowledge or connections with Nigeria.  The stability of the family's
settings, which is the only setting they have ever known, is in the context
of living in Ms Pryce's mother's family home together with Ms Pryce's
sister and now her young daughter.  Ms Pryce's university experience and
career has been developed whilst in the UK.  Her ability to support the
couple's children, including when the appellant was in prison, was through
the ability to obtain childcare, albeit at an expense, in the UK. Her role
in the administration of legal education is one within the context of UK
legal services, having obtained a law degree in England.  Whilst that may
stand her in certain stead in the event of the family's relocation to
Nigeria, I find that the family's return to Nigeria as a whole would be a
very different proposition to the appellant returning alone and able to
find remunerative work just to support himself.  There is no suggestion
that the appellant's relatives in Nigeria would be able to house or provide
financial support to the appellant's larger family.  In simple terms, they
would need to fund and find accommodation themselves as well as schooling
and remunerative work, in circumstances where both the appellant and Ms
Pryce have formerly worked.  Whilst the appellant may be able to access
Nigerian society as an insider and may to an extent be able to assist Ms
Pryce, I recognise that she has simply no connection with that country
whatsoever and her ability to therefore work and provide support to the
family must therefore be at serious risk, even if the couple have not
explored in detail the availability of job vacancies.  There is every
possibility that the family would be dependent upon the appellant's income
alone, which, very broadly speaking, in the UK, has been limited to what
might be termed skilled manual work such as security-guarding, driving and
the like.

In those circumstances, Ms Pryce's role within a graduate job is of
significant importance to the family's financial prospects and her
inability to replicate that role in Nigeria, where she has no experience
would therefore have serious implications for the family's ability to
sustain themselves.  That in turn would have an impact on the family's
ability to source education for the two children, who are settled and at
important stages of their education, with the eldest child about to move,
the year after next, with his cohort to secondary school.  In circumstances
where Ms Pryce and her children would be moving to a country that is
entirely unknown to them, with serious risks as to the family's ability to
support itself, and without the close support network which Ms Pryce has
enjoyed for the entirety of her life, I accept that the effect of the "go"
scenario would be unduly harsh, even taking into account the starting point
that the public interest is in the deportation of the appellant as a
foreign criminal.

I then turn to consideration of the "stay" scenario, whereby the appellant
is deported to Nigeria, but Ms Pryce and her children remain in the UK with
her sister, her sister's child and her immediate support network.  I have
considered carefully the independent social worker report and I have no
doubt the impact which will be emotionally upsetting to both the children
(including the cousin) and also to Ms Pryce and her sister.  I am also
mindful of not falling into the trap of looking for something beyond the
commonplace or usual, when considering unduly harsh effects.  I find it
likely, given the couple's financial resources, that the ability of them to
see one another physically would be limited, if not at all, bearing in mind
the context that the appellant has not been able to afford to visit Nigeria
himself since 2007.  I have little doubt that therefore any contact would
be by means of social media communication only, albeit one that would not
incur the �5,000 expense that the appellant incurred whilst in prison.  The
consequence would be that the appellant would be physical absent from his
two sons' lives as well as the life of their cousin, Ms Pryce, and Nerissa,
with all of whom he has close relationships and with whom he is part of a
close family unit living together.

However, it is within the closeness of the wider family unit, that I
conclude that ultimately, the effect of deportation in the "stay" scenario
would not be unduly harsh.  Ms Pryce accepted that during the period of the
appellant's imprisonment, she was able to work full-time and, albeit with
childcare arrangements which were expensive, was able to cope.  She lives
in the family home belonging to her mother, and there is no risk of the
family losing their home in the event of the appellant's deportation.  The
couple's children go to school in the same neighbourhood she is familiar
with, with long-developed social networks.  She has a close family support
network and even if, as I accept, her close family support network may have
their own careers and families to attend to, I have no doubt that as from
time to time they would, if necessary, provide Ms Pryce with support.
Indeed, Ms Pryce described that she and her twin sister Nerissa helped one
another with childcare arrangements when they both worked, in the
appellant's absence.  I do not in any way belittle the central importance
that the appellant has played in his children's lives actively as a loving
father and having, for example, been there so that they can be proud of
him, as well as the close relationship he has with Nerissa and her
daughter.  Equally, I do not limit the weight that Ms Brown has eloquently
described of the desire of both children to have a father whom they can
show off and show and be around physically, which was possible even during
his period of imprisonment. I am nevertheless satisfied that Ms Pryce and
the two children would be able to cope and ultimately thrive in the
appellant's absence.  This is testament to the love and support of Ms Pryce
for her children as well as the support of the close-knit wider family.  I
have carefully considered the impact too upon Nerissa Pryce, with whom the
appellant has a close relationship, and her daughter, aged four years old.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that that daughter continues to have a
relationship with her biological father and also will remain cohabiting
with her cousins, the appellant's children.  Whilst the appellant's two
children are at important stages of their education, moving to primary
school and in the next year to secondary school, nevertheless there was no
evidence of worsening educational attainment during the period of the
appellant's absence nor, noting child A's medical condition of asthma, is
there any suggestion of any caring needs that Ms Pryce or her relatives
could not fulfil.  Put simply, whilst the outcome is, I have no doubt,
harsh, I also have no doubt that Ms Pryce and her close-knit and wider
family in the UK will be able to cope and thrive.  Even taking into account
and noting that it is not in the best interests of the children, it would
not, in my view, be unduly harsh for the appellant to be deported and for
Ms Pryce and her children to remain in the UK.

I go on to consider whether there are very compelling circumstances over
and above Exceptions 1 and 2, even though Exception 1 and the "stay"
scenario of Exception 2 are not met.   I include in that assessment, fresh
consideration of the Exception 1 and 2 factors, as well as the impact on
Nerissa Pryce and her child.  It is also at this stage that I also consider
the nature of the appellant's offending and his involvement.  I have
considered in particular the 'Boultif' factors (see Boultif v Switzerland
[2001] 33 EHRR 50) referred to at �49 of the Patel decision.  I am
conscious that this was a single offence and that the appellant is at no
risk of reoffending.  I am also conscious that he was distraught at his
offence and that the appellant's conduct since his offending has been
without criticism.  I take into account the fact of his British wife and
children and the fact that the "go" scenario would be unduly harsh.  I also
take into account that the appellant has been married since 2008 and,
albeit for a brief period of non-cohabitation, has a loving and close
family relationship with Ms Pryce but also as part of the wider close
family unit, including Nerissa and her child.  I take into account the fact
that the appellant has never been in the UK unlawfully and I also take into
account the challenges that Ms Pryce will face in the event that the
appellant is deported.  Nevertheless, this is in my view not a case where,
what were the described as the unique features by Ms Khan, mean that there
are very compelling circumstances.  On the one hand, the sentence was for
just over four years in question, and I take into account that the actions
of the appellant, who ultimately killed another man, were not intentional.
I also take into account that, as the sentencing Judge said, that he is not
a dangerous offender.  I take into account the Court of Appeal's assessment
of the sentence as possibly harsh but one that was open to the Judge to
make.  Nevertheless, the circumstances of the appellant having killed a
man, whose family's lives have been shattered for ever, places a heavy
weight indeed on the public interest in deporting the appellant.  Whilst I
recognise that this is not a case where deterrence would have a particular
effect as there was no suggestion that the appellant intended to commit the
offence in question, the appellant's culpability for such a serious
offence, in circumstances where Exception 1 and the "stay" scenario of
Exception 2 are not met, combined with the heavy weight of the public
interest in the appellant's deportation,  ultimately outweighs the factors
in support of right to respect for his family and private life developed in
the UK in a period when he was in the UK lawfully and also in the context
of an undoubtedly close and loving relationship with his family members as
a part of the family life in the UK.  I conclude that there are not very
compelling circumstances in this case, over and above Exceptions 1 and 2,
on an assessment of all of the evidence.

Considering the wider Article 8 considerations, including by reference to
section 117B of the 2002 Act, while the appellant has never been a burden
on the UK taxpayer; speaks English; established his family life when in the
UK lawfully and much of his private life when he had settled status; while
the decision to deport the appellant undoubtedly has an effect sufficient
to engage Article 8, the strong public interest in deportation ultimately
outweighs the appellant's right to respect for his family life, and the
best interests of the minor children involved.  The decision to refuse the
appellant's human rights claim is proportionate.

In the circumstances, the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant's
application for leave to remain on the basis of his human rights is upheld
and the appellant's appeal fails and is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   J Keith           Date:    9th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   J Keith           Date:    9th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12135/2019 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2020                 |On                                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                          MR ADEFEMI PETER ADEBISI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Khan, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and  reasons  which  were
    given orally at the end of the hearing on 21st October 2020.

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to the
hearing being via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Carroll (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 6th March 2020, by which
she dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds, following the
respondent's refusal of his human rights claim on 3rd July 2019, in the
context of the respondent having made a deportation order against the
appellant on the same date.  The automatic deportation provisions of
section 32(2) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.  The appellant, a
Nigerian national, with indefinite leave to remain in the UK since February
2011, had been sentenced on 7th February 2019 to 54 months' imprisonment
for causing death by careless driving while under the influence of drugs,
specifically cannabis.

The respondent accepted that the appellant was in a long-standing
relationship with his British national wife, who had been born in the UK
and who had no connections to the appellant's country of origin, Nigeria.
The couple had two British children, born in 2010 and 2015 and the
appellant was, except for his time in prison, a resident father.  The
eldest child, ('A') suffered from asthma and his behaviour at school was
said to have worsened during the period of the appellant's imprisonment.
The appellant had entered the UK in 2004, aged 22 years' old and had always
had leave to remain in the UK since his arrival.  He had no prior criminal
convictions.

In refusing the appellant's human rights claim, the respondent considered
the appellant's family life.  While the appellant had a family life with
his wife and children, who were 'qualifying' for the purposes of section
117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the respondent
concluded that the effect of the appellant's deportation on his wife and
children would not be unduly harsh ('exception 2' - section 117C(5)), on
the basis that it would not be unduly harsh either for his wife and
children live with him to Nigeria, or to remain in the UK without the
appellant.

In respect of the appellant's private life, ('exception 1' - section
117C(4)), the appellant had not been resident in the UK for most of his
life (just over 14.5 years, having arrived aged 22) and the respondent did
not accept that he was 'fully' socially and culturally integrated, as a
result of the seriousness of his offending.  The respondent also did not
accept that there would be very significant obstacles to his integration in
Nigeria, as he had received training and an education in the UK as well as
having worked in variety of roles, which would assist in his integration.
There were no very compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest
in the appellant's deportation.

The FtT's decision

The FtT's analysis of the evidence was brief.  She noted the offence
(�[18]); the appellant's remorse and low risk of reconviction (�[20] and
[21]) and his continuing family connections (parents and a brother) in
Nigeria and the appellant's wife's contacts with her parents-in-law.  While
the FtT cited the children's best interests, she concluded that separation
from the appellant did not amount to exceptional circumstances and they
could either choose to relocate to Nigeria as a family, or maintain contact
with the appellant, while remaining in the UK (�[25] to [27]).

Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT dismissed the
appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which, while citing section 117C of
the 2002 Act and relevant case law, engages very little with the
appellant's specific circumstances.  The grounds assert that the FtT had
failed to consider the effect on the appellant's children of his separation
from them (ground (1)); and had failed to set aside the appellant's
offending when considering the unduly harsh effect on the appellant's
children of his deportation (ground (2).

First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman initially refused permission, but on
renewal, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 14th
August 2020.  While permission was granted on all grounds, Judge Jackson
identified materiality as the issue, given that there was nothing
apparently identifiable which could establish either the unduly harsh
effects of deportation on the appellant's children or very compelling
circumstances.  She indicated that the appellant would need to satisfy this
Tribunal that the brevity of the reasoning was material to the outcome of
the appeal.

The hearing before me

The appellant's submissions

In the appellant's more detailed submissions before me, I was referred to
the two recent authorities of HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, and AA
(Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296.  The concerns that had been raised
by both Judges Easterman and Jackson were reiterated.  The key point here
was this was not a case where an adequate analysis of the evidence would
have made no difference in terms of an outcome.  In relation to the
authority of HA (Iraq), I was referred to �[152] and in particular the
point that a decision to deport a parent may produce hugely detrimental
consequences for a child but provided his or her best interests had been
adequately identified and weighed in the balance as a primary
consideration, the decision would be lawful.  There had been no such
analysis here.

Ms Khan then went on to cite from �[153] that there was no substitute for a
careful consideration of all relevant factors when the best interests of a
child were involved in an article 8 assessment; and at �[154] that a child
would not usually be in a position to urge his or her point of view and
that the decision maker cannot treat the child as if he or she had some
burden of proof.

Returning to an earlier part of the decision at �[53], it was the express
will of parliament that Tribunals should, in each case, make an informed
evaluative assessment of whether the effect of deportation on the partner
or parent would be unduly harsh in the context of the strong public
interest in the deportation of foreign criminals; and at �[56] the Court
had identified its concern around the risk of a test of harshness beyond
that ordinarily expected.  Such a test, if used incautiously, could be
misleading, particularly where Tribunals treated the essential question as
being one of whether the circumstances were out of the ordinary.  How a
child would be affected by a parent's deportation would depend on an almost
infinitely variable range of circumstances and it was not possible to
identify a 'baseline' assessment, all of which was consistent with �[38] to
[41] of AA (Nigeria).

Ms Khan referred me not only to the appellant's statement before the FtT,
but �[21] of the FtT's decision where she stated:

         "I heard evidence at length  from  the  appellant.   He  is  deeply
         remorseful and did not attempt to diminish responsibility  for  any
         of his actions.  Neither he nor Ms Pryce exaggerated any aspect  of
         the appellant's case."

Even if it were suggested that the elements of the appellant's witness
statement which had dealt with the impact on his wife and children were
brief, it was clear that there was substantial additional oral evidence
before the FtT, none of which was recorded in any detail in the FtT's
decision.  In any event, the appellant had referred in his written witness
statement aspects of the impact on his wife and children.  At �[18] he had
dealt with the emotionally damaging impact on his wife, which in turn would
have an impact on her ability to care for their children.  He also
commented at �[21] about the close nature of his relationship with his
children and the effect that that his deportation would have on his
children.

The appellant's wife had also produced a witness statement to the FtT, to
which I was referred, particularly �[4], which reiterated the closeness of
the appellant's relationship with his children and the tight family unit,
which was reflected in the evidence before the FtT at pages [43] and [44]
of the appellant's bundle before the FtT, which included a prison visit log
with regular, almost monthly visits by the applicant's wife and children to
the appellant in prison, and an endorsement by the Prison Family Services
officer at page [47].  It was simply no substitute to say that the
appellant's wife, who had no Nigerian background and had never been to
Nigeria, could simply move there, even if she were in contact with the
appellant's parents.

In summary, the inadequacy of the FtT's reasoning in this case was highly
material.

The respondent's submissions

In terms of the respondent's submissions, Mr McVeety agreed that an
assessment of the human rights claim was intensely fact-sensitive, and he
also accepted candidly that the FtT's reasoning had been brief.  However,
nothing in HA (Iraq) or AA (Nigeria) turned the absence of any detailed
evidence into the basis to conclude that there were very compelling
circumstances in the appellant's case.  This was a case where there were a
couple of brief references in the witness statements to the effect of
removal on the appellant's wife and children, but in reality, nothing that
would begin to amount to very compelling circumstances.

The other factors that might be said to go in the appellant's favour in an
assessment of very compelling circumstances, namely his honesty in
confessing to his cannabis use prior to killing somebody, albeit
accidentally, was not something that could realistically be seen in his
favour and nor could the fact that he collected his children from school
every day.

Discussion and conclusions

Drawing together the submissions from both parties, I first accept that the
FtT's analysis in relation to both 'exception 1;' 'exception 2;' and also
of 'very compelling circumstances' over and above those for the purposes of
Section 117C of the 2002 Act, was insufficient, in the sense of the FtT
explaining how she reached her conclusion that neither exceptions were met
and that there were no very compelling circumstances.  Indeed, the
limitations of that analysis are at �[25] to [27]:

         "25. The best interests of the children are a primary consideration
         under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
         209. They are, however, not sole or paramount and must be  balanced
         against other factors.  Only the strongest claim will outweigh  the
         public interest will outweigh the public interest in  deporting  an
         individual sentenced to at least four years' imprisonment.

         26. Neither the British nationality of the children nor the  likely
         separation from their father for a long period of time  amounts  to
         such exceptional circumstances  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation.  It is of course open to Ms Pryce and  the
         children to accompany the children to Nigeria should they choose to
         relocate to that country.  Alternatively, Ms Pryce and the children
         will be able to keep in regular contact with the appellant by means
         of computer and telephone and there  is  nothing  in  principle  to
         prevent them from visiting the appellant.

         27. Deportation will inevitably give rise to great sadness  and  to
         significant practical problems in terms of the ability of Ms  Pryce
         to continue work  and  to  care  for  her  children.  However,  the
         evidence falls short of showing a degree of  harshness  above  what
         would necessarily be  involved  for  any  child  (or  other  family
         member) faced with the deportation of a parent (see paragraph 23 of
         KO (Nigeria) UKSC [2018] 53)."

21.  While the analysis at  �[25]  refers  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and correctly states that these best interests are not sole or
    paramount, the conclusion which almost immediately  follows  at  �[26],
    that there are no exceptional circumstances which outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation, provides no analysis at all of the  impact  of
    the appellant's removal either on his children  or  Ms  Pryce,  or  any
    substantive analysis in relation to the practicability  of  the  family
    relocating, as a unit, to Nigeria.  The reasoning at �[29] in  relation
    to 'very compelling circumstances' similarly lacks such analysis and is
    once again more of a statement:

         "In light of all of the evidence, for the reasons given above,  and
         for the reasons given by the respondent, I find that the  appellant
         has  failed  to  demonstrate  that  there   are   very   compelling
         circumstances  such  as  to  outweigh  the   public   interest   in
         deportation..."

22.  Mr McVeety urged upon me that  the  absence  of  reasoning  was  of  no
    practical import, where  there  was  no  evidence  before  the  FtT  to
    analyse.  This is answered by two points.  First, both  the  statements
    of the appellant and Ms Pryce addressed the issue  of  the  substantial
    emotional impact that the appellant's removal would have  on  Ms  Pryce
    and her consequential ability to look after their children even  if  it
    was put in brief terms.  Second, as the FtT herself recorded at  �[21],
    she heard evidence 'at length' from the appellant.  The nature of  that
    evidence is mentioned in only two brief paragraphs at �[22]  and  [23],
    which described the appellant as a 'devoted husband  and  father',  but
    little more.  The remainder of the substance of the  oral  evidence  in
    relation the family unit in the UK is otherwise barely touched  on.  In
    these circumstances, it is not possible to safely  reach  a  conclusion
    that the evidence that was given would not have had a  material  impact
    on the eventual decision reached, had  it  been  set  out  clearly  and
    analysed more fully; or the absence and limitations  of  such  evidence
    was more clearly stated.

23.  I accept Ms Khan's submissions, powerfully made, that  this  is  not  a
    case where the absence of reasoning is immaterial. In the circumstances
    and bearing in mind the grave impact of the FtT's  decision  to  uphold
    the refusal of the human rights appeal, this is a case where the  FtT's
    decision is unsafe and should be set aside.

24.  In setting aside the FtT's decision, however, I preserve  her  findings
    (not in dispute) that the appellant continues to  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife, Ms Pryce, a qualifying  partner;
    and a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  two
    qualifying  children,  for  the  purposes  of  section  117C   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Decision on error of law

25.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains errors of  law,  such  that
    it is unsafe and  cannot  stand.   I  set  the  decision  aside,  while
    preserving the finding that the appellant has  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationships with his qualifying wife and children.

Disposal

26.  With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement, given the limited scope of the issues and disputed facts, it
    is appropriate that the Upper  Tribunal  remakes  the  FtT's  decision.
    Directions for the remaking are set out below.

Directions

27.  The following directions shall apply to  the  future  conduct  of  this
    appeal:

    27.1 The Resumed Hearing will be listed  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Keith, if possible, or another Upper Tribunal  Judge,  and  if  the
         appellant remains in criminal detention, the hearing shall be heard
         at the Royal Courts  of  Justice,  on  the  first  available,  time
         estimate 4 hours, to enable the  Upper  Tribunal  to  substitute  a
         decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.

    27.2 The appellant shall no later than two weeks prior to the  Hearing,
         file with the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  upon  the  respondent's
         representative  a  consolidated,  indexed,  and  paginated   bundle
         containing all the documentary evidence upon which  he  intends  to
         rely.  Witness statements in the bundle must be signed, dated,  and
         contain a declaration of truth and shall stand as the  evidence  in
         chief of the maker who shall be made available for the purposes  of
         cross-examination and re-examination only.

    27.3 The respondent shall have  leave,  if  so  advised,  to  file  any
         further documentation she intends to rely upon and in  response  to
         the appellant's evidence; provided the same is filed no later  than
         one week prior to the Hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside, subject to the preserved findings set out above.

No anonymity direction is made



Signed J Keith                  Date:  28th October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
