
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12749/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams                   |                              |
|On 17 June 2021                               |On 13 July 2021               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                               Ishup Kumar Rai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 19 January 1986.  His
father, the sponsor, is a former Gurkha soldier who retired from the
British army on 30 November 1975.  The appellant first made an application
for entry clearance to settle in the UK together with his father, as the
dependent son of a former Gurkha soldier, in 2016.  Whilst his father's
application was successful, the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") rejected
the appellant's application in a decision dated 1 August 2016.  The
appellant appealed against that decision but his appeal was dismissed by
Judge Watson in a decision sent on 5 February 2018.  Judge Watson did not
accept that family life had been established between the appellant and his
father under Art 8.1 of the ECHR and so dismissed the appellant's appeal
under Art 8.

On 1 August 2018, the appellant made a further application for entry
clearance to settle in the UK as a dependent adult child of a former Gurkha
soldier.  That application was made along with an application for entry
clearance by his mother in order also to join the sponsor.  His mother's
application was successful but the ECO again refused the appellant entry
clearance on 2 July 2019 and that decision was maintained by the Entry
Clearance Manager on 9 December 2019.

The appellant again appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision
sent on 21 December 2020, Judge G D Davison dismissed the appellant's
appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  Judge Davison was not satisfied that the
appellant had established family life with the sponsor or, indeed, his
mother in the UK.

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
basis that the judge had erred in law in concluding that family life was
not established between the appellant and, the sponsor and his mother.
Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but,
on 9 March 2021, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Perkins) granted the appellant
permission to appeal.

In response to that grant of permission, the ECO filed a rule 24 response
on 9 April 2021 seeking to uphold the judge's decision, in particular his
finding that family life had not been established for the purposes of Art
8.1.

The appeal was listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice
Centre on 17 June 2021.  I sat in the Cardiff CJC and Ms McCarthy, who
represented the appellant, and Mr Whitwell, who represented the ECO, joined
the hearing remotely by Microsoft Teams.

The Judge's Decision

Before Judge Davison, the appellant's case was that there were more than
normal emotional ties, arising from financial and other dependency, between
him and his parents.  He relied on the fact that in 2013 he went to Saudi
Arabia to work and sent money home to his parents in Nepal to support them.
 He stopped working in Saudi Arabia in 2016 and returned to Nepal where he
lived in the family home with his mother and father.  Thereafter, the
appellant's first application for entry clearance (together with his
father) was made in 2016 and a second application made (with his mother) in
2018.  He was living at home in Nepal and despite there being a family
farm, remained financially reliant on money sent from the UK by the
sponsor.  The appellant also claimed that because of his parents' health
and circumstances in the UK (in particular that of his mother) they were
dependent upon him.

Judge Davison took as his 'starting point' the earlier decision of Judge
Watson in 2016.  That decision was, of course, based upon the finding that
the appellant had not proven the required "more than normal emotional ties"
in order to establish family life under Art 8.1.

Before Judge Davison, both the sponsor and the appellant's mother (who was
then in the UK) gave oral evidence as well as providing supporting witness
statements.  The appellant's father accepted that he had not told the truth
at the hearing before Judge Watson.  At that hearing, he had not told the
judge about the appellant's time in Saudi Arabia between 2013 and 2016
when, the appellant now claimed, he was working and providing financial
support to his family back in Nepal.  It was also part of the appellant's
case before Judge Davison that in 2013, prior to going to Saudi Arabia, he
had been studying and living with his sister in Nepal.

The judge set out the relevant law relating to Art 8, in particular in the
context of so-called Gurkha cases in Rai v ECO, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ
320 and, as there had been an earlier adverse decision against the
appellant, the IAT's guidance in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.

At para 28, the judge noted that the sponsor now accepted that he had lied
about the appellant being in Saudi Arabia and working there "as he feared
this evidence would lead to a refusal of his claim".

At para 29, the judge found that the appellant had lived with his sister
when he was studying and then after his studies went to work in Saudi
Arabia.

At para 30, the judge considered the appellant's claim, and the evidence
concerning, his working in Saudi Arabia and his return to Nepal:

"30. It now having been accepted that the appellant was working in Saudi
Arabia, the next issue is what caused the appellant to return.  The
evidence from the parents, as noted above, was divergent on this point.  I
find the appellant returned to be part of the entry clearance application.
I do not accept that he needed to return to look after his parents.  I do
not accept that the 'company' he was working for closed down and he had no
income.  This was not the evidence of his Father who stated that the
appellant returned alone and his friends whom he lived and worked with
remained in Saudi Arabia.  I find he wanted to come to the UK with his
family and so returned to Nepal to be part of that application.  It is not
to the credit of the sponsors that they have not been credible about the
reason for return.  The Father's evidence that the job was hard and the
money was 'low' does not sit well with the appellant returning to Nepal
just to be unemployed and receive no income, particularly when this is set
against the backdrop of him claiming the appellant needs to be in work to
financially support them."

The judge's reference to "divergent" evidence from the parents is a
reference to the evidence set out at paras 20 and 21 of the judge's
determination where the judge noted that the appellant's mother stated that
he returned to Saudi Arabia because the company for whom he had worked had
shut down and so he had no income (para 20).  The evidence of the
appellant's father was that the job had been hard and the salary was low
but he made no mention of the company having closed down and the appellant
being without income (para 21).

At para 32, the judge considered whether there was a basis for departing
from the earlier decision and findings of Judge Watson.  The judge said
this:

"32. I do not find that there are grounds to depart from the previous
determination.  Although I accept that the true factual position has now
been accepted and the sponsor regrets not telling the truth previously and
he is a man of exemplary military service.  His untruth to the Tribunal no
doubt weighs heavily on him.  The reality is that the judge assessed the
evidence on the basis the appellant was in Saudi Arabia and not in Nepal as
claimed.  The judge found that the evidence presented was inconsistent
about the farm and the income it produced (paragraph 31), there was no
evidence of frequent phone contact (paragraph 29), although there were some
financially remittances, they do not establish dependency (paragraph 33).
There were various reasons why the judge concluded family life was not
established."

Then at paras 33-36, the judge went on to make relevant findings based upon
the evidence before him and concluded that it did not establish family life
as claimed:

"33. The argument now advanced is that the untruth infected the decision
and now the true position is before me the appeals need to be revisited.
If I were wrong in the above finding and there were grounds to depart from
the previous determination, I would make the following findings.

(    The appellant lived with his sister whilst he studied.  These studies
were funded in part from income generated by the family farm.

(    After studying the appellant went to live and work in Saudi Arabia, in
Saudi Arabia he remitted some monies to his family.

(    He left Saudi Arabia to return to Nepal to be part of his Father's
entry clearance application.

(    There is a family farm in Nepal that surrounds the family home.
Although no accurate details have been provided the piece of land was said
to be large enough to support buffaloes, cows, pigs and chickens and a
sufficient size to grown some maize and potatoes.  I do not accept that the
appellant, having lived and worked on this land for various parts of his
life, would be incapable, as a fit and healthy 34 year old male, of
managing the same and raising/growing some livestock and crops.

(    I accept that the sponsors speak to their son and remit some money.
But I do not accept that this evidences real and effective support.

34.  I find the position is one created for the application.  The appellant
is a young adult male whose has studied and lived away from home.  I accept
that his parents paid for his studies and this is an element of dependency,
but that is not uncommon between parents and children.  He had started out
on his own life and was living and working in Saudi Arabia.  He returned
not out of any form of necessity/dependency, but because there was an
opportunity to live in the UK.  The picture painted since then of him being
at home, unable to farm the land in any meaningful fashion, with no
employment prospects and being entirely emotionally and financially
dependent on his parents is, I find, untrue and designed to achieve the
outcome sought by the family.  I have found the evidence about why he
returned to Nepal to be contradictory and unconvincing.  I have found the
evidence concerning the family farm to be inconsistent and not capable of
belief.

35.  I find on balance that the appellant has either been working in Nepal
or has been farming the land around the property to both provide food and
possibly [an] income for myself.  I have found the evidence to the
contrary, e.g. his Mother stating he is not able to manage the farm alone,
not credible.

36.  I have found no reason to depart from the previous determination.  If
I was wrong in that conclusion I have separately found that family life,
despite the low threshold that must be applied in these types of appeals,
is not established.  I find there is no real, effective, committed support.
 I find the evidence presented to that effect was contrived to present an
altered position of the reality."

As a result, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the
ECHR.

The Appellant's Challenge

The appellant relies upon three grounds of appeal which Ms McCarthy
developed in her oral submissions.

First, it is submitted that the judge erred in law in para 34 by requiring
the appellant to establish a "dependency of necessity".  Relying upon
Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Ms McCarthy submitted that the relevant
issue was whether the appellant has established "more than normal emotional
ties" and that such ties may result from dependency which means "real,
effective or committed support".  There is no requirement, she submitted,
that that dependency should arise out of necessity on the basis that the
appellant was incapable of providing support for himself.

Secondly, the judge erred in law in treating the appellant's account of
having worked in Saudi Arabia as incompatible with any finding that family
life existed.  In fact, Ms McCarthy submitted, it was evidence of
continuing ties of support between the appellant and his parents and
therefore of "real, effective or committed support" amounting to dependency
and establishing family life.

Thirdly, Ms McCarthy submitted that the judge had failed to consider the
relationship between the appellant and his parents in the UK (in particular
his mother) and the impact upon her that the separation was having both in
relation to her health and her day-to-day needs for support.  She submitted
that family life could be established both because of the appellant's
dependency upon his parents and his parents' dependency upon him, citing
Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2009] 1 AC 115.  Ms McCarthy submitted that this was
relied upon before the judge and referred to in para 23 of his decision
being part of the appellant's submissions.

The ECO's Submissions

On behalf of the ECO, Mr Whitwell relied upon the rule 24 response and
submitted that the grounds were little more than a disagreement with the
judge's finding.  He submitted that there was nothing that entitled the
judge to depart from the earlier decision.  He pointed out that the judge
cited Rai and at para 36 referred to the "low threshold" in Gurkha cases to
establish Art 8.1 was engaged.  He submitted that the judge had properly
approached the evidence and made sustainable findings, particularly in the
light of the fact that the adverse credibility findings were not
challenged.  He submitted that, before the First-tier Tribunal, the
appellant had not placed reliance in Counsel's skeleton argument upon the
effect upon his mother's health in the UK caused by the separation.  Mr
Whitwell submitted that the judge had made sustainable factual findings and
his appeal should be dismissed.

Discussion

The correct approach to determining whether Art 8.1 is engaged on the basis
of "family life" in the context of a claimed dependent adult child of a
former Gurkha soldier was summarised by the Court of Appeal in Rai at [16]-
[20].  Lindblom LJ (with whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed) said this:
         "16.  The  legal  principles  relevant  to  this  issue   are   not
         controversial.
         17. In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]
         EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph  17  of  his  judgment)
         that "if dependency is read  down  as  meaning  "support",  in  the
         personal  sense,  and  if  one   adds,   echoing   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  to  the  word
         "support", then it represents ... the irreducible minimum  of  what
         family life implies". Arden L.J.  said  (in  paragraph  24  of  her
         judgment) that the "relevant factors ...  include  identifying  who
         are the near relatives of the appellant, the nature  of  the  links
         between them and the appellant, the age of the appellant, where and
         with whom he has resided in the past, and the forms of  contact  he
         has maintained with the other members of the family  with  whom  he
         claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph  25)
         that "there is no presumption of family life". Thus "a family  life
         is not established between an adult child and his surviving  parent
         or  other  siblings  unless  something  more  exists  than   normal
         emotional ties". She added that "[such] ties  might  exist  if  the
         appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa", but it  was
         "not ... essential that the members of the family should be in  the
         same country". In Patel and  others  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
         Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his
         judgment, with which Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed)  that  "what
         may constitute an extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what
         constitutes dependency, and a good  many  adult  children  ...  may
         still have a family life with parents who are now settled here  not
         by leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".
         18. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy) the  Upper
         Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that  the
         judgments in Kugathas had been "interpreted too restrictively  in
         the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent  decisions
         of the domestic and Strasbourg courts", and (in paragraph 60)  that
         "some of the [Strasbourg] Court's decisions  indicate  that  family
         life between adult children and  parents  will  readily  be  found,
         without evidence of exceptional dependence". It went on to say  (in
         paragraph 61):
              "61. Recently, the  [European  Court  of  Human  Rights]  has
              reviewed the case law, in [AA v United  Kingdom [2012]  Imm.
              A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be whether  or
              not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If he is
              still single and living with his parents,  he  is  likely  to
              enjoy family life with them. ...".
         The Upper Tribunal set out the  relevant  passage  in  the  court's
         judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs 46 to  49),  which
         ended with this (in paragraph 49):
              "49. An examination of the Court's  case-law  would  tend  to
              suggest that the applicant, a young adult of  24  years  old,
              who resides with his mother and has not yet founded a  family
              of his own, can be regarded as having "family life"."
         19. Ultimately, as Lord  Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
         judgment of the court in Gurung (at paragraph 45), "the  question
         whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends
         on a careful  consideration  of  all  the  relevant  facts  of  the
         particular case". In some instances "an adult  child  (particularly
         if he does not have a partner or children of his own) may establish
         that he has a family life with his parents".  As  Lord  Dyson  M.R.
         said, "[it] all depends on the facts". The court expressly endorsed
         (at paragraph 46), as  "useful"  and  as  indicating  "the  correct
         approach to  be  adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of  the
         relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination
         in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy),  including  its
         observation (at paragraph 62) that  "[the]  different  outcomes  in
         cases with superficially similar features emphasises to us that the
         issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".
         20. To similar  effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
         Burnton  in Singh   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):
              "24. I do not think  that  the  judgments  to  which  I  have
              referred lead to any difficulty in  determining  the  correct
              approach to Article 8 in cases involving adult  children.  In
              the case of adults, in the context  of  immigration  control,
              there is no legal or factual presumption as to the  existence
              or absence of family life for the purposes of  Article  8.  I
              point out that the approach of the  European  Commission  for
              Human Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not  include
              any requirement of exceptionality.  It  all  depends  on  the
              facts. The love  and  affection  between  an  adult  and  his
              parents or siblings will not of itself justify a finding of a
              family life. There has to be something more.  A  young  adult
              living with his parents or  siblings  will  normally  have  a
              family life to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying
              a family life with his parents does  not  suddenly  cease  to
              have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.
              On the other hand, a young adult living independently of  his
              parents may well not have a family life for the  purposes  of
              Article 8.""

It is not suggested by Ms McCarthy that the judge misdirected himself by
not enquiring whether the appellant had established "more than normal
emotional ties" and dependency in the sense of "real, effective or
committed support".  Further, it is clear that the judge recognised,
consistently with Rai, that in this kind of case the threshold was "low"
(see para 36).

What is said by Ms McCarthy, relying upon Ground 1, is that the judge
required that dependency to be of "necessity" rather than seeking to
determine whether it was, in fact, established factually.  In that regard,
she relies upon what the judge said in para 34 in relation to the
circumstances of the appellant's return from Saudi Arabia in 2016 where the
judge said this:

         "He returned not out of any form of necessity/dependency, but
         because there was an opportunity to live in the UK."

It would, of course, have been wrong for the judge to gloss the test in Rai
and require any dependency in fact to arise out of "necessity".  The fact
of dependency is sufficient.  It is a "question of fact" and "a matter of
substance not form" (see,  Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338 at [31] per Sir
Ernest Ryder).  However, the context in which the judge used the phrase
"necessity/dependency" in para 34 was not to identify that established
dependency was from choice rather than necessity but as part of the judge's
overall assessment of the credibility of the appellant's case and whether
the witnesses who gave evidence were to be believed.  There was
inconsistent and contradictory evidence from the sponsor's father and
mother as to why he left Saudi Arabia.  One saying that he had lost his job
and so had no income and the other saying, not that, but that he had low
pay.

Likewise, the judge, in assessing whether the appellant was dependent upon
his parents once he returned from Saudi Arabia, found that he was, in fact,
not so dependent.  At paras 33 and 34, which I have set out above, the
judge did not accept that the appellant's account (given in the witnesses'
evidence) that he could not work on the family farm and support himself was
believable.  That finding is not, as Mr Whitwell pointed out in his
submissions, directly challenged in the grounds.  It was in that context
also that the judge referred to "necessity/dependency" not in order to
conclude that the appellant was in fact dependent but had become so by
choice, but rather in finding that the appellant was not to be believed
that he was in fact dependent upon his parents because it was not accepted
by the judge that he could not support himself (and therefore had not shown
that he was not doing so) from the family farm surrounding the family home
in Nepal.

Consequently, I reject Ground 1.

Turning to Ground 2, it is said that the appellant's support from Saudi
Arabia and his return to Nepal in 2016 was supportive of his claim that
there were "more than normal emotional ties" and/or dependency between him
and his parents.  The difficulty with this submission is that the judge did
not accept the appellant's account (and the evidence of his parents) about
these circumstances.  Much of the appellant's case turned upon the evidence
of his father.  His father accepted that he had previously lied in the
earlier appeal hearing.  He accepted that he had done so because, if he had
disclosed that the appellant had worked in Saudi Arabia, then he was
concerned that the claim might not succeed.  The judge was entitled to give
considerable weight to the fact that the sponsor accepted that he had lied
previously.  Of course, that a witness has lied previously does not mean
that necessarily he or she is lying about each and every part of his or her
evidence now.  The judge must have in mind the "Lucas direction" (R v Lucas
[1981] QB 720 per Lord Lane CJ at p. 723C), which, the Court of Appeal in
Uddin v SSHD recognised, is applicable in immigration cases.  At [11] Sir
Ernest Ryder (with whom King and Bean LJJ agreed) said this:
         "11. I note in that regard the conventional  warning  which  judges
         give themselves that a person may be untruthful  about  one  matter
         (in this case his history)  without  necessarily  being  untruthful
         about another (in this case the existence of family life  with  the
         foster mother's family), known as a 'Lucas direction'  (derived  in
         part from the judgment of the CACD in R v Lucas [1981] QB 720 per
         Lord Lane CJ at 723C). The classic formulation of the principle  is
         said to be this: if a court concludes that a witness has lied about
         one matter, it does not follow that he has lied about everything. A
         witness may lie for  many  reasons,  for  example,  out  of  shame,
         humiliation, misplaced loyalty, panic,  fear,  distress,  confusion
         and emotional pressure. That is because a person's motives  may  be
         different as respects different questions. The warning is not to be
         found in the judgments before this court. This is perhaps a  useful
         opportunity to emphasise that the utility of the self-direction  is
         of general application and  not  limited  to  family  and  criminal
         cases."

Here, of course, the sponsor's lie was in relation to a central facet of
the appellant's claim.  Ms McCarthy did not seek to contend before me that
the judge was wrong to take into account that the sponsor had previously
lied.  In my judgment, Judge Davison was clearly entitled to take that into
account along with other matters, particularly discrepancies in the
evidence of the appellant's mother and father in reaching his adverse
findings.

Whilst the judge accepted that there had, historically, been some support
and, indeed, "an element of dependency" between the appellant and his
parents, and indeed some remittances made by his parents in the UK to him
since they came to the UK, it was open to the judge to find that the
appellant had, in fact, not established dependency based upon financial
support by his parents at the date of the hearing.  The judge was entitled
not to accept the evidence before him that the appellant was "entirely
emotionally and financially dependent upon his parents", rather was working
or supporting himself in Nepal.  That finding was open to the judge even
if, as Ground 2 contends, the appellant was providing some financial
support from Saudi Arabia.  That financial support had ceased by the time
of the hearing, indeed it had ceased in 2016 when he returned.  The judge
undoubtedly understood the nature of the appellant's case about that
support but, in itself, even if accepted it did not establish that family
life existed subsequent to the appellant's return to Nepal from Saudi
Arabia.

For these reasons, I reject Ground 2.

Turning now to Ground 3, it does appear that Ms McCarthy raised before the
judge in her oral submissions the circumstances of the appellant's parents
in the UK and that there might be emotional dependency on the appellant as
a result.  That would appear to be the submission summarised in para 23 of
the judge's decision.  On the other hand, reading the detailed skeleton
argument prepared by Ms McCarthy for the First-tier Tribunal hearing (dated
29 April 2020), it is clear that the focus of her submissions was more upon
the appellant's dependency upon his parents rather than the other way
around.

The grounds (at para 21) refer to the witness statement of the appellant's
father at paras 26-30 (appellant's bundle pages 8-9) that the appellant
looked after his mother between 2016 (when his father came to the UK) and
2018 when she came to the UK and that they are "helpless without our son in
the UK" (para 29).  At para 30 reference is made to an incident where the
appellant's mother was taken to hospital as an emergency patient.

Whilst the judge does not directly refer to this evidence, perhaps because
it was not the focus of the appellant's case before him, I am unpersuaded
that if he had done so it would have led him to conclude (or indeed could
have led him to conclude) that there were more than normal emotional ties
between the appellant and his parents (in particular his mother) as a
result.  The evidence goes no further, in my judgment, than relating the
difficulties faced by the appellant's parents in the UK due to their
circumstances and age.  It does not speak to the support provided by the
appellant or any dependency of his parents on him in Nepal.  Consequently,
I am satisfied that the judge's failure to refer to this evidence did not
materially affect his findings or the outcome of the appeal.

For those reasons, I also reject Ground 3.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appellant's appeal
under Art 8 did not involve the making of an error of law.  That decision,
therefore, stands.

Accordingly the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 7 July 2021




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Davison, having dismissed the appeal, made no fee award.  The
appellant has been unsuccessful in his appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  That
decision also stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 7 July 2021

