
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13520/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2018                   |On 02 April 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               Mr Danyle Shaquille (aka Danyle Shukheil) Smith
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
                    Solicitors (Wimbledon)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of the Bahamas who was born on 22 November
1992.  On 19 July 2004 he entered the UK as a dependant of his mother and
was granted leave to remain until 31 March 2006.  Just over two months
later, on 2 June 2006, he was granted further leave until 31 October 2007
in line with his mother.  A further application made a month before the
expiry of this leave was refused, as was an application which had been
submitted on 2 October 2007.  The appellant's mother appealed against this
decision but her appeal was dismissed on 16 April 2008.  Neither the
appellant's mother nor the appellant made any further applications and
accordingly he has, since 2008, had no leave to remain in the UK.

On 14 October 2013 the appellant was convicted of an exceptionally serious
offence of aggravated burglary for which he was sentenced to eight and a
half years' imprisonment.  As is clear from the sentencing remarks, both
knives and an imitation firearm were used in the course of the burglary.
The judge's sentencing remarks include the following:

         "...  The victim was at home on the premises when you attacked.
         Violence was used and threatened against the victims and included a
         weapon.  One was cut, albeit not seriously, with a knife and the
         gun, as I say was drawn and pointed".

It was, as the judge found, a "gang attack".

On 23 May 2016 the appellant was served with a Notice of Liability to make
a Deportation Order and, absent representations from the appellant, a
deportation order was signed on 19 January 2017 and served on the appellant
together with the reasons for his deportation on 23 January 2017.  Absent
reasons why the appellant arguably fell within one of the exceptions set
out within Section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007, by Section 32(5) of that
Act, the respondent was obliged to make a deportation order, because the
appellant had been convicted of an offence and been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of over twelve months.

After the deportation order had been made, in an email sent on 30 June 2017
by a lady called [N], who was claiming to be the appellant's partner, the
appellant made representations to be allowed to remain, which the
respondent treated as an application to revoke the deportation order which
had been made and to be allowed to remain on Article 8 grounds (which would
constitute an exception to automatic deportation, under Section 33 of the
UK Borders Act).  However, in a detailed decision letter dated 12 June
2018, the respondent refused to revoke the deportation order, and refused
the Article 8 claim, on the basis that the appellant's deportation would
not breach the UK's obligations under Article 8 "because the public
interest in deporting you outweighs your right to private and family life".
 The respondent in this decision had regard to the relevant Immigration
Rules (in particular at paragraph A362 and paragraphs A398 to 399D) and
also to Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as
inserted by the Immigration Act 2014).

The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal was heard
before First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan sitting at Harmondsworth on 19
July 2018.

In a Decision promulgated on 13 August 2018, Judge Khan dismissed the
appeal.  The appellant now appeals against this decision, leave having been
granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf on 31 August 2018.

The basis upon which Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal is that it
was arguable that there had been sufficiently serious procedural and other
irregularities that the decision would have to be remade.

Some of these procedural irregularities overlap.  The first instance of
procedural unfairness alleged within the grounds of appeal is that the
appellant had not had an opportunity of seeing the respondent's bundle in
sufficient time to prepare for the hearing.  As Judge Shaerf notes when
giving his reasons for granting permission to appeal, that bundle is dated
9 July 2018 and was received at Harmondsworth on 12 July, which is some
seven days before the date of the hearing.  However, the appellant was at
that time detained at IRC Morton Hall in Lincolnshire, and he had already
applied for an adjournment, which request was received at Harmondsworth on
9 July, the same day that the respondent's bundle is dated.

This complaint overlaps the complaint that the hearing should have been
adjourned, primarily because the appellant had not had a proper opportunity
of considering the case against him and wanted to adduce further evidence.
Further, in his decision, Judge Khan does not even mention that an
adjournment request had been made, let alone give his reasons for refusing
an adjournment.  The judge failed to do so even though in his Record of
Proceedings he had noted that at the start of the hearing the appellant had
applied for an adjournment, referring to the late service of documents on
him.  This was a hearing at which the appellant was not represented.

The grounds also complain that the judge refused to allow the appellant to
provide any documents at the start of the hearing, although there is no
reference to this in the Record of Proceedings, or in Judge Khan's
decision.  As the appellant was not represented at this hearing, there is
no other way of knowing whether in fact such an application was made.

There are other aspects of the judge's Decision which were also criticised
within the grounds, which criticism has been echoed in Judge Shaerf's
Reasons.  Although technically the decision had been a refusal to revoke
the deportation order, at paragraph 1 of his decision, Judge Khan states
that: "The appellant appeals against the respondent's decision of
19/01/2018 made under Section 32 of the Borders Act 2007 seeking to deport
the appellant as a foreign criminal".  The actual decision under challenge,
which was to refuse his human rights claim and also refusing to revoke the
deportation order which had previously been made, was dated 12 June 2018.
As Judge Shaerf notes, "it is regrettable the judge failed to identify
correctly the decision under appeal".

Another difficulty with the decision is that although this was a challenge
to a deportation decision (that is, the refusal to revoke the deportation
order) and although the judge refers to Part 5A of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, he failed even to mention Section 117C,
which contains the applicable provisions which have to be considered by a
judge when considering deportation appeals.

Directions

Following the grant of permission on 3 September 2018, the Tribunal gave
directions in this case, which were signed by the Resident Judge.  These
were sent to the parties and included the following:

"...

4.   There is a presumption that, in the event of the Tribunal deciding
that the decision of the FtT is to be set aside as erroneous in law, the re-
making of the decision would take place at the same hearing.  The fresh
hearing will normally be based on the evidence before the FtT and any
further evidence submitted (see [5] below), together with the parties'
arguments.  The parties must be prepared accordingly in every case.

5.   The Tribunal is empowered to permit new or further evidence to be
admitted in the re-making of a decision.  In any case where this facility
is sought the parties must comply with Rule 15(2A) which is in these terms:

'In an asylum case or an immigration case -

(a)  if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was not
before the First-tier Tribunal, that party must send or deliver a notice to
the Upper Tribunal and any other party -

(i)  indicating the nature of the evidence; and

(ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal; and

(b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that was not before the
First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have regard to whether there
has been unreasonable delay in producing that evidence.'

A failure to comply with Rule 15(2A) will be regarded as a serious matter
and may result in fresh or further evidence not being considered by the
Tribunal.

..."

The Hearing

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jones told the Tribunal that his
instructions were that the appellant had been seeking to provide witness
statements, OASys Reports, third party reports and medical evidence.  These
were the documents which the judge had not permitted him to adduce.

In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to whether he had prepared a
bundle for this hearing (even out of time) Mr Jones replied that he had
not, but that the appeal was proceeding on the basis of procedural
unfairness.

When asked how the appellant's appeal could possibly succeed, Mr Jones
accepted that the appellant did not come within the exceptions set out
within Section 117C of the 2002 Act (which mirror the exceptions referred
to in the rules), and so would have to rely on very compelling
circumstances over and above these exceptions.  The question was whether
the adverse findings the judge had made were sustainable.  It was the
appellant's case that the judge had not properly considered the risk of his
committing further offences, when finding at paragraph 35 that: "There is a
very high risk that this appellant would go on to commit more serious
crimes in the UK".

When asked by the Tribunal what exceptional circumstances were said to
exist, Mr Jones replied that if reports were given to the Tribunal whatever
they said should be taken into account.  It was possible that a probation
report would say that there had been a change of circumstances.  The
judge's finding at paragraph 33 that he had limited ties in the UK because
he had failed to make any mention of any other family in this country and
only one other person had come with him to the hearing to support him was
subject to challenge.

The procedural irregularity was that the appellant had not been given an
opportunity to put his case.  There had been no mention in the decision of
why an adjournment was refused, and the judge had made adverse findings
against the appellant because of his failure to provide evidence (at
paragraph 33), which in the circumstances was unfair.  The appellant relied
on the decision of Moses LJ in ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844 (a case
involving the same judge) where the Court of Appeal had held that even if
an appellant's case appeared difficult, he still has a right to make that
case.  He was entitled to a fair hearing, even if his case was on its face
a weak one.  When a Tribunal came to consider the strength of the
appellant's ties in the UK, the low risk of his reoffending and all matters
which might arise in a report taken together, the appellant might be able
to show very compelling reasons why he should not be deported.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Duffy first of all asked the Tribunal to
note that there was in fact an OASys Report on file which showed that this
appellant presented a medium risk of reoffending but a high risk of harm to
the public.  Mr Duffy accepted that the judge's failure to give reasons why
he had refused an adjournment (or even to mention within his Decision that
such an application had been made) was a procedural error; the appellant
was entitled to know what the case against him was and needed to see the
respondent's bundle in order to do so.  However, although the failure to
engage with the adjournment request was procedurally wrong, it was
difficult to see how this appeal could possibly have succeeded under
paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules, and so the procedural error was
not material in the circumstances of this case.

    Discussion

I reserved my decision, but immediately following the hearing I read
through the file and my notes of the hearing, and reached a provisional
view of what my Decision would be.  Regrettably, the file was then mislaid
and my Decision was not finalised.  However, the file has now been located
and I now give the decision I had originally intended to give, but much
sooner.  The Tribunal apologises to the parties for the delay.

As accepted on behalf of the respondent, during oral argument, it was
clearly a procedural error not to give reasons why the request for an
adjournment was refused.  Furthermore, in the circumstances of this case,
where the unrepresented appellant had not been served with the respondent's
bundle in sufficient time to allow him to prepare for the hearing (because
the bundle was apparently served at Harmondsworth whereas the appellant was
at the time detained at IRC Morton Hall) it would have been the interests
of justice to grant the adjournment at the very least to enable the
appellant to know what case he had to answer.  It was further a procedural
irregularity that the appellant had not been served with the respondent's
bundle before the hearing, and would have been so even if the application
for an adjournment had not been made.

At paragraph 5 of the grounds, it is said that the appellant "wanted more
time to get witness statements, probation reports, OASys Reports and
medical documents" and that the appellant had requested this at the start
of the hearing, but there was no mention of this in the Decision.

The appellant clearly did not have a fair trial, because he had not had
sight of the evidence against him, and had had no reasonable opportunity to
present his case.  In these circumstances, it is not sufficient to say that
any irregularity was not material because the appellant's case was so weak
anyway that this irregularity made no difference.  This Tribunal must have
regard to what was said by Moses LJ in ML (Nigeria) (referred to above) as
follows, at paragraph 14:

"As a second limb, as I have hinted, [Counsel for the respondent] said
that, even if there were these errors, there is no point in sending this
case back for a further hearing.  But so bad was the decision that, in my
view, it would be wrong to consider the chances of success that the
claimant might have a second time round.  I am perfectly prepared, as a
matter of hypothesis, to assume that he will have a very difficult run on a
further occasion.  But that cannot displace the obligation for the
procedure to provide him with a fair opportunity of deploying his case.  It
is, after all, the reputation of the courts, and the courts in relation to
immigration, which is at stake here.  It seems to me that they cannot be
preserved and protected as deserving respect if a decision which is so
flawed is allowed to stand".

Accordingly, the decision will have to be remade, but, as Judge Shaerf
noted at the conclusion of his reasons for granting permission to appeal,
"the appellant should note that grant of permission is no indicator of the
eventual outcome".

Although the appellant had not had a reasonable opportunity either of
considering the case against him or of presenting his own case at the
hearing before Judge Khan, that is not the situation before this Tribunal.
The directions were very clear; if the appellant wished to rely on any
further evidence, this evidence had to be served prior to the hearing
together with an explanation (which in this case would undoubtedly have
been accepted) as to why that evidence had not been before the First-tier
Tribunal.  It is notable in this case that no further evidence was relied
upon and furthermore it was accepted on behalf of the appellant in oral
argument that neither of the exceptions set out within Section 117C of the
2002 Act or the Immigration Rules applied.

Section 117C of the 2002 Act (which in all material respects mirrors the
relevant provisions within the Immigration Rules) provides as follows:

"117C    Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
criminals

(1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

(2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

(3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been sentenced to
a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

(4)  Exception 1 applies where -

(a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
life,

(b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

(c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.

(5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

(6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

(7)  The considerations in subSections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
account where a court or Tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted".

Clearly neither of the exceptions applies here.  So far as Exception 1 is
concerned, the appellant has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most
of his life; he has been in this country without leave since 2007.  Nor has
the appellant argued that there would be very significant obstacles to his
reintegration back into Bahamas.  So far as Exception 2 is concerned, it is
not suggested that this exception would apply either.

Further and in any event, of course, as this appellant was sentenced to a
period of imprisonment well in excess of four years, the public interest
would require deportation even if one of the exceptions applied unless
there were very compelling circumstances, over and above those described in
the exceptions.

The appellant's case is in reality completely hopeless.  Although for
procedural reasons Judge Khan's decision had to be set aside, because even
the weakest of cases is entitled to be argued, the appellant has now had
that opportunity to argue his case, and not only has no further evidence
been advanced but the Tribunal has not even been referred to evidence which
could possibly be advanced.  Whether or not the appellant represents a
serious risk of reoffending (which as a matter of fact, according to the
OASys Report, he does) is not relevant, because even if he does not
represent such a risk, by virtue of Section 117C and the relevant
provisions of the Immigration Rules, he must still be deported unless he
can show very compelling reasons why he should not.  There are none, and so
the only decision this Tribunal can properly make is to dismiss his appeal.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan as containing a
material error of law and remake the decision as follows:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 26 March 2019
