
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13588/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 9th November 2020                 |
|On 4th November 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    AMRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr P G Farrell, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) Respondent's decision dated 25 February 2019.

     ii) Appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) Decision of FtT Judge J C Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 8 October
         2019.

     iv) Appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in the  application
         for permission to appeal dated 14 October 2019.

      v) Grant of permission by Designated FtT  Judge  Woodcraft,  dated  28
         January 2020.

     vi) Decision of Ut Judge Lindsley, promulgated on 1 July 2020,  setting
         aside the decision  of  the  FtT  for  error  of  law,  and  making
         directions with a view to remaking the decision.

    vii) Skeleton argument on remaking the  decision  from  the  appellant's
         representatives, attached to email dated 28 July 2020.

   viii) Email from respondent of  28  July  2020,  indicating  no  skeleton
         argument to be served as  "the  case  revolves  around  appellant's
         evidence about long residence  and  ...  nothing  requires  further
         written elaboration".

     ix) Further directions of the UT dated 1 September 2020, with a view to
         disposing of the case by a remote hearing.

      x) Email from the appellant's representatives of  16  September  2020,
         indicating that no interpreter was required and no  witnesses  were
         to be called.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  Mr Farrell connected by  audio  only.   No  members  of  the
    public attended, either in person or remotely.   The technology enabled
    an effective hearing.

 3. Mr Farrell relied upon his written submissions.

 4. It emerged that Mr Whitwell had not been provided with all the elements
    of the case to date, and  had  not  known  that  the  hearing  was  for
    remaking the decision.  He applied for an adjournment, but  I  did  not
    find any good reason to grant one.  He relied on  the  refusal  letter,
    and pointed to shortcomings in  the  leasing  documents,  gaps  in  the
    payslips, and the acknowledgment that none of the witnesses could speak
    to the appellant having been here throughout the period  of  20  years.
    (That is probably all the SSHD could have said, if there  had  been  an
    adjournment.)

 5. I indicated that the appeal would be allowed.

 6. Although set aside, the FtT's decision may be used as a starting  point
    in respect of its positive findings on the evidence for the  appellant.
    I have no reason to depart from those.  He has been here since  a  date
    just over 20 years ago.  The question becomes whether it is more likely
    than not that he has been here continuously.  The lease  documents  are
    scrappy  and  inconsistent,  which  might   reflect   that   they   are
    fabrications, or might  arise  from  legal  forms  being  used  without
    professional input, which is common enough.  Some of the  payslips  are
    similarly scrappy.  There are gaps in the pay record and in the leasing
    record, but that is hardly surprising when someone who has  lived  here
    on an irregular basis is trying to document himself  for  a  long  time
    back.  It is of course possible that the appellant has been in and  out
    of the UK by irregular means.

 7. The search is not for anything near to a certain record of  the  entire
    period, which is the error into which the FtT fell.

 8. Drawing all the evidence together, I conclude from it the appellant has
    been in the UK not only for substantial parts of  the  20  year  period
    but, more likely than not, for all of it.

 9. The appeal, as first brought to the FtT, is allowed.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      4 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

