
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13332/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Remotely by Skype for Business                |On 14 December 2020           |
|On 26 November 2020                           |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                  Kami [T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, instructed by Paul John & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 19 April 1972.

The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 16 June 2010 with entry
clearance as a domestic worker which was extended until 9 December 2011.
The appellant made a further application for leave as a domestic worker on
11 November 2011.  That application was refused on 22 December 2011 and the
appellant unsuccessfully appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Permission
to appeal was refused both by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper
Tribunal.  The appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 1 June 2012.

On 5 April 2012, the appellant made an application for further leave to
remain as a domestic worker but this was voided on 1 August 2012 as she
still had an appeal pending on her previous application.

Following her unsuccessful appeal, on 23 August 2012 the appellant again
applied for leave to remain as an overseas domestic worker.  That
application was refused on 26 March 2013 and, although the appellant had a
right of appeal, she did not appeal.

On 25 October 2013, the appellant lodged a judicial review application but
permission was refused and the application marked as totally without merit
on 23 January 2014.

On 19 November 2014, the appellant made an application for leave based on
Art 8 of the ECHR.  This application was refused on 5 June 2015 and
certified as being "clearly unfounded" under s.94 of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002").

On 20 February 2015 the appellant was served with a notice of liability to
be removed as a person who had no leave to enter or remain.

On 11 February 2016, the appellant made further submissions which were
rejected under para 353 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) on 16
February 2016.

On 12 February 2016, the appellant applied for limited leave again based
upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  That application was rejected on 4 March 2016.

On 7 March 2016, the appellant claimed asylum.  That application was
refused on 5 September 2016 and was, again, certified as "clearly
unfounded" under s.94 of the NIA Act 2002.

On 9 July 2018, the appellant again made a human rights application based
upon her relationship with a Nepalese citizen who had settled status in the
UK, Mr Chakra [L] ("the sponsor") and who was born on 21 May 1972.  In
addition, the appellant relied upon her relationship with the sponsor's
daughter, Ms ("SL"), a Nepalese citizen who was born on 18 August 2004.
She had moved to the UK to live with her father, the sponsor on 26 December
2016 and was granted indefinite leave to enter.

On 22 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's application
both under the "partner" rule (Section R-LTRP) in Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules and also under Art 8 outside the Rules.  The respondent
was not satisfied that the appellant had a genuine relationship with the
sponsor or with his daughter, SL.  As a consequence, the Secretary of State
concluded that the appellant could not meet the eligibility requirements in
R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii) under the ten-year route as a "partner".  The Secretary
of State did not go on to consider whether the appellant satisfied the
requirements of para EX.1. of Appendix FM, namely whether there were
"insurmountable obstacles" to her family life with her claimed partner and
his daughter continuing in Nepal.  Finally, the respondent concluded that
the appellant's removal would not result in unjustifiably harsh
consequences so that her removal breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by
Judge Abdar on 20 December 2019.  The respondent was not represented at
that hearing.  The appellant, the sponsor and SL gave oral evidence before
the judge.  In addition, a number of documents were relied upon including a
letters of support, documents from SL's school and in relation to the
appellant's health.

The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.  First, unlike the Secretary of
State, he accepted that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting
relationship with the sponsor and with SL (see paras 22 - 24).  Applying
the relevant "partner" rule in Appendix FM (R-LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d)),
the judge recognised that the appellant met the relevant eligibility
requirements of the ten-year route as a "partner" and that, in order to
succeed, she had to establish that para EX.1. applied to her, namely that
there were "insurmountable obstacles" to family life with the sponsor
continuing in Nepal.

On that issue, the judge reached his findings at paras 26-33 as follows:

"26. The Appellant's evidence is that there are insurmountable obstacles to
continuing their family life in Nepal mainly due to the Appellant's
relationship with the sponsor and Miss [L] in the UK.  The sponsor and Miss
[L] are settled in the UK, the latter joining the Appellant and sponsor in
December 2016.  The Appellant's contention is that Miss [L] is in school,
which would be disrupted if the Appellant was to return to Nepal or if the
sponsor and, in turn, Miss [L] had to follow the Appellant to Nepal.


27.  The Appellant also has abdominal pain for which the Appellant is
receiving treatment in the UK.  The Appellant is concerned about not being
able to receive the treatment in Nepal and the treatment being of inferior
standard compared to the UK.


28.  On the evidence, on balance, I am not satisfied that there would be
insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and Sponsor's family life
continuing outside the UK.  The Appellant accepts, see page 23 of the
Respondent's bundle, having friends and relatives in Nepal and I also find
the fact of the Appellant having spent the vast majority of her life in
Nepal, the Appellant would have the wherewithal to find her feet on return,
which would ease the inconvenience the Appellant may face.


29.  The sponsor and Miss [L] are not obliged to return to Nepal with the
Appellant.  However, should they wish to do so to continue their family
life together, I find that they would not face insurmountable obstacles in
doing so.  The sponsor has been in the UK since February 2011 and settled
since 2016, as confirmed in oral evidence, which is less than the amount of
time the Appellant has been in the UK.  The sponsor is a chef by trade and
in all the circumstances, I find that the Appellant and the sponsor could
continue their lives together in Nepal, if so desired.


30.  I do not find the consideration concerning Miss [L] to be more cogent
in the Appellant's favour.  However, I am not persuaded, on balance, for
that consideration to suffice to find there to be insurmountable obstacles.
 Miss [L] is not obliged to return to Nepal and if she were to return with
the Appellant and the sponsor after three years of being in the UK, I find
that she would be able to do so without significant difficulties,
particularly with the continuing love and support of the Appellant and
sponsor.


31.  I have no reason to find that the Appellant and the sponsor do not
have family remaining in Nepal who would be able to offer them support and
both would be able to work in Nepal and build a life together, albeit
perhaps not the standard of living the Appellant and sponsor may desire.


32.  I have sparse medical evidence on the Appellant's condition and I am
not satisfied that the Appellant has discharged the burden on the Appellant
to establish the medical condition or any lack of availability of treatment
in Nepal would create insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and the
sponsor continuing their family life together in Nepal.


33.  In the circumstances and in the round, on balance, I do not find any
of the difficulties, exclusively or in combination, would lead to
insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant or the sponsor in continuing
their family life together outside the UK."


The judge then went on to find that first, there were not "very significant
obstacles" to the appellant's integration on return to Nepal and so she
could not succeed under para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules; and
secondly, the public interest outweighed any interference with the
appellant's private and family life such that her removal would be
proportionate and not a breach of Art 8.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on three
grounds.  First, in finding that there were not insurmountable obstacles to
family life between the appellant and sponsor continuing in Nepal, the
judge failed properly to take into account the best interests of SL given
that she was 15 years of age and in year 11 in the middle of studying for
her GCSEs and was settled in the UK.  Secondly, the judge erred in law in
concluding that SL would be able to remain in the UK on her own.  Thirdly,
the judge failed properly to consider the Chikwamba principle.

On 29 April 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge N J Osborne) granted the
appellant permission to appeal.

Initially, in the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ
Sheridan) issued directions on 23 June 2020 expressing the provisional view
that the error of law issue and whether the decision should be set aside
could be determined without a hearing.  The parties were invited to make
submissions both on whether a hearing should take place and also on the
merits of the appeal.  In response, it would appear that only the appellant
made submissions in reply.  In those submissions dated 9 July 2020, the
appellant requested that there be a hearing.  As a consequence, on the
Upper Tribunal (Judge Mandalia) issued directions directing that there
should be a remote hearing of the appeal by Skype.

That appeal was listed before me on 26 November 2020.  I was based in court
in the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre and Ms Allen, who represented the
appellant, and Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State, joined
the hearing by Skype for Business.

The Submissions

On behalf of the appellant, Ms Allen relied upon grounds 1 and 2.  Ms Allen
placed no reliance upon ground 3 and the Chikwamba principle.  She accepted
that it had no application as the appellant could not establish with
certainty that she would meet the requirements of the Rules if she sought
entry clearance.  In particular, the appellant, was found by the judge not
to have adequate English speaking skills (see para 42) and she did not have
the required English Language certificate to meet the requirements of the
Rules.

As regards ground 1, Ms Allen submitted that the judge accepted that the
appellant had a genuine relationship with the sponsor (as her partner) and
with his daughter, SL.  However, in finding that there would not be
"insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant and her partner continuing
their family life in Nepal, the judge failed to consider the best interests
of SL.  She submitted that the judge had made no reference to her best
interests in the determination.  The judge, Ms Allen submitted, failed to
take into account that SL was in the middle of her GCSEs (being in year 11)
at the time of the decision.  In reaching the finding that there were no
"significant difficulties" in SL returning to Nepal in order to accompany
the sponsor to continue his family life with the appellant, Ms Allen
submitted that the judge failed to take into account the impact upon SL and
also that she had indefinite leave to enter.

This was also, Ms Allen submitted, important in considering the appellant's
claim outside the Rules as para EX.1. applied, not only to a partner but
also to a child with whom the individual has a subsisting parental
relationship, but only if the child is either a British citizen or has
lived in the UK for at least seven years.  Unlike the case of a partner,
who could be either a British citizen or a person settled in the UK, the
Rule could not apply to SL as she was neither a British citizen nor had she
been in the UK for at least seven years, but she did have indefinite leave
to enter.

Secondly, Ms Allen submitted that, in para 30 of his determination, the
judge appears to have contemplated that SL could remain in the UK on her
own whilst the sponsor (her father) went back to Nepal with the appellant
to continue their family life.  That, she submitted, clearly failed to have
regard to the fact that SL was 15 years of age and in school.

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells accepted that the issue was whether
there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the sponsor returning to Nepal to
continue family life with the appellant.  The position of SL was relevant
to that.  However, Mr Howells submitted that, at para 26 of the
determination, the judge specifically referred to the disruption to SL, who
was at school, if the appellant returned to Nepal and the sponsor
(accompanied by SL) went to Nepal.  Mr Howells referred me to the proper
approach to the issue of "insurmountable obstacles" and that it was a
'stringent test' relying on R (Agyarko) and Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11
at [43] and [44] per Lord Reed.  He submitted that it was properly open to
the judge to find in para 30 that SL could return "without significant
difficulties, particularly with the continuing love and support of the
appellant and sponsor".

As regards the second ground, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not,
in para 30, concluded that SL could remain in the UK on her own.  He
submitted that the judge had considered the appellant, sponsor and SL as a
'family unit' and that the sponsor and SL would either both stay in the UK
or both would go back to Nepal.  He relied on paras 29, 30, 43 of the
determination.

Discussion

In order to succeed under the ten-year 'partner' route relied upon in
Appendix FM, namely Section R-LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d), the appellant has
to meet both the suitability requirements in Section S-LTR and the
eligibility requirements in E-LTRP.1.2-1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1 and 2.2 and para
EX.1.

As a result of the judge's positive finding that the appellant had a
genuine and subsisting relationship with the sponsor as his partner, and
that that was a relationship akin to marriage and that they had lived
together for three years, the only issue under the Rules was the
application of para EX.1.

Paragraph EX.1 provides as follows:

"This paragraph applies if


(a)  (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
with a child who -


(aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years when
the applicant was first granted leave on the basis that this paragraph
applied;


(bb) is in the UK;


(cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously for at least
the seven years immediately preceding the application; and


(ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK; or


(b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK
with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK."


Paragraph EX.2 defines "insurmountable obstacles" as:

         "The very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."


As Ms Allen pointed out in her submissions, the appellant could not seek to
rely upon subpara (a) of EX.1 because, although the judge accepted that she
had a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with SL, SL was not a
British citizen and had not lived continuously in the UK for at least seven
years as she had only come to the UK in December 2016.  Unlike subpara (b),
the eligible "child" does not include a child who is "settled" in the sense
of having indefinite leave to enter or remain.  By contrast, a "partner"
who is settled is an eligible partner for the purposes of para EX.1.  It is
not clear whether that was a deliberate omission in the rule but, in any
event, I agree with Ms Allen that the impact upon a child with settled
status would be a relevant consideration in determining whether a decision
was a disproportionate interference with the family life of that child as a
result of the removal of the parent.  The matter does not have any direct
relevance to the outcome of the appeal at this stage and I need say no more
about it.

The meaning of "insurmountable obstacles" was considered by the Supreme
Court in Agyarko where, at [43]-[44], Lord Reed said this:

         "43.  It appears that the European court intends the words
         "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a practical and
         realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to obstacles which
         make it literally impossible for the family to live together in the
         country of origin of the non-national concerned. In some cases, the
         court has used other expressions which make that clearer: for
         example, referring to "un obstacle majeur" ( Sen v The Netherlands
         (2003) 36 EHRR 7, para 40), or to "major impediments" (Tuquabo-
         Tekle v The Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798, para 48), or to "the test
         of 'insurmountable obstacles' or 'major impediments'" (IAA v United
         Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19, paras 40 and 44), or asking itself
         whether the family could "realistically" be expected to move (Sezen
         v The Netherlands (2006) 43 EHRR 30, para 47). "Insurmountable
         obstacles" is, however, the expression employed by the Grand
         Chamber; and the court's application of it indicates that it is a
         stringent test. In Jeunesse, for example, there were said to be no
         insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of the family to
         Suriname, although the children, the eldest of whom was at
         secondary school, were Dutch nationals who had lived there all
         their lives, had never visited Suriname, and would experience a
         degree of hardship if forced to move, and the applicant's partner
         was in full-time employment in the Netherlands: see paras 117 and
         119.






         44.   Domestically,  the  expression   "insurmountable   obstacles"
         appears in paragraph EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Rules.  As
         explained in para 15 above, that paragraph applies in  cases  where
         an applicant for leave to remain under the partner route is in  the
         UK in breach of immigration laws, and requires that there should be
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing  outside  the   UK.   The   expression   "insurmountable
         obstacles" is now  defined  by  paragraph  EX.2  as  meaning  "very
         significant difficulties which would be faced by the  applicant  or
         their partner in continuing their family life together outside  the
         UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship for the  applicant  or  their  partner."  That  definition
         appears to me to be  consistent  with  the  meaning  which  can  be
         derived from the Strasbourg case  law.  As  explained  in  para  16
         above, paragraph EX.2 was not introduced until after the  dates  of
         the decisions in the present cases. Prior to the insertion of  that
         definition,  it  would  nevertheless  be   reasonable   to   infer,
         consistently with the Secretary of State's statutory  duty  to  act
         compatibly with Convention rights, that the expression was intended
         to bear the same meaning in the Rules as in the Strasbourg case law
         from which it was  derived.  I  would  therefore  interpret  it  as
         bearing the same meaning as is now set out in paragraph EX.2."


As Mr Howells submitted, it sets a "stringent test".  It must however be
applied in a "practical and realistic sense" and does not require the
obstacles to be "literally impossible for the family to live together"
outside the UK.

The Court of Appeal in Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 gave guidance as to
the application of the "insurmountable obstacles" test in para EX.1 at [36]-
[37] as follows:

         "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of  all  to
         decide whether the  alleged  obstacle  to  continuing  family  life
         outside the UK amounts to a  very  significant  difficulty.  If  it
         meets this threshold requirement, the next question is whether  the
         difficulty is one which would make it impossible for the  applicant
         and their partner to continue family life together outside the  UK.
         If not, the  decision-maker  needs  finally  to  consider  whether,
         taking account of any steps which  could  reasonably  be  taken  to
         avoid or mitigate the difficulty, it would nevertheless entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner (or both).


         37. To apply the test in what Lord Reed in the Agyarko case at para
         43 called "a practical and realistic sense",  it  is  relevant  and
         necessary in addressing these  questions  to  have  regard  to  the
         particular characteristics and circumstances of  the  individual(s)
         concerned. Thus, in the present case where it  was  established  by
         evidence to the satisfaction of the tribunal that  the  applicant's
         partner is particularly sensitive to heat, it was relevant for  the
         tribunal to take this fact into account in assessing the  level  of
         difficulty which  Mr  Wilmshurst  would  face  and  the  degree  of
         hardship that would be entailed if he  were  required  to  move  to
         India to continue his relationship. We do not accept, however, that
         an obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India is shown  to
         be insurmountable - in either of the ways contemplated by paragraph
         EX.2. - just by establishing that the  individual  concerned  would
         perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and  would  in  fact  be
         deterred by it from relocating to India. The test  cannot,  in  our
         view, reasonably be understood as  subjective  in  that  sense.  To
         treat it as such would substantially dilute the intended stringency
         of the test and  give  an  unfair  and  perverse  advantage  to  an
         applicant whose partner is less  resolute  or  committed  to  their
         relationship over one whose partner  is  ready  to  endure  greater
         hardship to enable them to stay together."


In assessing whether there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant
and sponsor continuing their family life in Nepal, their position could not
be divorced from that of SL.  In reality, SL could only live in the UK if
her father (at least) remained in the UK.  I do not mean to say that a
teenage child could never remain in the UK, whilst at school, without a
parent in all circumstances.  That is self-evidently not the case, for
example, where the child is at a private boarding school.  Alternatively,
the child might have very close family with whom she could live whilst
attending school.  Neither of those situations presented themselves in this
appeal.  The reality was that a 15 year old girl, in year 11 attending a
state school in London (Queens Park Community School) could only remain in
the UK and attend school if her father (the sponsor) remained in the UK.
As a result, therefore, whether there were insurmountable obstacles to her
father returning to Nepal with the appellant, involved an assessment of the
impact upon SL, her best interests and her immigration status, given that
she had indefinite leave to enter.

Although, in ground 2, Ms Allen pressed the argument that in para 30 the
judge had contemplated SL remaining in the UK on her own, I am not
persuaded that that is in fact what he was contemplating.  Reading the
determination as a whole, I accept Mr Howells' submission that the judge
considered the sponsor and SL as a unit.  They would either both return to
Nepal together or they would both remain in the UK together.

Although, therefore, I do not accept ground 2 is made out, I do accept that
ground 1 is established.

In assessing the circumstances of SL in the UK, as part of the assessment
of whether there were insurmountable obstacles to the sponsor returning to
Nepal, it was incumbent upon the judge to consider the "best interests" of
SL.  As Ms Allen submitted, at no point in his determination did the judge
specifically refer to SL's "best interests".  He did refer to SL's
circumstances.  Mr Howells drew my attention to para 26 of the
determination (set out above) where the judge referred to SL being in
school and that that would be disrupted if the appellant was to return to
Nepal together with the sponsor and SL.  However, in para 26 the judge was,
as he specifically says, stating what was the appellant's contention.
Thereafter, he made no further reference to SL's circumstances, in
particular the (arguably) critical stage of her education having completed
one and a bit years of a two year GCSE programme and that she had
indefinite leave to enter.

In paras 27-33, the judge referred to the appellant's health; he referred
to the fact that the appellant, and indeed SL, have previously lived for
most of their lives in Nepal; they had family there who could provide
support; and the sponsor was a chef by trade.  All of these matters went to
whether, once in Nepal, there were "insurmountable obstacles" to family as
a "unit" living there.  At para 30, in concluding that SL could return
"without significant difficulties", the judge solely focussed upon the fact
that she had only been in the UK for three years and she would return,
continuing to have the "love and support" of the appellant and sponsor.
What none of this addressed was whether, given the claimed impact upon SL's
education if she returned to Nepal with the sponsor, that presented a
significant difficulty which, as a practical matter, created
"insurmountable obstacles" to the sponsor leaving the UK (necessarily with
his daughter, SL) to live with the appellant in Nepal.  In failing to
grapple with the impact upon SL's education if she returned to Nepal with
her father, the judge erred in law in reaching his adverse finding that
there were not "insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant and sponsor
continuing their family life in Nepal.

For those reasons, the judge erred in law in finding that the appellant did
not meet the requirements of the 'partner' rule and that finding cannot
stand.

The necessary consequence of that is also that the judge's decision to
dismiss the appeal under Art 8, including outside the Rules was materially
flawed in law and cannot stand.



Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of a material error
of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

Both representatives agreed that, if that were my conclusion, the proper
disposal of the appeal was to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for the
decision to be remade.  However, the judge's positive findings in respect
of the genuine and subsisting nature of the appellant's relationships both
with the sponsor and SL in paras 22-24 should be preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision under
Art 8 to be remade with those preserved findings.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             3 December 2020
