
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13504/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|under rule 34 (P)                    |On 3 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     R R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involved the assessment  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant,  his  parents  and  younger   sibling   appealed   the
    respondent's decision dated 12 June  2018  to  refuse  a  human  rights
    claim. First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi dismissed the linked appeals in a
    decision promulgated on 04 January 2019.

2.   Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved  the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 April 2019. She went on to remake  the  decision  and
    allowed the appeals of the appellant's parents  and  his  sibling.  She
    dismissed the appellant's appeal at [28] of the decision. In doing  so,
    she noted that the appellant was under 18 years old at the date of  the
    application for leave to  remain  on  29  March  2017.  The  respondent
    accepted in the decision letter that the appellant had been resident in
    the UK for a period of 7  years  and  2  months  at  the  date  of  the
    application.  The  judge  found  that  his  period  of  residence   was
    "significant", but she concluded that  it  would  be  proportionate  to
    expect the appellant  to  return  to  Mauritius  and  apply  for  entry
    clearance as a student now that he was over 18 years old.

3.   By agreement, the RR's appeal was remitted from the  Court  of  Appeal.
    The Statement of Reasons indicates that the parties agreed  that  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McWilliam erred in failing to give sufficient weight  to
    the ties that the appellant might have established following  7  years'
    residence accrued as a child and failed to give adequate  consideration
    to the principles outlined in MA (Pakistan) and Kugathas. The terms  of
    the agreement in the Court  of  Appeal  appear  to  indicate  that  the
    respondent accepted that weight should have been given to the ties that
    the appellant is likely to have established here as a child, which  are
    only likely to have strengthened in the three  years  that  had  passed
    since he reached his majority.

4.   In light of the Covid-19 pandemic the Upper Tribunal reviewed the  case
    and issued  directions  to  the  parties  on  14  May  2020.  In  those
    directions I gave the following indication:

         "... the judge failed to consider  whether,  at  the  date  of  the
         application (the relevant date for the purpose of  the  immigration
         rules),  the  appellant   met   the   requirements   of   paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv) given that the only reason given by the Secretary  of
         State for refusing the application was  that  it  was  said  to  be
         reasonable to expect the child (as he then was) to  leave  the  UK.
         The fact that Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam concluded that it  was
         unreasonable to expect his sibling, who was still a child, to leave
         is relevant to whether, at the date of the  application,  it  would
         have been reasonable to expect the appellant to do so."

5.    The  appellant's  representative  responded  to  the  directions  with
      written  submissions  and  a  consolidated  bundle  of  evidence.  The
      respondent was operating under restricted  circumstances  due  to  the
      pandemic and did not reply to the directions  until  much  later,  and
      only after they had been sent to  her  again.  Having  considered  the
      indication given by the Upper Tribunal and the written  arguments  put
      forward on behalf of the appellant the respondent made  the  following
      concession in correspondence sent on 26 August 2020.

         "The Secretary  of  State  writes  further  to  the  correspondence
         received from Graham Tomlinson dated 18/8/20 and the Directions  of
         UTJ Canavan of 14/5/20.

         In the light of: the terms of remittal by consent from the Court of
         Appeal, the fact that the Appellant was a qualifying child  at  the
         date of application, the fact that UTJ McWilliam allowed the linked
         appeals of  the  Appellant's  younger  sibling  and  parents  under
         Article 8 (@27) and upon the Secretary  of  State  considering  the
         Appellant's bundle, it is conceded in the specific circumstances of
         this  case  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  amount   to   a
         disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights.

         For these reasons the Secretary of State respectfully  invites  the
         Upper Tribunal to allow the appeal of RR under Article 8."

6.   I am satisfied that this concession was a proper one on behalf  of  the
    respondent. In light of the concession it  is  not  necessary  to  give
    detailed reasons for this decision. At the date of the application  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds the appellant was a 'qualifying
    child' who had been resident in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  7
    years. The Upper Tribunal having found that it would be unreasonable to
    expect his young sibling to leave the UK, it follows that it was likely
    to be unreasonable to expect the appellant to do so at the date of  the
    application. The fact that he subsequently reached his majority did not
    change the position in relation to Article 8,  which  is  based  on  an
    assessment of the strength of a person's ties to the UK. Weight  should
    be given to the ties established by the appellant during the seven-year
    period in which he remained as a child. The appellant has been resident
    in the UK since he was 10 years old and for a total period of 10 years.



7.   I am satisfied that the appellant is likely to have established  strong
    private life ties to the UK during an important formative period of his
    life and  that  his  removal  in  consequence  of  the  decision  would
    interfere with his right to private life in a sufficiently grave way to
    engage the operation of Article 8(1) of the  European  Convention.  The
    respondent accepts that the appellant's removal would not strike a fair
    balance and would be disproportionate for the purpose of Article 8(2).

8.   I conclude that removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights 1998.



DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan        Date 27 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email




