
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13306/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2019                  |On 27 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             Mr Durga Prasad Rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Nepal born on 10 December 1983, so he is
currently 36 years old.  He appeals against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Seelhoff promulgated on 16 May 2019 following a hearing at
Hatton Cross some thirteen days earlier on 3 May 2019, when the judge
dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision refusing to grant
him entry clearance to join his parents and siblings in the UK.

The appellant's case is that his father was a former Gurkha soldier and
that but for what has been described in past cases as the "historic
injustice" would have been permitted to join his family at a time when his
father ought to have been allowed to make an application for entry
clearance and bring his minor children with him.  It is established now
that save in unusual circumstances such an application by an adult child
will usually succeed where first, the historic injustice is established
(that is, that the father would have been entitled to entry clearance
earlier but for that historic injustice) and secondly, that at the time of
the application there is still family life extant between the now adult
child and the father.

In this case, the judge made a decision that there was not family life
between the appellant and his family and in the course of his decision he
made a number of findings with regard to the integrity of the witnesses who
gave evidence.

There are a number of issues raised within the grounds but it is sufficient
for the purposes of this decision if I refer just to two of them, because
on behalf of respondent, Ms Cunha has accepted that these particular
submissions are well-made.  The first is that during the hearing it is
apparent that Mr Jesurum, who represented the appellant before the First-
tier Tribunal as well as before this Tribunal, had expressed concern that
the questions and answers were not being accurately interpreted and that in
consequence the witnesses were confused within the evidence that they were
giving.  In this case, this is particularly important because the vagueness
and lack of detail in the evidence was particularly relied upon (see e.g.
at para 47) by the judge when considering the accuracy and reliability of
the evidence in what at paragraph 46 the judge had described earlier as "a
very finely balanced case".  Mr Jesurum told this Tribunal, and Ms Cunha
does not seek to challenge this, that what he was particularly concerned
about, among other aspects of the evidence given, was that although he was
asking questions in the past tense the translations were given in the
present tense and that this suggested that there was something going wrong
with the translating.  Ms Cunha in particular accepted that the judge's
reasons for dismissing these concerns of Counsel were not sustainable,
where at para 35 of his decision, the judge had stated as follows:

"[In regard to particular evidence] the sponsor's answer again did not make
sense with Counsel suggesting that the interpretation must be wrong.  I
noted that Counsel did not speak Nepalese and that the questions were being
broken down and put simply."

Ms Cunha was particularly concerned that the judge had not dealt properly
with the concern that Counsel was obliged to express that there had been
translation errors.  Having regard to what Mr Jesurum informed the Tribunal
today, the criticism is, in my judgment, justified, because one cannot
simply dismiss a concern about translation because Counsel does not speak
the language, where it is clear, as it was to Counsel, that the answers
given did not relate accurately to the questions which had been asked.
This is material because it has a bearing on the findings that the
witnesses' evidence was unreliable.

There is moreover a further and more fundamental challenge to the decision
which again Ms Cunha accepts is made out and it is that the judge had in
mind the wrong test for family life.  Addressing the Tribunal, Ms Cunha
stated as follows:

"The judge considered that there had to be shown 'dependency' per se.  This
was not the right test.  The right test is the Kugathas 'family dependence
test' which has been endorsed in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 at paras 17 to 36.
 The real test is whether there is 'real, effective or committed'
dependency; in other words, not just financial.  By not applying the right
test, we accept there was a material error affecting the rest of the
judgment."

In his submissions, Mr Jesurum emphasised this aspect of the decision and
referred the Tribunal to the decision within Kugathas of Sedley LJ where
(in an independent judgment) he had referred to "dependency" as amounting
to real, or effective or committed support (at para 17) and that this had
been upheld in Rai.  It was clear that the judge in this case had not
applied the correct test.

In light of the submissions made on behalf of both parties, but also having
independently considered this aspect of the case, I agree.  This is
particularly material in a case which was described by the judge as "a very
finely balanced case" and accordingly the error of the judge in not
applying (or not demonstrating that he had been applying) the correct test
is a material one, because a judge applying the correct and less strict
test of support might very well have made a finding that there was family
life still between the appellant and his family, and this might very well
have led to a successful appeal.  It follows that the decision will have to
be remade.

Both parties are agreed that on the facts of this case the appropriate
course is to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal so that it
can be remade by any judge other than Judge Seelhoff and with no findings
of fact retained and I will so find.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff as
containing a material error of law and direct that the appeal be remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross, to be reheard by any
judge other than Judge Seelhoff with no findings of fact retained.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                 Dated: 23 September 2019
