
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/14400/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th June 2019                        |On 25th June 2019                  |

                                   Before

                           DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY
                  SITTING AS A DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                                   Mr F.J.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Harper, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors (Merton Rd)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge S J Clarke promulgated on 22nd February 2019.

At the appeal before the Upper Tribunal today the Appellant has been
represented by Miss Harper of Counsel and the Secretary of State has been
represented by Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

Permission to appeal in this case has been given by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Hollingworth on 30th April 2019.  He found it was arguable that
insufficient weight had been attached to the conclusion that it was in the
child, T's best interests to remain living in the UK with her parents and
siblings as a family unit in the UK and had attached insufficient weight in
the benchmark policy of seven years in relation to the issue of integration
and that the references by the judge to the daughter having started to
integrate into life in the UK with her friends detracted from the
significance of that benchmark period. He also found that it was arguable
that insufficient analysis had been given in respect of whether there were
strong reasons for outweighing her best interests, when applying Section
117B(6).

The Grounds for Appeal to the Upper Tribunal dated 6th March 2019 argue two
grounds.  Firstly, it is argued that the judge failed to treat the child's
best interests as a primary consideration following the Supreme Court's
case in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  It is said that there is no
reference to the best interests of the child being a primary consideration
and no indication that the judge did treat the child's best interests as a
primary consideration.

The second ground argues that the judge failed to recognise that there
would have to be strong reasons for the child's best interests to be
outweighed following the judgment of Lord Justice Elias in the Court of
Appeal decision of MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

I am grateful to Miss Harper for having prepared a brief note of her
submissions dated 9th June 2019, which I have carefully considered,
together with the oral submissions both of herself and Mr Bramble on behalf
of the Secretary of State.  I remind myself, as was previously stated in
the case of MA (Pakistan) and Others v The Upper Tribunal and Asylum
Chamber in 2016, EWCA Civ 705, paragraph 74, that it may be that other
judges would have struck the balance differently and the question is
whether this judge reached a conclusion which was not open to her.

The first ground essentially argues that the judge has failed to treat the
child's best interests as a primary consideration.  When one looks at the
judgment of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke, when making her findings of
fact and conclusions at paragraph 8, she stated:

"The best interests of the child must be to remain living in the UK with
her parents and siblings in the family unit and this would preserve the
status quo.  She has two siblings who are SF born 3rd August 2015 and MH
born on 14th November 2012."

She went on at paragraph 10 to note the effects of refusal of the
application would be that the children would have to leave the UK and that
the children must not be punished for the sins of the parents by
overstaying and that at the date of the hearing she found that both parents
were liable to removal. She approached the case on the basis.  She noted
that there was one qualifying child in this case who had started to put
down roots and to integrate into life in the UK.

The judge went on then at paragraph 11 to incorporate into her judgment the
guidance given in the case of KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 and stated that:

"The guidance of the Respondent was approved in KO (Nigeria) reads that the
starting point is that they would not normally expect a qualifying child to
leave the UK and it is normally in the child's best interests for the whole
family to remain together, which means that if the child is not expected to
leave, then the parent or parents of the child will also not be expected to
leave the UK.  The Supreme Court found that the question of
'reasonableness' is to be considered in the real world and the immigration
status of the parents is of relevance to establish that context.  It may be
reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the UK with the parents and
siblings."

Thereafter, the judge went on to consider the situation of the oldest
daughter, T, in this case and the fact that she was at Junior School and
the letter from the school confirming she had attended there since 8th
December 2016 and there had been some change in her life by moving schools,
but her mother confirmed that she had made new friends.  She has found that
there is no evidence that she enjoyed a family life with extended family in
the UK and found she had extended family in Pakistan with whom she and her
other siblings could forge new ties.  She found that the children spoke
"easy Urdu" in that the parents speak Urdu, sometimes mixed with English
and found that Urdu is the language spoken between the Appellant and his
wife.

The judge found that there was no evidence that the eldest daughter and her
other siblings could not adapt and learn to read and write Urdu and in time
improve their spoken Urdu.  The judge also in paragraph 13 went on to
consider how the oldest child had been born in Pakistan, but came to the UK
aged 9 months and spent the majority of her life in the UK and
significantly now she was 9 years old and had started to integrate into
life in the UK with her friends.  The judge stated that she had taken
account of how the eldest child had never visited her country since she
came to the UK and her siblings were born in the UK.  She found that the
children had knowledge of the various customs of their country and the
children presented with no medical difficulties.

The judge also went on to consider that the Appellant still owned a shop in
his home country and that there would not be any repercussions opening up
in the manner suggested. She considered the Appellant's hypertension and
found that the family could be accommodated and maintained until the
Appellant's own shop was up and running, or the parents found alternative
forms of employment.  At paragraph 17 the judge stated:

"Drawing the strands together, I find the parents have to leave, and the
natural expectation would be that the children would go with them, there is
nothing in the evidence that I have considered and set out to suggest it
would be other than reasonable for a qualifying child to return to her
country with her parents and siblings in a family unit."

In respect of the argument that the judge has not considered the child's
best interests as a primary consideration, when one reads the decision as a
whole it is quite clear that in fact the judge has considered the child's
best interests as a primary consideration, in fact, obviously the judge has
realised the importance of it by dealing with it first, and not as an
afterthought. In paragraph 8 the judge states that the best interests of
the child must be to remain living with her parents and siblings in the
family unit in the UK and this would preserve the status quo and noted she
had two siblings in the UK.  As Miss Harper says, there is no need
specifically for a judge to set out that "I take this as a primary
consideration" but in fact, that is what the judge has done, and I find
that in this case the judge has clearly considered it of such importance to
actually consider it as the first matter that she has addressed her mind to
and has borne it in mind when considering the question as to whether it is
reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom for
the purposes of  Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002.

As Miss Harper agrees, the question of what is in the child's best
interests for the purposes of Section 55 is a primary consideration.  It is
not the paramount consideration, as the courts have made clear throughout
the years. As a primary consideration it can be outweighed by other
factors.  It is not a case that one individual factor has to outweigh it.
It can be the case that a judge concludes that the other factors taken as a
whole mean that the balance should be struck in terms of it being
reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom, as in
this case.

The first Ground of Appeal therefore fails.

In respect of the second ground, it is argued that the judge has failed to
recognise that there would have to be strong reasons why the child's best
interests should be outweighed.  In that regard, Miss Harper relies upon
the judgment of the Court of Appeal in the case of MA (Pakistan) and the
fact that Lord Justice Elias at paragraph 46 held that:

"Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that a child has
been here for seven years must be given significant weight when carrying
out the proportionality exercise.  Indeed, the Secretary of State published
guidance in August 2015 in the form of the Immigration Directorate
Instructions entitled 'Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private
Life: Ten Year Routes' in which it was expressly stated that once the seven
years' residence requirement is satisfied there will need to be strong
reasons for refusing leave.  These instructions were not in force when the
cases now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view they merely
confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After such a
period of time the child will have put down roots and developed social,
cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is likely to be
highly disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK.  That may be
less so when the children are very young because the focus of their lives
will be on their families but the disruption becomes more serious as they
get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong
expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK
with his parents as part of a family unit and that must rank as a primary
consideration in the proportionality exercise."

She went on to argue that Lord Justice Elias at paragraph 49 stated that as
a starting point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful
reasons to the contrary.  Miss Harper quite correctly conceded that the
First-tier Tribunal Judge although havng to consider what those powerful
strong reasons might be does not have to specifically highlight the point
by saying, "these are strong and powerful reasons" but the court has to
take account of whether or not there are sufficient strong reasons to
outweigh the child's best interests.

When conducting the assessment in this case First-tier Tribunal Judge
Clarke quite properly noted not only what was it in the qualifying child's
best interests to remain in the UK with her parents and siblings but also
went on to consider what the effects of refusal upon her would be in that
she would be required to leave the UK with her parents and noted that she
had started to put down roots and to integrate into life in the UK,
reflecting obviously the significance of the seven year test set out within
Section 117B(6) and the fact that it is likely at that age when children
are likely to start to have developed such strong private ties to the UK.

The judge also recognised in paragraph 11 that the guidance given in KO
(Nigeria) that as the starting point one would not normally expect a
qualifying child to leave the UK and normally a child's best interest is
for the whole family to remain together, which means that if the child is
not expected to leave, then the parent or parents of the child will not be
expected to leave the UK.  As she quite rightly quoted from KO (Nigeria),
the question of reasonableness is to be considered in the real world and
the immigration status of the parents is of relevance to establish that
context.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke went on in the judgment to
consider the eldest qualifying child's schooling and the fact that she had
attended her present school since 8th December 2016.  There had been some
change in her life by moving schools, but she made new friends, as mother
stated.  The judge had read the annual report and other documents in
relation to her schooling, noting that she had extended family in Pakistan,
that she spoke easy Urdu and can improve her written and oral Urdu.

The judge also went on to note how she although born in Pakistan had come
to the UK just aged 9 months and spent the majority of her life in the UK
and significantly now she was 9 years old and had started to integrate into
life in the UK with her friends.  The judge also took account of the fact
that she had never visited her country and her siblings were born in the
UK.  At this stage, the judge found that the children did have knowledge of
the various customs of their country and noting in that regard also the
extent to which the parents could actually work and be accommodated and
maintain themselves in Pakistan.

Mr Bramble points out that in MA (Pakistan) itself, the eldest qualifying
child at that stage was aged 8 and said to be able to adapt to life
elsewhere and was said to be halfway through his primary education and
there would be no safeguarding issues and no risk factors if he was to
return to Pakistan and that in that case return was to be with his parents
to a country where he had a number of other close adult relatives.  In that
case the judge at found that also the eldest child had been brought up in
the Islamic faith as was his younger brother and there was no reason why it
would be unreasonable to expect either of them to accompany their parents
to Pakistan.

At paragraph 74 of the judgment in MA (Pakistan) it was argued that the
judge had not given sufficient weight to the fact that the Appellant had
resided here for over seven years and that his best interests were to
remain with his family.  The court also found that they did not accept that
submission and that judge made specific reference to the seven year rule
and its significance and it may be that other judges would have struck the
balance differently but the question is whether this judge reached a
conclusion which was not open to him but, having regard to the wider pubic
interest in effective immigration control, in that case he had not done so.
It is clearly, as Miss Harper says, not a case of balancing one case
against the other.

 Obviously, the court has to consider each case on its facts but the point
simply being made by Mr Bramble is that the factors stated in MA (Pakistan)
as far as the older child was concerned were simply factors that the court
can take into account as being potentially strong sufficient reasons to
outweigh the best interests of the child.  It is not a comparison of one
case with the other.  He is just saying that these are factors which the
court is entitled to take into account, and Miss Harper does not challenge
that.

In my judgment, in this case the judge has gone through the specific
circumstances of the elder, qualifying child, in particular in the effect
upon her in terms of her schooling, her friends, her ability to speak Urdu
and read and write Urdu and improvements she can make in that, the fact
that she has significantly spent the majority of her life in the UK and
noting specifically that significantly she was now 9 years old and had
started to integrate into life in the UK with her friends. The judge also
took account of the fact that the oldest child had never visited Pakistan
since the time at which she left, as a 9 month old baby. The judge has
properly taken account of all the factors in the case and has given
sufficiently strong reasons in the circumstances of this case as to why it
was that the child's best interests should be outweighed and it would be
reasonable to expect the qualifying child to return to her with her
parents. This was a finding open to the judge on the evidence before her.

The judge has quite correctly applied the law in the case and the arguments
on behalf of the Appellant simply amount to a disagreement with the
findings.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not reveal a
material error of law.  The fact that other judges may have reached a
different decision does not mean that there is a material error of law in
this case.

I therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        DJ McGinty                         Date 23rd June 2019


District Judge McGinty sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
