
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14400/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated:                 |
|On 18 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      K

                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which it made following  a
hearing of 3 October 2018; whereupon it  dismissed  her  appeal  from  the
Secretary of State's decision of 27 October 2017 refusing to grant leave to
remain in the United Kingdom ("UK") either under the Immigration  Rules  or
under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR") outside
the Rules.

2.    The tribunal had granted the claimant anonymity.  I am  not  sure  why
that is.  But since nothing was said about anonymity at the  hearing  before
me I have decided to preserve the status quo and continue that grant.

3.    By way of brief background,  the  claimant  is  a  female  citizen  of
Sri Lanka and she was born on 10 December 1972.  She is  married  to  her
sponsor who, to preserve  anonymity,  I  shall  simply  call  S.   He  is  a
naturalised British citizen but he was born and resided in Sri Lanka  until
July 2001.  He and  the  claimant  married  each  other  in  Sri Lanka  in
August 1997.  That marriage subsists.  They have a daughter who, again  for
the purpose of preserving anonymity, I shall  simply  call  T.   As  to  the
pattern of immigration history, S entered the UK on 24 July 2001  and,  it
seems, claimed asylum.  His  claim  was  refused  but  he  was  nevertheless
granted permanent stay under what is sometimes referred to  as  "the  legacy
exercise".  He has subsequently gone on to naturalise.  T arrived in the  UK
on 9 January 2009 when she was aged 10 years old.   She  is  by  now,  of
course, an adult.  She was granted discretionary leave to remain.   She  was
subsequently granted permanent stay  in  October 2016.   The  claimant  had
remained in Sri Lanka throughout  the  above  period  but  she  sought  and
obtained entry clearance in order to join S and  she  entered  the  UK,  for
that purpose, on 22 September 2014.  In accordance with standard  practice
she was given leave to enter under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as
the spouse of a person settled in the UK.  That was limited leave  but  with
the facility for her to, in due course, apply for permanent  leave  assuming
relevant requirements contained within the Immigration Rules could be shown
to be complied with.

4.    On 19 June 2017, within the terms of the initial period of leave, the
claimant  applied  for  further  leave  under  Appendix FM  to  the  Rules.
However,  on  27 October 2017  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   that
application.  The sole ground for refusal was  that  the  evidence  provided
demonstrated  that  the  claimant  and  S  had  a  joint  annual  income  of
ï¿½14,625.00 which was below the prescribed necessary threshold level.  As  to
the possible applicability of Article 8 outside the rules, it  was  decided
that there would not be insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
abroad.  The claimant appealed to the tribunal.

5.    The hearing, as noted, took place on 3 October 2018.   Both  parties
were represented.  The claimant, S  and  T  all  gave  oral  evidence.   The
tribunal then  received  oral  submissions  from  the  representatives.   On
7 November 2018 the tribunal's decision was sent to the parties.

6.    It was accepted on behalf of the claimant that  she  did  not  satisfy
the requirements of Appendix FM to the rules as at the date of  application
(the relevant date for the purposes of an assessment under the rules).   The
claimant's representative, though, sought  to  argue  that  the  substantive
requirements and the evidential requirements had been met  by  the  date  of
the tribunal hearing.  It was not argued, as I understand it, that that  was
conclusive with respect to the appeal but rather that, if right,  it  was  a
significant factor weighing in favour of the claimant with  respect  to  any
exercise  of  the  proportionality  test  which  might  be  required   under
Article 8 outside the rules.

7.    The tribunal,  before  coming  to  the  position  outside  the  rules,
considered whether paragraph EX.1 of the Rules might be met.   However,  it
decided not, because of what it clearly found to be a  paucity  of  evidence
regarding obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Sri Lanka.   For  quite
similar reasons  it  decided  that  the  claimant  could  not  benefit  from
paragraph 276ADE of the Rules either.  Its decision and its reasoning as to
those matters has not been the subject of further challenge so  I  need  say
no more about it.

8.    The tribunal then went on to consider the  position  under  Article 8
outside the rules.  It took some time over this and it said this:

      "      26.   In  terms  of  whether  it  is  appropriate  to  consider
      Article 8 outside the scope of the Immigration Rules, I have gone on
      to do so, to take into account the  impact  of  the  decision  on  all
      family members, although no exceptional reasons to do so  were  raised
      by the appellant.   This  is  not  a  relationship  where  the  couple
      married, in the full knowledge that they could  not  choose  in  which
      country they lived, they did not know  when  they  married  that  they
      would be faced with the dilemma of which country to live in.   Nor  is
      it a family life that has been without considerable upheaval,  in  the
      separation of the appellant, sponsor and  their  daughter,  over  many
      years.  This  is  a  human  rights  appeal  and  all  family  members'
      protected  rights  must  be  considered  (Beoku-Betts v SSHD  [2008]
      UKHL 39).

            27.  In answering the questions in  R (on  the  application  of
      Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, I
      find there is clear family life and the  appellant  and  sponsor  will
      also have established private lives here during  a  period  of  lawful
      residence, however, I have no real evidence about any ties here to the
      community.  I find  it  is  a  reasonable  inference  that  they  have
      established a private life, through work and length of residence.  The
      couple have been residing here together, lawfully.  Their relationship
      is of lengthy duration, dating back to the 1990s, and they do have  an
      adult daughter together who lives with them.  The  genuine  nature  of
      their relationship has been accepted by  the  respondent.   I  further
      find that the appellant's removal would interfere with those protected
      rights and those of the sponsor, since it would  require  the  sponsor
      and their daughter  to  leave  the  United Kingdom  to  be  with  the
      appellant, or in the alternative, the couple will be separated  again.



            28.  In considering the question of whether removal  amounts  to
      a  disproportionate  interference  in  those  rights   I   do   attach
      significant weight to the public interest.  I find that it is the view
      of the respondent and of Parliament that it is in the public  interest
      for those seeking to sponsor a spouse  to  settle  here  to  be  in  a
      position to maintain  themselves.   This  is  reflected  both  in  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules and further in decisions of the
      higher courts (MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10) as  well  as  the
      statutory considerations.  Maintenance of immigration control is  also
      in the public interest.

            29.  Even by the date of hearing, the  evidence  of  income  did
      not meet the evidential requirements in Appendix FM-SE, and I am  not
      sure why, since the couple have  legal  representation.   Neither  the
      appellant or the sponsor are in permanent  salaried  employment.   The
      sponsor makes no reference in his statement to any  employment  before
      2016.  He says he  worked  between  June  and  October 2016  for  one
      employer, then for another two months with  two  different  employers,
      until December 2016, when he was  unemployed  until  September 2017.
      They made the application in June 2017 and so he was out of  work  in
      the six months preceding the application and for  three  months  after
      that.  He says he was then in employment between September 2017 until
      January 2018.  He says his next employer, for whom he worked only part
      time, between January and July 2018, refused to give him any payslips.
       He has not provided an employment contract, employer's letter or bank
      statements showing regular monthly income from that  employment,  even
      if he cannot get payslips.  I find that concerning.  The sponsor  says
      he then started work for  Kolak Snacks Ltd,  through  a  recruitment
      agency.  There are no details in his statement but there are  payslips
      covering the period 23 August 2018 to 27 September 2018, which  is
      roughly one month.  By the date of hearing, the sponsor was only  able
      to evidence income of ï¿½1,090.33  from  employment  in  the  last  nine
      months.  In the last two years, he  has  been  out  of  work  for  the
      majority of the period.  He is not  in  regular  employment  and  each
      employment role typically lasts only a short period.  I have only been
      provided with payslips and a bank statement for the month  before  the
      hearing and I have been provided with no explanation for that.

            30   The appellant was on contract with a care agency.  She  was
      in this role from 2015 to October 2016,  was  out  of  work  for  two
      months, then started  working  in  housekeeping  for  Avery Homes  in
      December 2016 for twenty hours a week, but says she works more  hours
      some weeks.  In the tax year  preceding  the  application  she  earned
      ï¿½14,312.03 gross.  In the six months preceding the date of hearing she
      earned ï¿½6,293.76.  The financial evidence for the appellant  also  did
      not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM-SE  even  by  the  date  of
      hearing, in that there was  no  employer's  letter,  only  two  months
      payslips for July to September 2018 and one month's  bank  statements
      for June 2018.  It has  not  been  explained  to  me  why  consistent
      evidence for the full period, showing  income  into  her  account  and
      corresponding documents from  the  employer  has  not  been  provided.
      However, an employer's letter saying she is employed  on  an  'as  and
      when' basis was provided to the respondent in June 2017.

            31.  It concerns  me  greatly  that  this  Tribunal  granted  an
      adjournment at the request of the appellant, specifically so that  she
      and the sponsor could obtain documentary  evidence  of  their  income.
      Even were there to have been an issue with the sponsor's payslips,  it
      should  be  possible  to  provide  evidence  of  income  through  bank
      statements.   Such  evidence  would  be  within  the  control  of  the
      appellant and sponsor, but has not been provided.  I  have  suspicions
      that the reason why no evidence has been  provided  of  the  sponsor's
      claimed six month  employment  in  the  six  months  before  the  last
      hearing, is because he was not in fact employed at all.  There  is  no
      suggestion that the employer has  been  reported  to  the  police  for
      withholding payslips, or to any regulatory body, and even if he  could
      not get payslips, it is not at all difficult  to  request  records  of
      employment from HMRC.  I am also concerned  about  the  lack  of  bank
      statement evidence, which should be easily available.  I note that the
      family members are living in London, where the cost of living is  very
      high.  The sponsor has not been working, or works  sporadically.   The
      appellant only works twenty hours a week.   Their  daughter  was  also
      only working part time.  Given the likely cost  of  living,  compared
      with their low income for  three  adults,  and  the  omission  of  key
      documents I would usually expect to have been provided with, I suspect
      that they subsidise their income from benefits, and so are reliant  on
      public funds.

            32.  The respondent says combined income for the  appellant  and
      sponsor in the year before the date of application was ï¿½14,625.   That
      falls significantly below the income threshold  that  the  respondent,
      and Parliament, say is required for a couple to be  able  to  maintain
      themselves without being reliant on public funds and becoming a burden
      on the state.

            33.  At the date of hearing,  assessing  the  six  month  period
      before the hearing itself, even taking the evidence  at  its  highest,
      the sponsor relies on ï¿½1,090.33 income, according to the gross  annual
      income year to date figure on his payslip, and  the  appellant's  most
      recent payslip says she has earned ï¿½6,293.76 so far in the six  months
      of this tax year.  This means that if contemplating an annual  figure,
      the couple are still significantly below the minimum income threshold,
      and even estimating ahead for this tax year, their income is no higher
      than at the date of application.  Given  that  they  were  granted  an
      adjournment to obtain more financial evidence of employment, and  knew
      the hearing was looming, their income is no  higher  than  it  was  in
      June 2017.

            34.  The couple therefore now rely on third party support.   The
      fact that their daughter says she has paid rent and bills  means  they
      are not able to afford to do so without her help on occasion.  I  have
      not been provided with a tenancy  agreement,  bills,  council  tax  or
      other utilities, or a financial schedule, to  establish  their  income
      and outgoings and just how large the shortfall is in their  income  to
      meet their liabilities.  Their daughter only earned ï¿½3,900.20  in  the
      tax year 2017 to 2018 and no evidence  has  been  provided  about  her
      income in the tax year preceding the date of application, and she says
      she was also unemployed for at least part of the  year  preceding  her
      hearing.  By the date of application, she had  earned  just  ï¿½2,431.73
      according to the year to date figure on her payslips.  In the month of
      the hearing her gross monthly income was ï¿½849.53 and  she  had  earned
      just under ï¿½5,000 in the first six months of this tax year.

            35.   The  appellant  therefore  relies  on  income  that  falls
      significantly short of the minimum income threshold for  herself,  the
      sponsor, and even including income from their adult daughter, it still
      falls well below the minimum income the respondent says a couple  need
      to survive on.  She has not provided any evidence about her  financial
      liabilities or sufficient evidence to establish that income  over  any
      real period, since the evidence is patchy.

            36.  The respondent has also amended her Rules, since  the  date
      of decision, to address the need to make provision  for  circumstances
      in which a decision may breach protected rights, such as where refusal
      amounts to 'unjustifiably harsh consequences' for  the  appellant  and
      her family (Agyarko & Ikuga v SHHD [2017] UKSC 11).  The respondent
      has also acknowledged that, in  circumstances  where  refusal  of  the
      application could otherwise breach ECHR Article 8, she must take into
      account other credible and reliable sources  of  earnings  or  finance
      available to a couple in considering whether  they  meet  the  minimum
      income requirement under Appendix FM  (MM  (Lebanon) v  SSHD  [2017]
      UKSC 10).

             37.   While  she  has  not  defined  what   amounts,   in   the
      respondent's view, to such circumstances within the Rules  themselves,
      she has set out in her October 2017  policy  guidance,  factors  that
      might tend towards a grant of leave  to  remain  where  the  applicant
      cannot meet the strict evidential requirements,  such  as  (c),  which
      considers family relationships.  I do accept that despite the  periods
      of separation, this is a close  family  with  ties  of  financial  and
      emotional interdependency, and that now that  the  appellant  and  her
      daughter have finally been reunited after a long period of separation,
      and  so  the  continuation  of  this  relationship   is   particularly
      important.  I also accept that culturally, family life may  not  cease
      between adult children and their parents at the moment  such  a  child
      reaches  their  majority,  and  weight  should  be  attached  to   the
      importance  of  the  mother  and  daughter  bond,  in  the  particular
      circumstances of this case.  In relation to (d), while I do  not  have
      any reliable evidence to weigh, I do accept the family  have  gone  to
      great lengths and made considerable sacrifices to pursue  family  life
      across two different countries and that the sponsor has not been  back
      to Sri Lanka in seventeen years.  It is also relevant to consider the
      family's history under (i), which addresses the fact that they formed
      family life at a time when they did not know they may not be  able  to
      live together in the same country, and since they have  been  reunited
      here, have been present here lawfully throughout.  There are  also  no
      factors that might increase the public  interest  in  the  appellant's
      removal, such as  criminality,  abuse  of  the  system  or  fraudulent
      claims.  I do not have sufficient evidence about the background to the
      daughter's status to make any findings about that.

            38.  Even taking into account  alternative  sources  of  income,
      the couple have not demonstrated that they have  sufficient  resources
      to be able to support themselves and not become  a  burden  on  public
      funds.  Given the absence of key evidence,  my  concern  is  that  the
      family are already reliant on public funds.   The  appellant  did  not
      complete the section of her application form that  relates  to  income
      and whether the family is already reliant upon public funds since  her
      arrival.  In terms of the statutory considerations  under  117B,  they
      have not established any competency in  English,  any  integration  in
      this country, and have not established that they will not be a  burden
      upon the state.  Little weight should be attached to her private  life
      here, whilst her leave has been precarious, but that does not apply to
      the relationship with the sponsor, her daughter,  or  to  the  private
      lives of those who are settled here.  However, I find that  Parliament
      intended for those seeking to live here to support themselves, and  in
      the absence of any  real  evidence  of  compelling  and  compassionate
      factors, or reasons why they could not settle again in Sri Lanka,  or
      even reasons why the appellant cannot  re-apply  for  entry  clearance
      from Sri Lanka (R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State
      for the Home Department IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) considered), I find
      the public interest outweighs the family's rights under Article 8.

            39.  I will say that I had  been  provided  with  compelling  or
      cogent evidence of obstacles to life in Sri Lanka,  difficulties  the
      family would face  with  settling  there,  or  to  pursuing  an  entry
      clearance application, and  detailed  and  consistent  evidence  about
      their finances to suggest they can support themselves, or  that  their
      ties here should outweigh  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
      removal, I would have allowed the appeal, mindful of the length of the
      relationship, the family's history  and  the  years  they  have  lived
      together here.  However, the evidence was simply  not  there  and  the
      Tribunal cannot speculate.  Even oral evidence only  could  have  been
      adduced, but was not."

9.    So, all of that is why the appeal failed.  But that was  not  the  end
of the matter because the claimant, still represented at that stage,  sought
and obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds were,
in summary,  to  the  effect  that  the  tribunal  had  failed  to  properly
calculate the level of joint earnings at the date of the hearing before  it;
that in  considering  third  party  support  (from  T)  it  had  erroneously
required that T herself demonstrate  she  was  earning  over  the  requisite
ï¿½18,600.00 threshold; it had overlooked  some  of  the  evidence  concerning
financial standing; and it had unlawfully speculated to the effect that  the
claimant might be or was in receipt of public funds.

10.   The Judge who granted permission relevantly said this:

      "It is arguable that the judge may have erred  by  miscalculating  the
      income available to the appellant and her spouse, which  was  relevant
      as to whether the Rules could be met and thus the  proportionality  of
      the decision in assessing the human rights grounds of appeal."

11.    The  case  was  then  listed  for  an   oral   hearing   before   the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could  be  given  as  to
whether or not the tribunal had erred in law and, if  it  had,  what  should
flow from that.  The Secretary of State was represented by Mr T Lindsay to
whom I am grateful.  The claimant was not represented and  did  not  attend.
There is an explanation.  Her solicitors had written to the  Upper Tribunal
shortly prior to the hearing indicating that she had been unable to pay  for
representation.  Accordingly, those solicitors invited  the  Upper Tribunal
to make a decision based upon the written grounds of  application  and  upon
the content of a skeleton argument which had been provided for the  purposes
of the hearing which had taken place before the tribunal on 3 October 2018.
 No request for a postponement or adjournment was made.

12.   In the circumstances I decided  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
claimant or a representative for her.  I do  appreciate  it  is  unfortunate
that she was not represented.  But there was no indication before  me  that,
if I were to adjourn to a  future  date,  she  would  be  represented  at  a
reconvened hearing.  Additionally and  in  any  event,  as  noted,  no  such
application to adjourn  had  been  made.   Indeed,  I  have  been  expressly
invited to make my decision as to error of law without adjourning.

13.   Mr Lindsay, for the Secretary of State, urged  me  to  conclude  that
there was no error of law in the tribunal's decision.  I have  so  concluded
for the reasons which I shall now set out.

14.   It will be apparent from the passage which I have set out  above  that
the tribunal took considerable care over the appeal, over its reasoning  and
over its ultimate decision.

15.   Turning to the individual grounds of appeal then, I am  not  persuaded
that the tribunal did miscalculate the evidence of joint income  as  at  the
date of the appeal hearing.  As to that, the tribunal found on the basis  of
the material before it that S  had  only  earned  a  little  over  ï¿½1,000.00
during the six month period prior to the hearing (in  paragraph 33  of  the
written reasons) and that the claimant had only earned just under  ï¿½6,300.00
during the same period (see the same paragraph).  There is  nothing  in  the
arguments made or in the material before me to suggest that those  important
findings were incorrect.  I appreciate it was (at least  I  think)  asserted
that S had been working for a longer period than had been evidenced by  wage
slips.  But the  tribunal,  although  it  did  not  say  so  in  terms,  had
effectively decided that any such earnings had not  been  demonstrated.   It
made the point  at  paragraph 31  that  had  payslips  genuinely  not  been
available despite S having genuine  employment,  he  could  have  relatively
easily evidenced such claimed employment from other sources.  So, I  am  not
persuaded that there has been any relevant miscalculation.

16.   As to Ground 2, the  tribunal  did,  as  it  was  required  to  as  a
potentially relevant matter under Article 8 outside the rules, consider and
address the question of third party support.  Indeed,  it  accepted  that  T
had provided financial assistance in the  past.   At  paragraph 34  of  its
written reasons, though, it made the point  that  there  was  a  paucity  of
evidence regarding T's financial circumstances and financial commitments  in
order to demonstrate an ability to provide such  ongoing  support  and  that
the evidence suggested her own earnings were  quite  limited.   I  can  find
nothing in that paragraph, in paragraph 35  or  in  anything  else  in  the
written reasons  which  supports  the  proposition  that  the  tribunal  was
requiring T to demonstrate she had an income of ï¿½18,600.00 prior  to  taking
her potential ability to support into account.  Since the tribunal  did  not
do that it cannot be said that it erred  in  doing  that.   Rather,  it  was
simply making the point that  the  evidence  as  to  available  third  party
support was insubstantial.

17.   As to Ground 3, depending  on  how  one  chooses  to  read  what  the
tribunal had to say at paragraph 30 of its written  reasons,  it  might  be
that it did overlook or at least fail to refer to some  bank  statements  in
the name of the claimant herself.  But, in truth, that  was  not  a  central
issue.  None of  those  bank  statements,  for  example,  comprise  evidence
regarding earnings of S.  Nor do they  suggest  that  the  earnings  of  the
claimant herself were greater than the tribunal found they were.

18.   As to Ground 4, it is right to say that the  tribunal  expressed  its
suspicion that the claimant and her family might be  in  receipt  of  public
funds.  I am not sure that doing that was particularly helpful.   But  I  am
satisfied it did not actually make a finding  to  that  effect  nor  did  it
allow the suspicions it had to influence its decision.

19.   In the circumstances, therefore, I conclude that the grounds  advanced
on behalf of the claimant have not been made out.  Accordingly,  I  conclude
that the tribunal's decision did not involve the making of an error  of  law
with the implication that that decision will, therefore, stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision shall stand.

The claimant is granted anonymity.  That grant was  initially  made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal but I  continue  it  under  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Accordingly, no  report  of  these
proceedings shall identify the claimant or any member of  her  family.   The
grant of anonymity applies to all parties to the  proceedings.   Failure  to
comply might lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                      Date: 28 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


