
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14038/2019
                                                               PA/04941/2019
                                                               PA/04942/2019
                                                               PA/04944/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 April 2021                     |On 12 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A1
                                     A2
                                     A3
                                     A4
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L. Brakaj, instructed on behalf of the Appellant.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    Introduction:
    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because
    the case involves protection issues. I find that it is  appropriate  to
    continue the order. Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them. This  direction
    applies both to the appellants and to the respondent. Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon) (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who allowed the protection  and  human  rights  appeal  of  the
    appellants in a decision promulgated on the 31 December 2020.

 2. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and on  26  January  2021
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin.

 3. Whilst this is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State I intend  to
    refer to the parties as they were before  the  Fist-tier  Tribunal  for
    ease of reference.

 4. The hearing took place  on  28  April  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face-to-face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable,  and  both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could   be
    determined in a remote hearing.   The advocates attended  remotely  via
    video as did the first appellant and the second appellant who were able
    to see and hear the proceedings being conducted. There were  no  issues
    regarding sound, and no substantial technical problems were encountered
    during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were able to  make
    their respective cases by the chosen means.



The background:

 5. The appeals that had been lodged by all the appellants were listed  for
    a hearing together in accordance with directions made by the FtT on the
    7 September 2020 given that the issues were interlinked and the appeals
    concerned the same evidence.

 6. The background to the appeal is summarised in the decision of the  FtTJ
    at paragraphs 1-7 of the decision.

 7. The appellants are listed above as A1  (first  appellant),  A2  (second
    appellant), A3 (third appellant) and A4 (fourth appellant).

 8. The first appellant (who is the father of the second, third and  fourth
    appellants) is a national of Nigeria, born xxx.  The second, third  and
    fourth appellants are also nationals of Nigeria and were  born  xx,  xx
    and xx respectively.

 9. The first appellant had made an application  on  15th  March  2018  for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his family life as  a  parent
    of the second, third and fourth Appellants who were present and  living
    in the United Kingdom at that time.  The respondent had considered  the
    appellant's application and had refused the same on 30th July 2019  for
    the reasons set out in a Refusal letter also dated 30th July 2019.

10. The second, third and  fourth  appellants  had  made  applications  for
    asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  on  6th  November   2017.    The
    respondent had considered the applications of  the  second,  third  and
    fourth appellants and had refused the same for the reasons set  out  in
    Reasons for Refusal letters in respect of each of the second, third and
    fourth appellants dated 7th May 2019.

11. The second, third  and  fourth  appellants  had  appealed  against  the
    Respondent's decision and this was the hearing of those appeals.

12. The second and fourth appellants are female and their applications  for
    asylum/humanitarian  protection had been made on the  basis  that  they
    feared that in the event of return to Nigeria  they would be  subjected
    to female genital  mutilation  (FGM)  from  their  father's  family  in
    Nigeria.  The third appellant, who is male, feared that in the event of
    return his sisters would  be the subject of FGM and also he feared that
    he would be subjected to tribal markings being  performed upon him  and
    further, that he feared that  his  father's  family's  relatives  would
    force  him to work for them.

13. The second, third and fourth appellants also  claimed  that  return  to
    Nigeria would breach their rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

The relevant immigration history:

14. The immigration history of the family members  was  summarised  by  the
    FtTJ at paragraphs [21-34] and was taken from documentation supplied by
    the Respondent.

15. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  30th  January  2014
    with entry clearance as a Tier 4  dependent  partner  valid  from  19th
    December 2013 until 30th January 2015.

16. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 20th  September  2014  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 student  valid  from  11th  September  2014
    until 9th February 2016.

17. On 4th October 2016 the appellant applied for a visitor visa.  This was
    refused on 5th October 2016, one of the grounds for refusal being  that
    the appellant had provided false information that his  wife  and  three
    children were resident in Nigeria when they were in  fact  residing  in
    the United Kingdom.

18. On 14th October 2016 the appellant applied for a visitor visa which was
    refused on 19th October 2016 as the appellant had  previously  provided
    false information in an earlier visa application.

19. On 29th December 2016 the appellant applied for a  visitor  visa  which
    was refused on 12th January 2017, the refusal again  referring  to  the
    fact that the appellant had provided false information  on  an  earlier
    application.

20. The appellant entered the United Kingdom with a visa specifying  "leave
    to enter - outside Rules" granted on compassionate  grounds  and  valid
    from 12th October 2017 until 12th April 2018.

21. The immigration history of the second, third and fourth  appellants  is
    essentially the same and the following  immigration  history  is  taken
    from documentation supplied by the respondent.

22. On 20th March 2015 a Tier 4 (General) dependent child visa  application
    was submitted to the British High Commission in Nigeria.  The visa  was
    issued on 26th May 2015, valid 26 May 2015 -9 February 2016.

23. The second, third and fourth appellants entered the UK in June of  2015
    to join their mother and father.

24. On 13th March 2016, the appellants were  named  as  dependents  on  the
    asylum claim of their mother (EAO).

25. On 7th December 2016, asylum claim  refused.   The  second,  third  and
    fourth appellants were granted discretionary leave to remain  on  their
    mother's asylum claim for a period of twelve months.

26. On 6th November 2017, asylum claim made by the second, third and fourth
    appellants in their own right and asylum intake interview conducted.

27. On13th June 2018, asylum interviews conducted in relation to the second
    and third appellants.

The factual claims:

28.  At paragraph 39 the FtTJ set out the basis of  the  first  appellant's
    appeal as follows.

29. The first appellant claims to have a family life in the United  Kingdom
    with his children, the second, third and fourth Appellants.

30. The appellant also claims to have a private life in the United Kingdom.



31. The appellant had previously been given entry  clearance  for  a  short
    period outside the Immigration Rules on the basis that  his  wife,  who
    was living in the United Kingdom with  the  second,  third  and  fourth
    appellants, had a diagnosis of terminal lung cancer.

32. The first appellant is the sole carer for the second, third and  fourth
    appellants who are currently  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    second appellant is now an adult.  All four appellants live together as
    a family unit.

33. The first appellant has a genuine fear that in the event of  return  to
    Nigeria, the second and fourth appellants would be subjected to FGM  by
    the first appellant's family.  FGM is a tradition  in  the  appellant's
    family and the clan and the tribe of which they are  part.   The  first
    appellant and his late  wife  had  previously  agreed  with  the  first
    appellant's family that the second appellant would be  the  subject  of
    FGM as and when  she attained the age of 16 but the first appellant and
    his late wife made arrangements  for   the  second,  third  and  fourth
    appellants to be brought out of Nigeria  before  the  second  appellant
    attained the age of 16 and was subjected to FGM.

34. The first appellant believes that  if  the  second,  third  and  fourth
    appellants were returned to Nigeria, if the  first  appellant  were  to
    return with them, the Second and fourth appellants would  be  subjected
    to FGM by the first appellant's family, notwithstanding  the wishes  of
    the first appellant that this should not take place.

35. The first appellant did not consider that he would be able to withstand
    the pressure from his family for the traditional  FGM  practice  to  be
    carried out.

36. The first appellant also feared that in the event of  return  his  son,
    the third appellant,  would  be  subjected  to  tribal  markings  being
    inflicted upon him.

37.  The basis of the appeals on behalf of the other appellants is also set
    out and summarised at paragraph [42] as follows.

38. The second and fourth appellant fear that they will be subjected to FGM
    in the event of return to Nigeria.  FGM is a  traditional  practice  of
    the family of the first appellant, who is the  father  of  the  second,
    third and fourth appellants.

39.  So far as the first appellant is aware,  all  female  members  of  his
    family have been subjected to FGM whether or  not  this  was  with  the
    support of their parents.

40. The question of FGM being  performed  upon  the  second  appellant  was
    raised when she was 13 years old.  The issue was raised  by  uncles  of
    the second, third and fourth Appellants but  has  the  support  of  the
    extended family as this is a family tradition.

41. The third appellant fears that in the event of return  of  himself  and
    his siblings to Nigeria his sisters, the second and fourth  appellants,
    would be subject to FGM.  He fears that he would be subject  to  tribal
    markings being inflicted upon him and that he would be put to  work  on
    behalf of other relatives.

42. All female members of the first appellants' family have had FGM carried
    out on them whether or not their parents approved of the practice.

43.  The respondent issued decisions in respect of all of the  claims  made
    either on protection grounds and/or  on  human  rights  grounds.  Those
    decisions are set out in the respondent's bundle and are summarised  in
    the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs [40] and at [42].

44.  In  summary,  the  respondent  considered  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant that he could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
    and in particular that they were no very significant obstacles  to  his
    integration  into  Nigeria  if  required  leave  the  United   Kingdom.
    Reference was made to his grant of leave  to  enter  the  UK  based  on
    compassionate circumstances naming the terminal illness of his wife and
    thus was granted to enable him to spend  time  with  her  and  then  to
    enable the appellant and the children  to  relocate  back  to  Nigeria.
    Whilst he is the sole care of three children and  did  not  agree  with
    FGM. It was concluded that the appellant would be able to  protect  his
    children whilst living with them  as  a  family  unit.  The  appellants
    children had resided in the UK since June 2015 with  the  help  of  the
    first appellant as the sole carer, they would be able to adapt to  life
    in Nigeria.

45. In  respect  of  the  second  and  fourth  appellants,  the  respondent
    considered the claim based on the fear that they would be subjected  to
    FGM in the event of return to Nigeria  and  on  the  basis  FGM  was  a
    traditional  practice  of  the  family  of  the  first  appellant.  The
    respondent  considered  that  there  was  sufficiency   of   protection
    available  to  the  second  and  fourth  appellant  for  the   Nigerian
    authorities. In relation to the third appellant, it  was  not  accepted
    that there would be a real risk that he would be  subjected  to  tribal
    marking and in any event sufficiency of protection was  available.  The
    respondent concluded that all four appellants lived together  and  that
    they would return as a family  unit  and  the  best  interests  of  the
    children (third and fourth appellants) would be to  remain  with  their
    father who is the sole surviving parent.

46. The FtTJ had the opportunity to hear oral evidence from the  first  and
    second appellants and had witness statements from the other  appellants
    although they were present at Court (see [43]). The  FtTJ  also  had  a
    comprehensive bundle  of  documents  containing  the  evidence  of  the
    appellants and also country background evidence relevant to FGM.  There
    were also copies of the family court documents.

47.  In the light of the  different  decisions  taken  in  respect  of  the
    appellants and the nature of each of the appeals, the FtTJ  at  [49-53]
    set out the way he intended to approach the appeals under  the  heading
    "methodology". The approach taken by the FtTJ is one that  was  readily
    understandable in the light of the different issues.

48. The factual findings of the FtTJ in relation  to  the  first  appellant
    were set out at paragraphs [54]-[67], the fourth appellant  at  [68-69]
    and third appellants at [71]-75]. The factual assessment of the  appeal
    of the first appellant is set out at [76]-[86]. It  is  also  right  to
    observe that the FtTJ also carried out an analysis  of  the  Article  8
    claims of the second and third appellants.

49. In relation to the appeals relevant to the second and fourth appellants
    they were both based upon the claim of the  risk  of  being  forced  to
    undergo FGM in the event of return to Nigeria. The judge observed  that
    their claims are slightly different because whilst the second appellant
    was a minor at the time of the claim she was now an adult where is  the
    fourth appellant was 10 years of age at  the  date  of  the  claim  but
    remained a minor.

50. In summary, the FtTJ considered the claim based on the risk of  FGM  to
    both the second  and  fourth  appellants.  In  respect  of  the  second
    appellant, the judge recorded that her claim was that  she  feared  her
    father's family and that FGM may be carried out upon her and  that  she
    had been told that that would be carried out when  she  was  14  or  15
    years of age and the threat came from her uncles. The evidence was that
    FGM was first raised to her knowledge when she was 13 years of age  and
    raised by her father's family. Her cousins  and  mother  and  undergone
    FGM; her cousins being 16 or  17  at  the  time  this  was  undertaken.
    Further evidence was given that whilst she resided with her brother and
    sister of the paternal grandmother's home FGM was not performed at that
    time because it was understood that  it  will  be  performed  when  she
    turned 16 and an appropriate ceremony would take place. The FtTJ  found
    the evidence to be given  in  a  "straightforward  manner  without  any
    indication of evasion on the part of the second appellant".

51. At [57] the FtTJ considered the evidence  given  in  support  from  the
    first appellant that was relevant to the  issue  of  FGM.  This  was  a
    tradition of his family and expected of all female members and describe
    the pressure from his family to accept FGM being carried out  upon  his
    daughters. The judge recorded the evidence  that  the  entire  clan  in
    Nigeria believed FGM and two  uncles  who  specifically  maintained  it
    would be carried out in relation to the daughters are said  to  be  the
    spokesmen  on  behalf  of  the  clan.  The  judge  recorded  the  cross
    examination concerning the risk of FGM at  paragraph  [57]  but  having
    considered the evidence, the judge reached a finding  that  "the  first
    appellant had been consistently stated his opposition to  FGM  and  has
    been equally consistent that his  family are insistent that  FGM  shall
    be undergone by family female  members  regardless  of  the  wishes  of
    parents of the girls involved and his family will ensure that this took
    place whether or not first appellant and  his  wife  are  agreeable  to
    this."

52. At [58] reference is made to the evidence provided by  the  appellant's
    mother and the judge took into account the  evidence  set  out  in  the
    family  proceedings  which  included  the  mother's  fear  the   second
    appellant would be made the subject of FGM and the  ensuing  protection
    orders that were made in relation to the second and  fourth  appellants
    (at [59]).

53. At paragraph [60] the judge  analysed  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    threat of FGM which included the emails which had been  sent  from  the
    uncle of the second and fourth appellants. The content  of  the  emails
    were described  at  [60]  and  the  judge  expressly  noted  that  "the
    respondent   does   not   challenge   the   authenticity    of    these
    communications."

54. At paragraphs [62]-[63] the FtTJ set out the country  materials  relied
    upon by the respondent and the appellant relevant to the issue of  FGM.
    Relevant to the consideration  was  that  whilst  the  respondent  made
    reference to the list of tribes performing FGM which  did  not  include
    the tribe of the appellants, the evidence before  the  judge  and  upon
    which he placed his findings were that the evidence was that the threat
    to carry out FGM came from the family.

55. At [63]-[64] the FtTJ reached conclusions on the claim and having taken
    into account the individual factors referred to in the CPIN. The  judge
    was satisfied that the second appellant would be at risk of persecution
    in the event of return to Nigeria as she would be at risk of FGM at the
    hands of her father's family. The judge further found  that  the  first
    appellant would be against FGM and whilst he may be able to  give  some
    form of protection, the family pressures to enforce  family  traditions
    may be too much for him to resist. Further reasons were given at [64].

56. The issue of state protection and sufficiency of the same was  set  out
    at [65] and [66] and by reference to the country  materials  but  found
    that whilst legislation prohibited FGM that had not been passed in  all
    states of Nigeria, that the police were reported to treat the  practice
    of FGM as a family or community affair and may not intervene at all and
    that it was difficult to obtain protection in all states outside  Abuja
    where FGM is prevalent. The judge also took into account that the first
    appellant  had  sought  to  access  state  protection  from  the  local
    authorities but no action was taken (at [65). The judge concluded  that
    state protection will not be  available  to  the  second  appellant  to
    prevent FGM.

57. It is also right to set out that in relation to the  fourth  appellant,
    the evidence relied upon was substantially the same and as a result  of
    the factual findings an assessment of the evidence, her case  was  also
    satisfied on the basis of risk.

58. The last issue addressed by the FtTJ was that of internal relocation at
    [67]. The place of relocation was expressly stated by the respondent to
    be Abuja and it was submitted that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    family were powerful or influential enough to  trace  them  on  return.
    However the judge took into account the relevant paragraphs of the CPIN
    and relevant to Abuja which referred to FGM as prevalent there.  Having
    considered the question of internal relocation in accordance  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 339O of  the  immigration  rules,  the  judge
    considered this in the light of the threats  in  the  emails  from  the
    second appellant uncle which were recorded at [60] and [67]  and  which
    were not challenged by the respondent  ( see [60]) and  concluded  that
    whilst it was the case at the first appellant's family may not be aware
    of the current whereabouts of the first appellant and his children, the
    only other area Nigeria other than the appellant's home area  to  which
    the first appellant had any connection was the very place that FGM  was
    the most prevalent. The judge found on the fact that there was a  "real
    risk" that the first appellant's family can make successful efforts  to
    locate the second appellant and her siblings and their  father  in  the
    event they all returned as a family unit.  Further  findings  are  made
    that it was not reasonable to expect the second appellant to return  to
    Nigeria after her length of residence in the UK and to relocate  to  an
    area that she had no connection.

59. At paragraphs [71 - 75 the FtTJ  addressed  the  circumstances  of  the
    third appellant who was also a minor. In summary the judge  found  that
    he determined that his two sisters should be granted asylum  and  would
    therefore remain in the UK. In the light of that finding,  the  refusal
    of leave to remain would breach  the  third  appellant's  rights  under
    article 8 and result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for him in the
    context of separation from his siblings and taking  into  account  they
    had always resided together in the relatively  recent  death  of  their
    mother.

60. The last set of factual findings an assessment of the evidence  related
    to the first appellant and its human rights claim at paragraphs  [76  -
    86].

61. Thus the FtTJ allowed the appeal of the first and third  appellants  on
    Article 8 grounds and the second and  fourth  appellants  appeals  were
    allowed on asylum and on human rights grounds.

62. Following the decision the respondent sought permission to  appeal  and
    permission was granted by UTJ Martin.

63. The grounds of challenge sought to challenge the assessment made by the
    FtTJ that related  to  internal  relocation.  The  written  grounds  of
    challenge asserted that the judge had erred in law by failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for his conclusion that the appellant would be at risk
    on return to Nigeria should  they  relocate  to  another  area  of  the
    country. The grounds asserted that there had been no evidence  advanced
    by any of the appellants would suggest the extended family  would  have
    any reach outside of their home village as such to find that  the  risk
    exists across the whole of Nigeria and that was an error in law. It was
    further asserted  that  no  findings  had  been  made  as  to  why  the
    appellants would be unable to access protection from the authorities in
    any area of relocation particularly in Abuja where the act of  FGM  had
    been criminalised.

64. The second written ground was that the judge had erred by dealing  with
    each appellant individually and that this  had  resulted  in  a  flawed
    conclusion. As the appellants will be returning as a family  unit,  the
    decision failed to  take  into  account  the  protection  support  they
    provide to each other.

65. The last point raised was that the judge  had  found  that  the  female
    appellants were at risk but it was unclear as to how the judge  reached
    the conclusion that the only risk factor was that  of  the  family  and
    that the vast majority of girls are subject to the  practice  prior  to
    the age of five. The grounds assert  that  the  tribe  is  recorded  at
    paragraph 62 were not ones who are known to practice FGM.

66. At the hearing Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent identified factual
    mis-statements in the  grounds.  He  stated  that  whilst  the  grounds
    appeared to advance the appeal on the basis that the judge erred in law
    by referring to the tribe and that they were not ones to practice  FGM,
    that ignored the factual basis found by  the  judge  that  this  was  a
    practice that was family-based rather than tribally based. Furthermore,
    whilst the grounds made reference to there being no evidence to suggest
    the family would have any reach outside  the  home  village,  and  that
    assertion ignored the evidence of the threatening  emails  set  out  at
    paragraph 60 and 67 which were not challenged by the respondent .

67. After having had the opportunity to consider the bundle of documents Mr
    Walker also made reference to the problems with the  grounds  where  it
    was raised that FGM would not be a risk for these particular appellants
    based on their age and relying on the objective material whereas it was
    clear from the evidence in the appellant's bundle that the  appellant's
    wife had undergone FGM at 15 and therefore the practice took place over
    the age of five and  contrary  to  the  respondents  assertion  in  the
    grounds. He submitted that the grounds that had been advanced on behalf
    of the Secretary of State were no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
    factual findings reached by the judge and that on a  clear  reading  of
    the decision that the judge had considered all of the points raised and
    the grounds did not stand up to any close scrutiny  when  the  evidence
    was read. Thus he did not seek to advance the appeal.

68. Ms Brakaj was in agreement with those matters raised by Mr  Walker  and
    also provided to the tribunal  the  record  of  proceedings  which  she
    submitted demonstrated  that  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  was
    properly dealt with by the FtTJ As set out in the witness statement  of
    the first appellant and the oral evidence and that Abuja was  the  only
    area identified on behalf of the respondent for internal relocation and
    that the family was there  and  the  first  appellant  was  already  in
    contact with the family and therefore if he moved from the UK where  he
    was known to be, that would trigger the search for him. Ms Brakaj  also
    indicated that the appellant had given evidence relating to sufficiency
    of protection that he  had  gone  to  the  local  authorities  who  are
    unwilling to assist him in this had also been recorded in the  decision
    of the FtTJ who were plainly  aware  of  the  relevance  of  that.  She
    further submitted that the FtTJ looked the specific  risk  and  in  the
    context of the family having undergone FGM at an older age and that the
    country information did not preclude individual families and  how  they
    practised FGM. Thus she submitted all  aspects  of  the  evidence  were
    dealt with.

69. In the light of the position taken by the respondent  at  the  hearing,
    the grounds are no longer not advanced. I have set out above a  summary
    of the factual findings made by the judge in the context of  the  claim
    made on behalf of the appellants  principally  the  second  and  fourth
    appellants and the risk of FGM to them which the judge found was a real
    risk upon return to Nigeria. The decision of the FtTJ  was  a  careful,
    comprehensive, and considered decision which took account  of  all  the
    evidence and analysed the  relevant  issues  in  accordance  with  that
    evidence. Consequently, as the grounds are no longer pursued,  it  must
    follow that the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and  the
    decision of the FtTJ shall stand.

Decision:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and the decisions stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or his family members. This direction  applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
         Date:  29 /4 / 2021


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

