
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14037/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 17 October 2019                   |
|Extempore decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                Rabia Salman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Ahmad, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gandhi
promulgated on 29 April 2019 dismissing the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's decision dated 15 June 2018 to refuse her human rights claim
made on the basis that she cannot return to Iraq as a lone female woman.
The judge dismissed the appeal because she found that the appellant lacked
credibility when asserting that she had no family support remaining in
Iraq.

Factual background

The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born 1 July 1945.  She is now 74.  She
claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2006.  She made a
claim for asylum shortly afterwards.  That claim was refused, and her
appeal against that refusal was dismissed by Immigration Judge Birkby in a
Decision and Reasons promulgated on 5 May 2006.  The substance of that
decision concerned the appellant's protection-based claim arising from her
account of her son having worked for the American military during and after
the war in Iraq.  Judge Birkby also considered the appellant's Article 8
rights.  The appellant had claimed to have no remaining family in Iraq.  At
[16] the judge rejected that limb of her case in these terms:

"I have not accepted her [the appellant's] account of the events in Iraq
and I am not satisfied that she does not have family in Iraq.  I therefore
do not accept that the appellant has proved on the balance of probabilities
that her right to a private or family life would be breached if the
decisions of the Secretary of State were to be implemented."

Before Judge Gandhi, it was common ground that the central issue in the
appellant's Article 8 appeal related to whether she would have any family
members in Iraq.  At [18], the judge records a concession by the respondent
that, in the event that she were to find that the appellant would be
without family or other support in Iraq, it would follow that she would be
destitute and the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) (very significant
obstacles to integration) would be satisfied.  As such, the sole and
central issue in the case was whether the appellant would right to Iraq
with the benefit of any family support or assistance or whether, as she
contended, she would return as a lone and therefore likely to be destitute
single woman in her 70s.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchison on the basis that
the judge arguably failed to consider the evidence of three new witnesses
who had been produced for the hearing before Judge Gandhi.  Secondly, that
the findings in relation to the appellant's friends who gave evidence were
irrational or arguably irrational, on account of the judge's findings that
they could not be aware of any secret correspondence the appellant may have
had with her family in Iraq.  Thirdly, Judge Grant-Hutchison considered
that it was arguable that the judge erred by discounting the supporting
evidence of the three witnesses as carrying less weight because they
recited simply what they had been told by the appellant.  Fourthly, the
judge had not made findings as to the strength or otherwise of the witness
evidence individually and fifth, that the judge brought her own subjective
assumptions as to what a relationship with a daughter-in-law and a
grandmother would look like in the very different cultural context of
family life in Iraq.

Discussion

The starting point for my consideration pursuant to Devaseelan (Second
Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702 is
that the previous decision of Judge Birkby represented the starting point
for any subsequent judicial consideration.  Pursuant to the guidelines
issued in Devaseelan, facts happening since an earlier decision may always
be taken into account, but facts relating to matters which were already in
existence at the time of the earlier decision which are now sought to be
relied upon must be treated with the greatest of circumspection.  As such,
the appellant, who was legally represented before Judge Gandhi, was on
notice that the starting point of Judge Birkby's findings would need to be
displaced by reference to evidence of facts happening in the thirteen years
since that decision had been promulgated.

In order to seek to depart from the starting point of Judge Birkby, the
appellant provided live evidence in the form of three witnesses.  Those
witnesses had not given evidence before Judge Birkby.  Judge Gandhi
rejected the evidence of the three witnesses on the following bases.

First, she had not received a satisfactory explanation as to why the
evidence provided by the witnesses on this occasion had not been available
to the judge previously.

Secondly, the evidence of the three new witnesses was based entirely on the
account that the appellant had provided to them of her claimed lack of
contact with any of her family in Iraq.  The judge observed that the three
witnesses would not know the full extent of the private correspondence that
the appellant may have with any of the remaining family that Judge Birkby
found that she still had in Iraq and therefore little weight could be
ascribed to their evidence.

Thirdly, the judge noted that one of the witnesses, Ms Amol, had said in
her live evidence that the appellant had used the Red Cross international
family tracing service in order to obtain or make contact with her family
in Iraq but had done so unsuccessfully.  That contrasted with the
appellant's own evidence that she had not used any such tracing services as
she did not wish to trouble anybody with that burden.

The question now arises as to whether the judge reached an irrational
finding when drawing these conclusions?  I do not consider that the judge's
findings were irrational.  Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge should have
put the concerns that she had to the witnesses or to the appellant.  In my
view, it was not unfair or irrational for her not to air her concerns in
that way.  It was for the appellant, through her counsel if necessary, to
address why the evidence now presented by the appellant had changed.
Pursuant to Devaseelan, the appellant has been on notice for the past
thirteen years that there would be a significant judicial starting point
finding of fact concerning her family which needed to be displaced.

Under the Devaseelan guidelines, any evidence which could have been
available previously but was not provided is now to be treated with the
greatest of circumspection.  It was not irrational or otherwise unfair for
the judge to analyse the evidence through the requirements of Devaseelan,
without having revealed each step of her emergent thinking in the hearing.
It should have been clear to those representing the appellant that the
starting point of Judge Birkby's findings would need to be displaced by
reference to clear and cogent evidence.  It cannot now be said that there
is a material error of law arising from her approach.

In some circumstances, judges can be required to air their concerns about
the evidence in a case, particularly where they propose to resolve a case
on grounds other than those canvassed by the parties: see AM (Fair hearing)
Sudan [2015] UKUT 656 (IAC).  Headnote (v) provides:

         "Fairness may require a Tribunal to canvas an issue which has not
         been ventilated by the parties or their representatives, in
         fulfilment of each party's right to a fair hearing."

    The issue of the judge's findings concerning the three new witnesses in
    the present matter is not in AM (Sudan) territory.  The refusal letter
    highlighted the absence of evidence concerning the appellant's claims
    to have no family support in Iraq.  The respondent relied on the
    decision of Judge Birkby.  It was common ground that Devaseelan
    applied.  The appellant was therefore on notice that the issue of
    family support in Iraq was a live issue, and that the appellant's case
    that she did not have any such support had already been rejected.  The
    judge was not under a duty to give running commentary on the issues in
    the case during the hearing.

Similarly, in relation to the second ground of appeal, namely that the
judge made an irrational finding that the appellant could secretly be in
contact with her family in Iraq, I do not consider this to have any merit.
The appellant lives with a number of different supporters and rotates from
place to place on a fairly regular basis.  Ms Ahmad submitted that it would
not be possible for the appellant to maintain secret correspondence with
any family in Iraq without the other witnesses with whom she lives finding
out.  I reject this assertion.  There is no suggestion in any of the
evidence to which my attention has been drawn that the witnesses had sight
of any private correspondence of the appellant.  There is no suggestion
that they would know about any correspondence she received, whether
electronically or through friends and family or by means of conventional
airmail.  It was an entirely apposite observation for the judge to find
that unless the three witnesses had full sight of all the appellant's
private correspondence, it could not be said that they could definitively
rule out the possibility that she remains in contact with her family.

I do not consider that anything turns on the judge's treatment of the three
witnesses' evidence together.  The observation that none had appeared for
the appellant before Judge Birkby applied equally to each of them.  The
judge had, in any event, observed in her decision that there were limits to
what the three witnesses were able to say about the appellant's contact
with her family in Iraq.  It has not been demonstrated to me how there were
features of any of the witnesses' individual evidence which could or should
have led to a different conclusion on this point.  This is a criticism of
form rather than substance.  It is well established that judges do not need
to labour over each individual piece of evidence.  See Lord Justice Haddon-
Cave in PA (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA
Civ 2495 at [42]:

         "There is an increasing tendency for  First-Tier  judgments  to  be
         overly long and to contain unnecessary detail.  This  can,  itself,
         cause problems of consistency and cogency. Laborious recitation  of
         every piece of evidence is not necessary or  desirable  and  simply
         adds to the already heavy burden on First-Tier judges. It  is  only
         necessary to refer to evidence that is relevant  to  the  issue  or
         issues for determination. Length is no substitute for analysis."

In relation to ground 3, it is contended that the judge reached irrational
findings when contrasting the evidence of Ms Amol concerning the
appellant's attempts to use the Red Cross international family tracing
service with the appellant's own evidence that she had not used the
service.  This was a plain credibility finding that was open to the judge
on the evidence.  One witness said one thing, another witness said another.
 The judge analysed the differences and reached conclusions that were
entirely open to her on the facts.  There is no merit to this ground of
appeal.

There is some superficial force in the final ground of appeal concerning
the judge's assumptions surrounding the attempts she considers the
appellant be likely to have made to contact her daughter-in-law in Iraq.
Although a judge should be slow to impose his or her subjective cultural
expectations as to how members of the family would conduct themselves in a
very different cultural context, I do not consider the judge to have
strayed beyond the boundaries of what was appropriate on this occasion.
The appellant has been subject to a finding of fact from Judge Birkby for
the last thirteen years that she and continues to remain in contact with
her family in Iraq.  On that basis, it was entirely reasonable of this
judge to make a finding that the evidence of the appellant that she had not
made any attempts to contact the very family members which Judge Birkby had
found her to be in contact with.  It was entirely open to the judge to find
that the evidence of the appellant in this respect lacked credibility.

Drawing this analysis together, the judge reached findings of fact which
were open to her on the evidence and which cannot be said to be irrational.
 Although another judge may have reached different findings, the task of
the Upper Tribunal is to consider whether the decision involved the making
of an error of law.  In relation to matters of fact, that means determining
whether the judge reached irrational findings, not whether another judge
may have resolved the case on a different basis.  The judge's findings were
not irrational or otherwise infected by legal error.  This appeal is
dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed Stephen H Smith                           Date 10 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
