
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14742/2019 ('v')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And via Skype for Business           |On 21st April 2021                   |
|On 6th April 2021                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                               MS BABLY KHANOM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Rana, Counsel, instructed by Monk Turner & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which I gave
orally at the end of the hearing on 6th April 2021.

Both representatives and I attended the hearing via Skype, while the
hearing was also open to attend at Field House.  The parties did not object
to attending via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hembrough (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 20th November 2020, by
which he dismissed her appeal against the respondent's refusal on 16th
August 2019 of her application for leave to remain based on right to
respect of her family and private life.

The appellant's immigration history was that she had entered the UK on 23rd
April 2006 with her husband, from whom she is now estranged and a son, on a
visit visa; remained in the UK unlawfully; applied in January 2015 as a
dependent spouse on an application for leave to remain outside the
Immigration Rules, which was refused; and on 8th May 2019 applied for leave
to remain based on right to respect for her family and private life which
was refused in the impugned decision. In her latest application, the
appellant, a Bangladeshi national, referred to living with her daughter and
grandchildren, (she had separated from her husband since the 2015
application); was not working and was being maintained by her daughter but
in turn provided her daughter with support looking after the grandchildren.
 The appellant claimed to have separated from her husband because the
appellant had become pregnant by a different father and the appellant was
unable to return to Bangladesh.  She claimed to have a family life with her
daughter and grandchildren as well as close ties to her local community in
the UK and was estranged or unaware of the whereabouts of her family
members in Bangladesh.  At the age of 51, she claimed to be 'elderly' and
could not work, suffering from diabetes and high cholesterol.

In rejecting her application, the respondent did not accept that there
would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
Bangladesh, where she lived up to the age of 36.  The appellant had entered
the UK as a visitor without expectation of being able to remain here and
removal would not separate any British children from their parents.
Refusal of leave to remain would not, in the respondent's view, result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences and there was nothing preventing the
appellant's daughter from financially supporting the appellant in
Bangladesh.  The respondent considered the appellant's diabetes and
cholesterol which did not, in her view, risk any breach of article 3 ECHR
in the event of the appellant's return to Bangladesh.  Neither condition
was at the stage or severity preventing the appellant to travel nor had it
been shown the appellant would be unable to access treatment in Bangladesh.

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the FtT.

The FtT's decision

The FtT did not accept that the appellant had had a pregnancy resulting
from a relationship outside marriage (��31 to 37).  The FtT further did not
accept the appellant would be shunned by her family in Bangladesh (�38) or
that she would return there to a state of destitution, noting that the
appellant had three sons and a brother and sister in the UK about whom the
FtT had been told nothing (�39).  The FtT further considered and rejected a
risk of gender-based violence (�42).  Whilst the FtT accepted that the
appellant had a close relationship with her daughter and her grandchildren
(�45), at �47 the FtT was not satisfied that the relationship between the
appellant and her daughter and grandchildren constituted one of dependence
so as to engage article 8 regarding family life, nor was it argued that it
did.  Clearly, however, private life was engaged.  However, in applying
section 117B the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the FtT
concluded that refusal of leave to remain was proportionate (�52).

In reaching his decision, at �29, the FtT had noted that after the
appellant had given evidence via a solicitor's office, using CVP, the
appellant's representative had indicated that the appellant's daughter was
also present in the same office and he requested permission to call her to
give evidence.  The FtT had refused his request, observing that there was
no witness statement nor mention of her giving evidence in response to the
case management directions given on 29th June and 10th August 2020, which
had required the appellant to provide a list of witnesses and to file
witness statements.  The FtT bore in mind the overriding objective
requiring the proceedings to be conducted fairly and the FtT considered
that it would be unfair on the respondent to allow the appellant to
introduce fresh evidence without notice at the conclusion of the
appellant's evidence.  There was no application for an adjournment.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially on three
grounds:

   1. Ground (1) - the FtT had erred in failing to draw inferences from the
      evidence about the detrimental effect that the appellant's removal
      would have upon qualifying grandchildren, noting that the appellant
      lived with her grandchildren and dropped off and picked up one of the
      grandchildren from nursery.

   2. Ground (2) - the FtT had erred in refusing to allow the appellant's
      daughter to give evidence on the basis that no witness statement had
      been provided, noting that same daughter provided a letter in the
      bundle before the FtT dated 9th January 2019.

   3. Ground (3) - the FtT had erred in finding that there was no family
      life between the appellant, her daughter and grandchildren based
      their cohabitation, childcare provided by the appellant and closeness
      of the relationship.

   4. Ground (4) - the FtT had erred in refusing the appeal under article
      8, by failing to consider the fact of her separation from her
      husband, living with her daughter and grandchildren and her close
      relationship with them.  The FtT had failed to give adequate reasons
      for dismissing the appellant's case on article 8 grounds.

 1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission  on  18th  December
    2020.  While referring specifically  to  the  ground  relating  to  the
    appellant's daughter not being allowed to give evidence, the  grant  of
    permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

The Appellant's submissions

The first point was that the FtT had erred in concluding that there was no
witness statement from the appellant's daughter before him.  In fact, as
was referred to expressly at section C of the skeleton argument before the
FtT, this had referred at section C2 to a letter dated 19th January 2019
from the appellant's daughter, which confirmed that the appellant's
daughter had indefinite leave to remain and also that her mother lived with
her.  This was at page [9] of the appellant's bundle and I reviewed that
letter, which confirmed the same.  There was also a reference at section C4
of the skeleton argument to a letter dated 25th January 2019 from Rainbow
House which confirmed that the appellant was the person who mostly picked
up and dropped off her grandson, at page [6] of the appellant's bundle.  In
the circumstances, the FtT should have treated both of these letters as
amounting to witness statements.  The appellant's daughter was able to give
evidence and it was quite possible where, as here, the FtT was concerned
that there was a lack of evidence and had raised the question as to why the
appellant's daughter had not given evidence, that there could have been a
substantial examination-in-chief by Mr Rana to adduce additional evidence.

In that regard, Mr Rana relied upon and referred to the Court of Appeal
authority of AS (Pakistan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 703, which had stressed
the importance of granting an adjournment application in order to call
witnesses who could give relevant evidence.  He accepted that no
adjournment application had been made to the FtT but nevertheless where, as
here, the FtT had identified the daughter's evidence as being important and
where she had produced a 'witness statement' it was therefore an error of
law and a deprival of a fair hearing to prevent her from giving evidence.

At this stage, and to give both parties the opportunity to respond, I
myself reviewed through the correspondence file for the relevant
directions, which I discussed with them.  It appeared first of all that the
case had initially been listed for 14th January 2020, with standard
directions requiring the appellant to provide witness statements of all
witnesses who would give evidence at the hearing.  The January 2020 hearing
had been adjourned because of a concern about the scope of the appeal and
subsequently, Acting Resident Judge Woodcraft directed on 27th March 2020
that there be a case management hearing with additional directions.  Those
directions did not focus on the identity of witnesses or witness statements
but dealt, in a number of areas, with the need for an appellant's skeleton
argument or 'ASA'.  The directions did require that any evidence generally
should be disclosed not later than 5 working days before the final hearing.

Next, directions were issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge Aldridge on 29th
June 2020, which included, at �3b, a direction that by 13th July 2020, in
advance of a case management review hearing, the appellant must identify
the names of each witness to be called and the issue dealt with by each
witness.

Dealing next with the Case Management Review hearing conducted by telephone
on 10th August 2020 by Judge Karbani, I had regard to the record of
proceedings, in which it was recorded:

    "Witnesses: (App + daughter)"

Whilst Judge Hembrough referred to the appellant's daughter not being
identified as a witness, in fact, the record of proceedings does refer to
both the appellant and the daughter as witnesses whom the appellant wished
to call.

Therefore, this was the primary basis of the appeal.  The remainder of the
grounds were nevertheless still relied upon.  In particular, the FtT's
reasoning at ��44 and 45 of the decision illustrated what was contradictory
in the FtT's concerns about the appellant's daughter not giving evidence.
At �44, the FtT had referred to an acceptance of the appellant living with
her daughter and grandchildren and at �45 to their close relationship.
That being so, it was unclear why the FtT should be concerned, or possibly
draw adverse inferences, from the lack of evidence from the appellant's
daughter, at �29.  The flaw in the FtT's analysis was compounded because
the FtT had not considered the children's best interests, as required by
section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

Moreover, whilst the FtT had accepted that there was private life, the
FtT's finding that there was no family life was unsustainable.  Whilst Mr
Rana confirmed that he did not seek to argue family life existed between
the appellant and her daughter because he argued that there were more than
emotional ties, the same could not be said of the appellant and her
grandchildren, who were minor and so different considerations other than
'normal emotional ties' applied.  There was no proper assessment of family
life in the circumstances and that was unsurprising, given that the
appellant's daughter had not been able to give evidence.

The Respondent's submissions

Mr Tufan submitted, considering the procedural history of this case at �29
that there was no indication by way of production of a proper witness
statement that the appellant's daughter would be giving witness evidence.
It was not appropriate for a party to refer to a brief letter of a couple
of sentences, and rely, after the conclusion of the first witness's
evidence, to seek to adduce, through extensive oral examination-in-chief,
additional oral evidence.  The directions had been clear that evidence had
to be disclosed before the hearing, which included the witness evidence on
which a party intended to rely.  It was not unfair to prevent a party from
assuming an entitlement to adduce additional oral evidence in that way, and
indeed unfair on the other party.   Here and critically, the appellant's
daughter's statement (if it could be described as such) at page [9] of the
appellant's bundle was brief and its contents were accepted by the FtT,
namely the cohabitation of the parties, the existence of a close
relationship and the fact that the appellant helped out with childcare,
which was not disputed by the respondent.  The tendering of her evidence
was not prompted by concerns raised by the FtT, but because the presenting
officer before the FtT had asked the appellant in cross-examination why her
daughter was not giving evidence, and the appellant did not know, which was
consistent with the desire to call the daughter being a last-minute
decision. In any event, what else, Mr Tufan asked, could the daughter have
given evidence in relation to?  In the circumstances, even if the
appellant's daughter had given evidence, the FtT recorded at �47 that the
appellant did not seek to claim that there was a relationship of dependency
between the appellant, her daughter and grandchildren.

The FtT acknowledged the fact of cohabitation and the family's
circumstances but also recognised the comparatively recent cohabitation
(which had dated only back to 2019) and the limited role that the appellant
played, which in reality was nothing that the childminder could not do,
namely the pick-up and drop off at nursery.  In essence, if there were an
error in relation to that ground, it was simply not material.  The
remainder of the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with the
findings.

Discussion and conclusions

I deal with ground (2) first and what is said to be the error in the FtT
refusing to allow the appellant's daughter to give evidence.  In that
regard, the FtT had referred to the July directions that the appellant was
required to identify the witnesses whose statements were to be relied upon.
 I am conscious that Judge's Karbani's record of proceedings of the 20th
August 2020 clearly indicated that the appellant intended for her daughter
to give evidence.  I further take into account Mr Rana's submission that
albeit put in informal terms, not headed 'witness statement;' not listed in
the appellant's bundle as a witness statement, and without a statement of
truth (in contrast to the appellant's witness statement, which was headed
'witness statement,' or listed as a witness statement in the index of the
appellant's bundle, in contrast to the appellant's statement, which was,
there is unquestionably a letter at page [9] of the appellant's bundle
which could, just about, be seen as a form of statement, in the format of a
letter addressed 'To whom it may concern'.  I describe the letter as
capable of being described as a statement in the context of a jurisdiction
where statements may be adduced, which lack the formality expected in other
jurisdictions.  It confirms, as both parties accept, that the appellant's
daughter is a settled person with indefinite leave to remain; is the
daughter of the appellant; and that the appellant lives with her.

I also accept that the appellant's daughter may have wished to give oral
evidence in circumstances where she was prevented from doing so.

However, I am also conscious that the decision of a Judge in relation to
case management will always be a nuanced one.  The test ultimately always
has to be on whether a party has been deprived of a fair hearing.
Effectively, if a party has not been deprived of a fair hearing, then that
does not amount to an error of law.

On the one hand, the appellant's submission, by reference to AS (Pakistan)
is that a party who has been deprived of an ability to call a witness
cannot be said to have had a fair hearing.

On the other hand, I do note in the particular circumstances of this case
three critical points.  The first point is that where, as here, the
appellant was professionally represented, witnesses should expect to
include most, if not all of their evidence-in-chief, in a written witness
statement, rather than assume an entitlement to adduce a brief letter, none
of which is contentious or likely to be disputed and then expect to be able
to give extensive additional oral evidence-in-chief.  While the FtT was
wrong in his assertion that there was no mention of calling the appellant's
daughter previously, the FtT was right to note that an expectation of oral
evidence-in-chief is unfair on the other party.

Second, on the issue of a fair hearing, this turns on whether a party has
been deprived of giving relevant evidence, which could have assisted his or
her case. Mr Rana does not identify what that additional evidence may have
been.  None of the daughter's brief statement was disputed.  The FtT
accepted everything that was included in the appellant's daughter's
statement, namely that the appellant cohabits with her daughter, and lives
with her, and the FtT went beyond that to find that there is a close
relationship between the appellant, her daughter and her grandchildren.

Third, on the same issue of a fair hearing, at �47, the FtT found, when
considering the existence of family life, the following:

"Looking outside the Rules I have not been satisfied that the relationship
between the appellant and her daughter and grandchildren constitutes one of
dependence so as to engage article 8 as regards family life, nor was it
argued that it did [my emphasis].  Clearly however private life is
engaged."

While Mr Rana expressly stated that he did not seek to assert that there
were more than emotional ties between the appellant and her daughter, but
wider considerations applied to the grandchildren, what was critical was
the wider acceptance that no dependency, so as to engage Article 8 ECHR as
regards family life, was being pursued before him.  What the FtT was left
considering, in the absence of dependency, was precisely the set of
circumstances which he accepted, namely the fact of cohabitation, the
appellant's close relations with her grandchildren and her role in dropping
off and picking one of them up regularly from nursery.  In the
circumstances, I accept the force of Mr Tufan's submission that there was
no more specific relevant evidence for the appellant's daughter to give,
which the FtT had not considered, beyond generalised assertions in the
grounds on evidence about the effect of the appellant's removal on the
grandchildren, which the FtT recognised at �46 would cause understandable
upset. In summary, the appellant was not prevented from adducing relevant
evidence; the nature of any further evidence beyond understandable upset
has never been identified; and dependency was specifically not relied on
between the appellant and her grandchildren.  The FtT's error in failing to
spot, in the record of proceeding in an earlier case management review, the
appellant's wish to call her daughter to give evidence, did not prevent the
appellant having a fair hearing.  In the circumstances, I do not regard
there as having been a procedural unfairness in respect of ground (2).

Dealing with the remainder of grounds (1), (3) and (4), first, in relation
to ground (1) and the ground that the FtT had failed to draw inferences
from the evidence about the detrimental effect of the appellant's removal
upon qualifying children, noting the factual findings that had already been
made, the FtT clearly referred at �46 to the best interests of the children
as a primary consideration, but what the FtT was also entitled to do was to
take into account the limited duration of cohabitation; the focus of the
children being on their mother, rather than the appellant; and the absence
of any claimed dependency, as exemplified by the evidence of one child
having speech and language delay, for which he was receiving NHS and
nursery support, without evidence of input from the appellant (�45).  The
FtT specifically considered the likely short-term upset of the appellant's
removal, but without significant effect on their welfare or development
(�46).  Therefore, whilst brief, the FtT's analysis was to the point,
adequately and clearly reasoned.  Ground (1) discloses no error of law.

Dealing with ground (3) and the failure to give adequate reasons that there
was no family life, bearing in mind the findings made by the FtT
(cohabitation, help with childcare, a close relationship between all family
members and estrangement from the appellant's husband), once again, I refer
back to the reasons and analysis discernible from ��44 to 47 of the
decision, which I regard as adequate.  The FtT was entitled to consider the
brevity of cohabitation; the likely focus of the children on their mother;
and the lack of any claimed dependency.   Ground (3) discloses no error of
law.

Finally, in relation to ground (4) and a contention that the FtT had failed
to consider for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR the appellant's
circumstances in the round, namely the separation of the appellant from her
husband; living with her daughter and grandchildren; their close
relationship; and the appellant's health issues, what is clear is that
between ��47 to 55, the FtT had made a whole series of findings, weighing
up a variety of factors.  He specifically rejected that the appellant would
return to Bangladesh to a state of destitution or that she had lost her
cultural connections to Bangladesh.  The FtT also specifically found that
the appellant had not been what was referred to as an "adulteress;" nor
would she be perceived as such or face risk on that basis.  What the FtT
was unarguably entitled to do, applying the factors set out at section 117B
of the 2002 Act at ��49 to 55, was to note the public interest in the
maintenance of effective immigration control; the fact that the appellant
had been accessing free treatment via the NHS to which she was not
entitled; that little weight should be attached to private life which she
had established when she was in the UK unlawfully; and the limited evidence
of integration.  The FtT also considered the appellant's medical conditions
both individually and cumulatively.  As an aside, Mr Rana confirmed that no
appeal was being pursued before me in respect of Article 3 ECHR.

The FtT unarguably considered all of the evidence in the round, for the
purposes of Article 8 ECHR, considering that evidence and applying section
117B of the 2002 Act.  Ground (4) discloses no error of law.

Decision on error of law

I conclude that there are no errors of law in the FtT's decision.
Therefore, the appellant's challenge fails, and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed J Keith

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith      Date:  12th April 2021





