
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/15268/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 September 2019                      |On 13 September 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                              Mr Hassan Maqsood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tariq, Legal Representative, West London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Place promulgated 20 June 2019 dismissing the appeal against the
decision of the respondent dated 19 June 2018 to refuse the entry clearance
application made, on 27 March 2018, on the basis of being the spouse of
Fehmida Awan, a person settled and present in the UK as a British citizen.
First-tier Tribunal Judge Omotosho granted permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal on 24 July 2019, considering it arguable that the First-tier
Tribunal Judge had failed to assess the child's best interests and arguably
failed to carry out an Article 8 proportionality exercise properly.

The judge took account of the appellant's immigration history, which in
summary was that he entered the UK as a student but overstayed.  His visa
had expired in 2012.  He was then encountered in 2014 and given reporting
conditions but he failed to report as required and was listed as an
absconder.  That is more than merely overstaying and there is an increased
and significant public interest in removing him.  However, he voluntarily
departed on 12 February 2018.  Before he departed, he had met Ms Awan in
April of 2016, whilst effectively on the run from the authorities, and they
became engaged in February 2017.  He did not leave the UK for a further
twelve months, until February 2018.

It was suggested to me today that the appellant and the sponsor had
commenced a family life by cohabiting in the UK sometime between when they
met and when he left. However, they were in fact married in what was said
to be an arranged marriage in Pakistan.  The sponsor's witness statement
says:

"I confirm that I was first introduced to my spouse in April 2016 in London
and then started to see and talk to each other on a regular basis and ended
up getting engaged in February 2017 followed by our marriage on 15 February
2018.  I confirm that I lived in Pakistan with my husband for a few months
after the marriage while on annual leave."

It is not indicated at all in that statement, which was before the First-
tier Tribunal, that they were cohabiting.  I do not know and it is not
clear to me what oral evidence was given by the sponsor at the hearing but
I do not consider that the judge could have been told that they were
cohabiting because at paragraph 23 of the decision the judge stated, "I
note that the appellant and Ms Anwa have never enjoyed family life together
in the UK, having married in Pakistan."  So, if there was a degree of
family life by reason of being engaged, being little more than boyfriend
and girlfriend, it would seem there was not any evidence before the First-
tier Tribunal, which in any event found as a fact, that they had not
enjoyed family life together in the UK. That specific finding was not
challenged in the grounds.

More significantly, they married in the full knowledge of the appellant's
immigration status, that he was not only an overstayer, but he was on the
run from the authorities, having absconded from his reporting conditions.
The relationship was entered into in circumstances of precariousness.  It
is that fact that prompted the respondent to also refuse the application
for entry clearance under paragraph 320(11) on the basis that he contrived
in a significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by
overstaying more than six years.

Now, the refusal on 320(11) is mandatory. However, paragraph 320 provides
that where this paragraph applies, unless refusal would be contrary to the
Human Rights Convention or the Refugee Convention, it will only be in
exceptional circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal
will be outweighed by compelling factors.  There is no argument before me
today in relation to this issue, but it seems to me that if the decision
contravened human rights then that would supersede the reliance on
paragraph 320(11).

However, the immigration history is highly relevant to the public interest
considerations in respect of the only available ground of appeal, which is
on human rights.  The judge heard argument based on PS (India), where the
Entry Clearance Officer had not recognised that the appellant in that case
had voluntarily left the UK.  The judge considered all of that from
paragraph 16 onwards, distinguishing the case of PS and this appellant's
case. The judge carefully considered the explanation of the appellant that
he thought he no longer needed to report to the respondent but rejected
that entirely, finding at paragraph 20, "the appellant absconded and failed
to meet the temporary admission restriction that he was given relating to
reporting and residence.  I find that these are clear aggravating
circumstances and that they were fully considered in the refusal letter,"
and he found the reliance on 320(11) to be appropriate.

The judge then very properly went on to consider the article 8 ECHR claim,
following the Razgar stepped approach, and concluded that the crucial issue
was that of the proportionality balancing exercise.  He took into account
the public interest pursuant to Section 117B of the 2002 Act to the effect
that maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public
interest, and at paragraph 23 considered whether there was any compelling
circumstances outside the Rules which should lead to a different decision.
There, the judge considered in summary form all the circumstances of this
case, making the finding that I have mentioned before that they had not
enjoyed family life together in the UK.  I note a balanced approach with
some findings in favour of the appellant, and some points against him.

At paragraph 24 the judge accepted that they would want to live in the UK.
Although she came to the UK from Pakistan at the age of 26, the sponsor is
a British citizen.  Nevertheless, the judge found that she would still be
sufficiently familiar with Pakistani culture so that she would be able to
reintegrate there, even though she would prefer not to do so.  Essentially,
the judge was finding that family life with the sponsor could continue in
Pakistan.

The submissions of Mr Tariq this morning addressed paragraph 25 of the
impugned decision, where the judge took account of the fact of their son
being a British citizen born in the UK. The judge there addressed the
child's best interests. Although Section 55 is not mentioned, clearly the
judge is referring to best interests, and concludes, unsurprisingly, that
the best interests are to be with both parents.  What is urged upon me is
that the judge has not taken into account a British citizen child's right
to live in the UK, the loss of any opportunities, and, quite rightly, that
the child should not be blamed for the failings of the parent.  However,
the judge was not blaming the child for the failings of his father. Ms
Everett conceded, or did not challenge, that there was a genuine and
subsisting relationship with the child.  Although the child was born in the
UK, both mother and child have visited the appellant in Pakistan and there
is no doubt that they maintain as best a relationship as they can do
remotely between Pakistan and the UK.

However, clearly the judge was right in relation to the best interests of
the child. The fact that the appellant left voluntarily, and the fact that
the child is a British citizen with rights to live in the UK, is all taken
into account by the judge in the proportionality balancing exercise.  I am
satisfied the judge has reached a conclusion on that balancing exercise in
favour of the respondent, or against the appellant, which the judge was
entitled to do so and for which cogent reasons were given.  The authority
of PS (India) is not an authority for the proposition that merely because
there was a voluntarily departure the public interest element of his
otherwise poor immigration history is to be entirely negated.

For his part, Mr Tariq points out that if the appellant had been in the UK
then Section 117B(6) would apply so that the reasonableness test as to
whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK would
result, it is suggested, in the appellant being allowed to remain.
However, the father is not in the UK and that test does not apply at all on
the facts of this case.  The judge simply has to consider the
proportionality balancing exercise, taking into account the sponsor's
background in Pakistan and the child and the appellant's immigration
history, as well as the significant fact of the child's British citizenship
and all the rights and benefits that obviously entails.  Looking at that
all in the round, as I said, I am satisfied that is a conclusion that the
judge was entitled to reach and for which cogent and lawful reasoning has
been provided.  That a different judge may have reached a different
conclusion on these facts, does not demonstrate that there was any material
error of law by this judge in making this decision.

Decision

In the circumstances, and for the reasons set out above, I find that the
making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law such as to require the decision to be
set aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal remains
dismissed.


No anonymity direction was requested and thus I do not make one.


     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 3 September 2019





To the Respondent
Fee Award


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 3 September 2019

