
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15936/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And via Skype                        |On 28 January 2021                   |
|On 5th January 2021                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                              FELIX OLA-SUNMON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Osman, Counsel, instructed by Irvine Thanvi
                    Natas Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were given
orally at the end of the hearing on 5th January 2021.

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to attending
via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were able to
participate in the hearing.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge P J Aujla (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 2nd December 2019, by
which he dismissed the appellant's  appeal against the respondent's refusal
on 11th September 2019 of his human rights claim, specifically the right to
respect for his private life, based on long residence in the UK and whether
there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in his
country of origin, Nigeria; and his rights under Article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR'), by virtue of various medical
conditions, including chronic hepatitis B, liver cirrhosis and impairment,
thrombocytopenia (low platelet account), hypertension and neuralgia.

The FtT's decision

Given that the grant of permission is limited in scope, I focus only on
those issues relevant to the grant.  First, the FtT concluded, it is now
accepted erroneously, at  [14] that neither the appellant's application nor
the grounds of appeal referred to Article 3 ECHR and therefore the FtT
erred when concluding that it was not open to the appellant to argue the
matter on Article 3 grounds.

Second, the FtT concluded, in the context of considering whether there were
very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Nigeria, the
appellant's medical conditions.  At [30], the FtT concluded that Nigeria
had a working medical system which the appellant could access and he had
family who could support him to do so.

Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT dismissed the
appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which were lengthy. The FtT
initially refused permission to appeal on 27th April 2020 but upon a
renewed application, Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell granted limited
permission on the following grounds:

   1. First, that it was arguable that the FtT had erred in refusing to
      hear arguments on Article 3 ECHR, when the representations referred
      to at [13], which accompanied the appellant's application for leave
      to remain clearly made reference to Article 3.

   2. Second, it was arguable that the FtT had failed to consider and
      analyse evidence that the appellant would be able to access medical
      treatment in Nigeria, before concluding that the appellant could
      work; and had erred in concluding that he could  turn to his
      daughters for financial support.  In particular, the FtT had failed
      to consider the evidence that the appellant was estranged from his
      daughters since he had separated from his wife (the daughters'
      mother) after 10 years of marriage.  The FtT had also failed to take
      into account the appellant's uncontested evidence that his sister
      suffered a stroke rendering her wheelchair bound; and the appellant's
      brother-in-law was a pastor with a small church and therefore the FtT
      had failed to consider properly whether the appellant's sister and
      brother-in-law were in a financial position to be able to assist him
      with accessing treatment in Nigeria.

The hearing before me

I first of all began the hearing by identifying the documents that had been
before the FtT, which included a bundle which ran to some 92 pages, which
included medical records at pages [48] to [74].  I also had excerpts from a
Country Policy and Information Note, or 'CPIN', version 2.0 dated 28th
August 2018; a report by EASO; and finally excerpts from NHS website
printed out 25th November 2019 which dealt with potential complications
around a number of conditions including hepatitis B, cirrhosis and
hypertension.  Without criticism of Mr Osman, those excerpts describe the
conditions in general terms and although Mr Osman wished to refer me to a
version of the NHS notes which talk about the consequences of the lack of
treatment for the individual, and which I could read by searching for them
on the internet, as he had not produced a copy before this Tribunal,  I
regarded it as appropriate that I should refer to the document that was in
the bundle, evidently before the FtT, which in summary summarises the
complications of hepatitis B, namely that people with hepatitis B can
sometimes develop serious liver problems and these mostly affect people
with an untreated long-term chronic infection.

I also had the benefit of reviewing the skeleton argument that ran to some
ten pages which Mr Osman had also produced for the First-tier Judge and in
particular a section on Article 3 at paragraphs 10 to 14 which dealt with
the test under the well-known authority of Paposhvilli v Belgium
(Application No. 41738/10).  The skeleton argument dealt at [28] with the
risk of breach of Article 3 where Mr Osman said:

"It is submitted that the appellant would face a real risk of breach of his
rights under Article 3 ECHR.  The appellant is suffering from chronic
hepatitis B, liver cirrhosis, chronic kidney disease and hypertension.  He
is currently taking a number of medications to assist in managing those
conditions and in particular Entecavir.  This is an anti-viral used to
treat hepatitis B.  Without adequate treatment of hepatitis B the appellant
is at risk of his liver cirrhosis becoming more severe and therefore him
suffering liver failure.  It is also submitted that the appellant's chronic
kidney disease could develop into kidney failure without adequate treatment
of his hypertension."

Oral submissions

I was grateful for the focussed and relevant oral submissions by both
representatives.  Ms Everett accepted on behalf of the respondent that the
FtT had failed to consider the Article 3 claim.  The question was whether
that error was material, which in turn them impacted on the second ground
which was allowed to proceed, in particular the obstacles to the
appellant's integration into his country of origin, Nigeria, principally
because of his health conditions.



The appellant's submissions

Mr Osman submitted that the question, noting that the FtT had failed to
consider Article 3, was whether was evidence before the FtT which was
realistically capable of demonstrating that there were substantial grounds
for believing that the appellant's removal would risk his rights under
Article 3 being violated.  The appellant need only show that the evidence
was realistically capable of demonstrating such grounds, as otherwise I
would be conflating the error of law with remaking the appeal.  The extra
test which was compatible with this was that both representatives accepted
that it was correct to describe the threshold as an obligation on the
applicant to raise a prima facie case of potential infringement of Article
3.  While ideally there would have been more evidence before the FtT, Mr
Osman had only been instructed to appear before the FtT at the last minute,
and the evidence before the FtT was sufficient.  Should an error of law be
found, the appellant would seek to adduce additional evidence in any
remaking.

In relation to the second ground that had been permitted to proceed, Mr
Osman referred in particular to [24] and [25] of his skeleton argument and
in particular, the misapprehension by the FtT that simply because the
appellant could live with his sister and brother-in-law in Nigeria, they
would be able to afford to support him with financial treatment.  As found
by the FtT at [23], financial support for the appellant by friends in the
UK amounted to only ï¿½50 a week.  That would not begin to finance the
medical treatment for the appellant's conditions. The names of these
conditions were listed in the appellant's medical records before the FtT,
albeit Mr Osman accepted that the precise consequences and details of the
extent of those conditions was not set out in the appellant's medical
records. If I added the titles of those medical conditions to the general
NHS guidance as to what the consequences could be of the absence of
treatment, that at least passed the test of evidence before the FtT which
was realistically capable of demonstrating a relevant risk.

The respondent's submission

Ms Everett summarised her response that the first ground of challenge was
too speculative.  While the FtT had not considered the evidence from an
Article 3 perspective, the evidence was not realistically capable of
demonstrating relevant grounds.  The evidence was, in reality, simply a
list of the appellant's conditions, a list of prescribed drugs taken by the
appellant and then assertions by Mr Osman of a plausible chain of events in
the event of lack of treatment for those conditions. Taking one example
raised by Mr Osman, it was said that if someone such as the appellant had
impaired liver function or cirrhosis of the liver (liver scarring), such
conditions, if they became severe, could then lead to liver failure and the
need for a liver transplant or dialysis.  The question here was that a
simple list of conditions and a speculative, plausible chain of events was
not sufficient evidence that was before the FtT, realistically capable of
enabling him to reach the conclusion that there were substantial grounds
for believing that Article 3 would be breached.  It might be that with
additional evidence in the future, that the appellant could fill in the
evidential gap but in this case, but not on the basis of the evidence as it
stood before the FtT.  The second ground of challenge was linked with the
first, as it focussed on the appellant's ability to integrate into Nigerian
society, if he were unable to afford medical treatment.

Discussion and conclusions

I agree with both representatives' submissions that the FtT had erred in
failing to consider the claim by reference to Article 3.  As Ms Everett
accepted, for the error not to be such that I should set aside the FtT's
decision, I would have to be satisfied that there was simply not evidence
before the FtT realistically capable of demonstrating that there were
substantial grounds for believing that Article 3 would be breached.  The
appellant did not have to show that the FtT would inevitably have reached
such a conclusion, or even that such a conclusion was likely.

In the circumstances of this particular case, and without belittling the
potential seriousness of the conditions identified, what is striking,
beyond the list of the conditions themselves, is the absence of specific
medical evidence as to the seriousness or stage of such chronic conditions,
which may have ranges of severity,  in the evidence before the FtT, to
which I have been referred.

As I had identified with Mr Osman, the bundles before the FtT contain on
the one hand the appellant's medical record, which includes a list of
medical conditions at page [47] (which for the sake of brevity I do not
recite here) and a list of medications taken by the appellant.  Immediately
after the medical records is medical correspondence at page [51] in
relation to an unrelated medical condition; and at pages [52] to [53], a
further letter from the appellant's doctors describing the appellant as
having to get up at night, to pass urine, which may be worth investigating,
but that his renal function is "quite stable".  There is an NHS discharge
sheet at page [55] and two screening letters at pages [58] and [75] of the
bundle.

While noting the print-out of web-pages from an NHS website, which were
provided to the FtT, which identify possible consequences of medical
conditions which the appellant is listed as having, Mr Osman was unable to
draw my attention to any medical evidence before the FtT which was
realistically capable of permitting the FtT to reach the conclusion that
refusal of leave to remain would result in a relevant risk of breach of
Article 3 ECHR, even accepted the wider scope of such a right in the light
of the law as it is now understood since AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] UKSC.

In summary, and whilst I reiterate my awareness of the serious effects that
such conditions might have, within a broad range of such seriousness, I
accept Ms Everett's submission that it was too much of a speculative leap,
to proceed from a list of acknowledged conditions, and, in the basis of a
general description of those conditions on an NHS website, for any FtT to
realistically conclude that the appellant's removal would risk breaching
his rights under Article 3 ECHR.  By way of specific example, and as I
discussed with Mr Osman and Ms Everett, impairment of renal function can
describe a whole range of symptoms and effects and in the absence of
treatment, the consequences may be accordingly very varied.

It may well be that in making further submissions in the future, the
appellant adduces more specific and detailed evidence and indeed it was
telling that Mr Osman indicated that should I have found there to have been
an error of law, there would have been a Rule 15(2A) to adduce more
detailed evidence.  While I make no criticism of the intention to make such
an application, it is entirely consistent with the fact that there was
simply insufficient evidence for the FtT to find in favour of the appellant
in relation to Article 3.

That leads on to the question on the second ground, in relation to the
analysis of very significant obstacles.  Whilst Article 8 and Article 3 are
very different tests, as Mr Osman accepted, there was no challenge to the
fact that the appellant's sibling and brother-in-law, even if unable to
fund access to treatment, would be willing to support him in other respects
([29]).    The real thrust to the Article 8 challenge was the extent to
which he would be able to receive medical treatment for his conditions.
Just as there was insufficient evidence to satisfy the Article 3 appeal, I
am similarly satisfied that there was similarly insufficient evidence as to
the extent to which the appellant's conditions, even if untreated, would
have on his ability to integrate into Nigeria.  The challenge on Article 8
grounds also fails.

Decision on error of law

I conclude that while the FtT did err in law in respect of his failure to
consider the Article 3 appeal, that error was not such that it is
appropriate to set aside the FtT's decision.   Therefore the appellant's
challenge fails and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that it is  appropriate  to  set  its  decision
aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  18th January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



