
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/15892/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard on 10 March 2021               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|(by Skype for Business)              |On 28 June 2021                      |
|and on 16 June 2021                  |                                     |
|(by Microsoft Teams)                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               NIZAMUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by A J Bradley &
Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    on 10 March, Mr D Clarke, and
                    on 16 June, Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 15 May 1978.   On  19
    May 2019 he applied for leave to remain on private life  grounds.   The
    respondent  initially  refused  that  by  a  decision  which  was   not
    appealable, but later substituted a decision dated 13  September  2019,
    which gives rise to these proceedings.

 2. The respondent held that the appellant did not meet the  terms  of  the
    immigration rules on private life (which he does not dispute).

 3. "Beyond the rules", the  appellant  relied  upon  his  successful  food
    business, to the benefit of the community;  inability  to  operate  the
    business from outside the UK; the effect of redundancy on his employees
    and their children; and on having many friends here.

 4. The respondent considered that while some of  the  appellant's  actions
    were "commendable", there was nothing to prevent  the  running  of  the
    business from  abroad,  and  he  could  keep  in  touch  with  friends.
    Consideration was given to the best interests of children, but  he  had
    no parental responsibility;  they lived in the UK with  their  parents;
    and "As stated ... you have the option to continue to run your business
    from abroad ... to keep their parents in employment".

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  FtT.   His  case  focused  on   the
    respondent's declared duty of operating so as to contribute to economic
    growth and benefit the country, and the risk of closure of a successful
    business, with consequent  unemployment  being  contrary  to  the  best
    interests of the children.

 6. FtT Judge Agnew dismissed the appeal by a decision  promulgated  on  24
    January 2020.

 7. The appellant appeals  to  the  UT  on  the  grounds  set  out  in  the
    attachment to his application dated 3 February 2020.  The  grounds  are
    multiple and rather discursive, running  to  14  paragraphs  over  3  �
    pages.

 8. FtT Judge Keane granted permission on 10 June 2020, not restricting the
    grounds, but identifying arguable points as:

      (1) unfairness in asking a question during cross-examination (on which
      point the appellant was expected to provide evidence);

      (2) unfairness in not giving enough  time  to  provide  evidence  from
      HMRC; and

      (3) inadequacy of the proportionality balancing exercise.

 9. In a written submission dated 1 September 2020 the respondent contended
    on those issues:

      (1) there was nothing to substantiate any allegation of apparent bias;

      (2) the time granted to produce evidence was as requested,  and  there
      was no application for further time; and

      (3) the FtT considered everything relevant to proportionality, and the
      grounds in that respect were only disagreement.

10. Having received further detailed submissions, both  written  and  oral,
    from both sides, I reserved my decision.

11. Mr Caskie advanced the main point in the grounds as apparent bias.   He
    submitted  that  on  that  point,  a  rehearing  was   required;   and,
    additionally or alternatively, the decision also erred on other  points
    which, while relatively minor, cumulatively required the same outcome.

12. Apart from narrative in the grounds, and despite the observation in the
    grant of permission, the appellant  has  not  tendered  any  record  or
    evidence of the questioning by the judge which is challenged.

13. The grounds say:

      During cross-examination ...  the  judge  interjected  and  asked  the
      appellant why he did not "employ Scottish people".  That is  reflected
      in the [decision] at ... [30 - 31] ... Simply by asking that  question
      the judge would raise in the mind of the impartial  informed  observer
      the real possibility that ... interference in  the  lives  of  "native
      Scots" was more weighty than ... interference in the lives of  persons
      not holding that status but lawfully present in the UK.  The  question
      would not have been posed and the decision would  not  have  contained
      [30 - 31] had  the  judge  not  considered  the  appellant's  position
      employing only "non-native Scots" ... material ...

14. The FtT's decision at [9 - 10] clearly sets out the  issues  raised  in
    the refusal decision and in the grounds of appeal.  At [5] it refers to
    authorities on private life and value to the community, which were  not
    cited by either side but were drawn to attention by the judge.  It  has
    not been suggested that she made any error in identifying  the  correct
    principles.

15. The judge kept a  typed  contemporaneous  record.   Under  the  heading
    "preliminary matters", this says:

      HOPO - agreed he runs a business and has 8 employees

      Ar [= appellant's representative] -  they  would  have  difficulty  in
      getting employment elsewhere

      HOPO - that is what we disagree on

      [judge] What about contribution to the community?

      HOPO - we say interest in removing him.  We do  not  accept  making  a
      significant contribution.

16. In the appellant's evidence-in-chief, further  to  his  statement,  his
    representative asked him:

      Q. Some of the employees indicate they had diff[iculty]  in  obtaining
      employment elsewhere how come you can?

      A.  I have to employ those who can speak English, one of the employees
      last 4 � years ... she has daughter also works, she can speak  English
      so taught daughter, and she teaches newcomers

      So if Romanians have language barrier this is easier

17. The judge asked the appellant's representative to clarify, and he asked
    this question:

      Q.   Do you have employees who do not speak English?

      A.  Yes, 3 do not, 2 speak English, another 2 is broken  English,  the
      daughter understands English better

      So they are still able to work even though do not speak English

18. In cross-examination it was brought out from the appellant that all his
    employees had the right to reside and work in the UK; did  not  require
    specific skills to be employed by him; and would be free to  find  work
    elsewhere.

19. After the appellant had been examined, the judge records her  questions
    "for clarification".  This includes:

      Q.  Why not employing any Scots?

      A.  I did before as my job, it is very  very  clearn  [sic],  it  [is]
      quite a hard job, they work and then phone and say sick and  will  not
      come in and I cannot have enough staff to cover this.

20. I identified the above passage in course of  submissions  and  read  it
    out.  It was accepted as being the  question  from  which  the  grounds
    arise.

21. The criticisms for the appellant were based on the  decision  at  these
    two paragraphs:

      [30]  It is claimed that current staff will lose  their  jobs  if  the
      appellant has to leave .... All but one work part-time.  7 of them are
      European nationals from Romania and 1 is  from  Iraq.   The  appellant
      stated that 3 do not speak English at all, 2 speak  "broken"  English,
      and 2 speak English.  Another, the daughter of one of  the  employees,
      understands English and has been able to explain things to her  mother
      ...

      [31]  The appellant stated he  employed  those  from  other  countries
      because although he had attempted to employ native Scots,  they  found
      the work too hard and were unreliable so would phone in  sick  and  he
      did not have  enough  staff  to  cover  their  absence.   He  had  not
      advertised in the job centre.  He put a notice outside  his  premises.
      It appears that the Romanian employees have been introduced  by  other
      Romanians and the Iraqi employee by a mutual friend.

22. The decision goes on at [32 - 37]  to  record  the  evidence  led  from
    various employees, including their evidence that  lack  of  ability  in
    English prevented them from finding employment elsewhere.

23. Mr Caskie submitted  that  the  judge  gave  the  wrong  impression  by
    focusing on whether the appellant employed "native Scots";  should  not
    have probed into whether persons who were legally in the UK could speak
    English; and there was nothing relevant in [30- 31].

24. The respondent counters that any discriminatory  element  in  the  case
    arose from  the  appellant,  who  avoids  employing  "Scottish  people"
    because he considers them lazy,  and  instead  "utilizes  a  system  of
    nepotism", which is unlawful.

25. The retort for the appellant  is  that  criticism  of  the  appellant's
    employment practices is "an entirely new issue" which comes  too  late,
    and the submission on discrimination is "a primary school  approach  to
    equalities law".

26. These are not proceedings to decide whether the  appellant  engaged  in
    unlawful discrimination.  Such a finding would not be apt,  and  in  so
    far as the respondent's submissions seek one, they go too far.

27. However, those submissions do go to the heart of the main ground.   The
    issue is not new.

28. The judge's question, if it came out of the  blue,  might  appear  odd.
    But the respondent is correct that the question went to the  centre  of
    the case as the appellant chose to put  it,  namely  that  his  removal
    would cause job losses, to the detriment of  his  employees'  children,
    those employees being unable to find other work  due  to  inability  to
    speak English.  The grounds and submissions wrench the question out  of
    context.  It did not arise from a caprice  of  the  judge.   There  was
    nothing in it to cause a  fair-minded  observer,  having  followed  the
    proceedings to that stage, to suspect that the tribunal was biased.

29. Mr Caskie was at pains  throughout  to  emphasise  that  there  was  no
    contention of actual bias.  However, claims even of apparent bias in  a
    judge's question should be advanced within a fair representation of how
    it arose.  The submissions suggested that the judge embarked on her own
    exploration of language and ethnicity, but the matter  arose  precisely
    from the appellant's case.

30. Mr Caskie spent little time on the rest of the grounds.  They  complain
    that the appellant was not given longer  to  produce  further  evidence
    from HMRC, but he was given the time for which he asked,  and  even  if
    that was inadvisably short, he did not come back for an extension.   He
    has also failed to show that further time might have improved his case.
     At [77], in particular, the FtT identified commendable aspects of  the
    appellant's circumstances.  It is readily  understandable  that  he  is
    disappointed by his eventual lack of status to remain in the UK, but he
    has not shown that any more favourable findings might  reasonably  have
    been achieved.  The evidence that any child might be adversely affected
    was tenuous.  The grounds disagree on proportionality, but they do  not
    show that the judge erred by giving the appellant's contribution to the
    community and the best interests of the children  such  weight  as  she
    did.

31. The appellant has not established the main issue of apparent bias.  The
    rest of the grounds disclose no error by the judge on any point of law.
     The decision of the FtT shall stand.

32. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


        Hugh Macleman

      17 June 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




