
                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16545/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th July 2021                    |On 5th August 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'OEA'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
     Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Parsons, instructed by D J Webb & Co Solicitors

For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's refusal of his human rights claim, in the context of a
deportation order having been made against him as a "foreign criminal" (as
defined by section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act
2002). The deportation order was made as a consequence of his sentence of
one year's imprisonment, following his conviction on 12th June 2017 for
fraud involving credit cards in the region of �300,000, under the automatic
deportation provisions of section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  His index
offence was not his first conviction involving dishonesty. The appellant
had previously been convicted on 21st June 2012 of making false
representations (a cheque) for gain, for which he received a community
order.

In terms of his wider history, the appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, entered
the UK in June 2008 and entered into a relationship with a naturalised
British citizen, 'SA,' who herself was born in and lived in Nigeria until
aged 10, after which time she entered and subsequently settled in the UK,
some 25 years ago.  The appellant previously applied for an EEA residence
card on 17th March 2009, as a dependent of his uncle, an EEA national said
to be exercising free movement rights.  That the application was refused
and following the refusal, the appellant and SA were married on 19th May
2012.  It was shortly before his marriage that the appellant was convicted
of his first offence.  On 4th March 2013, he applied for leave to remain
based on his marriage to SA, which was refused.  The couple have gone on to
have two children, both British citizens born in the UK; a son, who I will
refer to as "child A", born on 24th of October 2013; and a daughter, "child
B", born on 8th July 2018.

The respondent's refusal of the appellant's application

In the meantime, the appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of
his role as a parent to child A on 22nd July 2014.  He was granted leave
until 5th May 2017.  Prior to the expiry of that leave, on 2nd May 2017,
the appellant applied for further leave to remain, which was refused on 7th
October 2019, following his conviction for the index offence.  The
respondent accepted that the appellant had, and continues to have, genuine
and subsisting relationships with both his British citizen wife and two
children, but concluded that the effect of deportation would not be unduly
harsh, either from the perspective of SA and the children relocating to
Nigeria (the so-called 'go' scenario); or the appellant being deported to
Nigeria with the remainder of the family remaining in the UK (the 'stay'
scenario).

Considering the appellant's private life, the respondent noted that the
appellant had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life and
there was no evidence that he had had any leave until the grant on 5th
November 2014.  The respondent did not accept that he was socially and
culturally integrated in the UK, accepting on the one hand, the period of
time he had been in the UK, including while employed, but on the other, his
criminal offending.  Moreover the respondent did not accept that there
would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
Nigeria, noting his previous claimed occupation as a banker; his
educational qualifications at degree level; and his employment in the
construction industry in the UK.

The respondent also concluded that there were not very compelling
circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 as set out in sections
117C(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act and refused his application.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision

Following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 20th January 2020, First-tier
Tribunal Judge Samini, (the 'FtT'), allowed the appellant's appeal.  The
respondent appealed and this Tribunal set aside the FtT's decision,
allowing the appeal, with the preserved concession that the appellant has
genuine and subsisting relationships with SA and his children.  The error-
of-law decision is annexed to these reasons.

The issues in this appeal

I identified and agreed with the representatives that the issues in this
case were:

whether the appellant meets the requirements of 'Exception 2' (section
117C(5) of the 2002 Act) - namely whether the effect of the appellant's
deportation on SA and the children would be unduly harsh, either in the
'stay' or 'go' scenarios.  In considering undue harshness I considered the
effect on SA, in the context of her claimed role as a carer for her own
mother; and the two childrens' best interests. In assessing undue
harshness, the appellant's offending is not relevant beyond the initial
point that deportation for foreign criminals is in the public interest;

whether there are very compelling circumstances over and above Exceptions 1
and 2, in the context of the appellant's family and private life, and also
noting the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act, as part of a
'balance sheet' assessment. In the context of the appellant's private life,
while it was accepted that the appellant had not been lawfully resident in
the UK for most of his life, his social and cultural integration in the UK
and very significant obstacles said to exist in relation to his integration
in Nigeria remain relevant.

The Hearing

I make initial observations about the evidence presented to me, to explain
the context of my later findings.  First, there was no agreed combined
bundle and regrettably, the parties needed to refer not only to a
supplementary bundle prepared for this hearing sent to this Tribunal on
28th June 2021, but also a version of a bundle before the First-tier
Tribunal, which it transpired was incomplete and necessitated the
representatives providing me with extra copies; a loose OASys Report, which
I had reviewed but which Ms Parsons did not have a copy of; and, as the
appellant began his oral evidence and when questioned about the lack of
evidence to support his assertions on a number of points, he referred to
evidence on his mobile phone having been sent to his solicitors and not
available to us.  I invited the appellant via his solicitors and Ms Parsons
to provide any additional evidence on which he wished to rely over the
lunch break.  The consequence of this is that there are at least five
separate sources with different page numbers to which I will need to refer
in this decision. Preparation of the bundles for this hearing was not
adequate.

Moreover, in terms of the witness evidence, whilst the appellant and SA
adopted witness statements in one of the bundles, these were brief and
their brevity necessitated Ms Parsons having to adduce extensive additional
oral evidence by way of examination-in-chief, of which Ms Isherwood had no
prior notice.  Whilst I do not draw adverse inferences from the lack of
detail in the written witness statements, there was no good reason why the
written witness statements could not have been more detailed in the first
place, particularly noting that they were relatively recent statements
dated 28th June 2021.

Finally, there was a lack of documentary evidence which could, in my view,
have been readily available to support various assertions of both the
appellant and SA.  Whilst I noted Ms Parsons' submission that I should not
draw adverse inferences from the lack of production of such evidence and in
particular, any failings on the appellant's solicitors' part to produce
this evidence, I accept Ms Isherwood's submission that I am also entitled
to consider the burden of proof as being upon the appellants and that where
they have failed to adduce evidence that could have been readily available,
I am entitled to consider the extent of the documentary evidence; and the
extent to which I am being asked to take the word of SA and the appellant,
particularly where that oral evidence amounts to general assertions,
lacking in detail.  To pick just three examples, the appellant claimed as
an obstacle to his integration into Nigeria, the fact that family members
in Nigeria relied upon his remittances.  There was a single remittance
advice in the first bundle and only when queried, did he then seek to rely
after the lunchtime break in the hearing on additional three months'
remittances from September to November 2020, detailing payments of some �35
in any one month.  This was despite discussions with him on the morning of
the hearing as to whether he might be able to obtain bank statements
electronically which might show a broader pattern of remittances (he did
not suggest that he could not adduce bank statements).

A second example is the couple's assertions about their support network
within the UK and in particular SA's six other siblings, a number of whom
live not too far away from the appellant's household, which comprises the
appellant; SA; their children; and SA's mother (they all live in SA's
home).  The issue was whether SA's siblings would, in the event of the
appellant's deportation, be willing to assist SA.  Whilst SA and the
appellant made general assertions that SA's six siblings would be unable to
assist because they were working and too busy, there was no other evidence
from any family members, whether by way of witness statement or attendance.
 Similarly, while there were references to SA's membership of her church
and the appellant spoke of his involvement in that church and guiding
younger members of the church in not repeating similar mistakes that he had
made in offending, there was no evidence from any church member or minister
as to his engagement in that church.

Even something as simple as whether the appellant was self-employed or
employed was not resolved adequately.  He had referred to a small number of
construction industry scheme payslips in his bundle, which appeared on the
one hand to suggest self-employment, whilst on the other, the appellant was
confused in his oral evidence and suggested that he had a contract of
employment.  No such contract or any correspondence from his putative
employer corroborating the appellant's assertion that they would re-employ
him once COVID restrictions were removed had been provided.

Having made these initial observations, I now turn to the witness evidence
of the appellant and his wife, SA.

The appellant's evidence

The appellant adopted his witness statements.   These recited his
immigration history as having entered the UK in 2008, shortly afterwards
meeting SA, with whom he entered into a relationship and proposed to her in
March 2010.  They were married in 2012 with a big wedding, and the
following year, their son, child A, was born.  The appellant did not in his
witness evidence deal anywhere about the consequences of his subsequent
imprisonment, for six months in 2017, but then moved on to discuss the
birth of his daughter in July 2018.  He added that SA's mother, with whom
they lived and who had dementia, took up a lot of SA's time.  He claimed to
have a "zero chance" of reoffending and nothing like that would ever happen
again.  He added in that context that he had worked full-time as an
interior decorator, beginning working via an agency in October 2017 but
working with them directly in June 2018.  They had promoted him to the
position of supervisor and he had subsequently received training in that
role.

He added that he would be unable to return to Nigeria as he supported his
mother and siblings there financially and they would struggle without his
support.  He would be unable to get employment there as he did not have the
resources to start his own business and did not have any connections there.


In oral evidence, the appellant claimed initially to have pleaded guilty to
the first offence whereas in fact the OASys Report indicated that he had
gone to trial and then was convicted.  When challenged he accepted that he
in fact had not pleaded guilty; had wished to do so, but his lawyer had
advised that he could not change his plea.

The appellant had lived with SA and his mother-in-law for the last six
years.  His mother-in-law's condition had deteriorated and she now required
"24 hour care" from SA.  It was only when the mother was sleeping that SA
could do anything else.  However, when questioned around childcare
arrangements for child A and the fact that child A travelled some distance
away to school in the Bexley area everyday, the appellant confirmed that SA
was in fact away travelling from the family home for around four hours each
day, comprising trips of an hour each way to take and then pick up child A.


The appellant asserted that he had been promised by his employer, when the
Covid lockdown ended, that he could return to work.   He had been carrying
out a supervisory role and reported back to his director about his team's
completion of work each day.  He had also worked for two years via the
"Sentinel" scheme in railway construction.

Whilst he accepted that in child A's birth certificate he had referred to
his occupation as a "banker", that only related to a banking qualification,
as his degree was in banking and he had never in fact worked as a banker.
In relation to child B, her birth certificate had referred to his
occupation as being in construction.  He said that he had not carried out
any job searches in Nigeria because the situation would be "hopeless".
Getting jobs in Nigeria depended upon connections and his family were not
in a position to support him.  His father had passed away in 2011.  Whilst
he had two brothers and a sister as well as an elderly 84 year old mother,
all four were dependent upon him.  When he was challenged about the extent
of the monthly remittances between September and November 2020 as amounting
in some cases to only �35 he suggested that this could last the entire
family a couple of weeks.  His mother was no longer in the family home and
was instead renting a property.  Whilst he was the eldest son, he had not
inherited the family property on his father's death because his father had
married twice and he had another sister who had inherited the property.
One of his brothers worked for a government ministry but there were
difficulties in the brother being paid and he had also a second brother who
was a doctor but once again there were difficulties in that brother being
paid and that brother was considering coming to the UK.  When the appellant
had been able to work, the family had made some savings and the family were
currently relying upon those savings to survive.

In terms of the appellant's mother's accommodation in Nigeria, it would be
large enough potentially for him to return and stay there, but it was in
poor condition and it would not be large enough for the entirety of the
family, including SA and children A and B to return with him.

In terms of the role he played in the UK, he enjoyed playing "rough and
tumble" with his children, checking his son's homework and playing football
with him and also dropping child B at nursery every day.  He accepted that
if permitted to stay, he would need to return to work financially.  He
accepted that if he did so, there would be a problem as no-one would be
able to look after SA's mother.  If he were returned to Nigeria, SA and the
children could not be expected to live there as he could not get the money
for a "luxury" life and they would not be able to cope.  When challenged
that there was no evidence of any savings, he said that he had transferred
money to a personal savings account, of which there was no disclosure.  He
was not able to comment on whether SA or her mother were receiving
benefits, as SA dealt with those matters.  He was also challenged on the
lack of evidence from his employer, which he had said he had provided to
his solicitor.  He claimed to be employed and specifically had signed a
contract of employment, albeit none was provided. He initially suggested
being unable to work since last March but then suggested that he had in
fact worked until last October.  His employer was allowing him to look for
jobs and he had created a CV and was looking online for jobs in the UK.  He
was not receiving furlough pay.

When challenged as to whether he was relying upon his mother-in-law
financially, as page [12] of the OASys report said that he relied on her
financially, as she received benefits, he said that the OASys report was
not accurate.  He added that he was not in contact with the people with
whom he had been involved in the criminal fraud and his life was focussed
on going to work and coming back home as well as engaging with church
attendees and in particular younger people whom he sought to guide.  When
it was put to him that the OASys Report referred explicitly in May 2018 to
him continuing to maintain contact with criminal associates (page [12] of
the report) he disputed this.  When it was suggested to him that he had
provided no up-to-date evidence in relation to child A's school and who was
looking after both child A and also SA's mother whilst the couple were
attending court, he suggested that SA had made arrangements with her
sisters or brother.  He then he clarified SA's brother was supposed to be
at the house and would drop child A at school.  When challenged as to
whether this meant that SA's mother would be left by herself today, he
accepted that she would be, for a time.  When asked whether SA would have a
wealth of family support were the appellant returned to Nigeria, he
disputed this, saying that they all had financial problems of their own and
that any role they would play would never replace his role in caring for
his children.  When challenged that the medical evidence did not support
the contention that SA's mother could not be left alone, he again disputed
this.

In relation to the issue of whether he could return to Nigeria, the
appellant said that he had only recently revealed to his mother about his
criminal conviction and he had not discussed the matter with child A's
school in the UK.  He spoke regularly with both his mother and siblings in
Nigeria, every few weeks.  He spoke English at home.  Whilst he wife's
language was Urhobo and his was Yoruba, he had spoken Yoruba to his son to
try and impart some knowledge of that language with him.

In terms of his support for relatives in Nigeria, when it was suggested to
him that he had not disclosed enough evidence to suggest that they were
entirely reliant upon the appellant, he clarified that they were not
entirely reliant on him, but his contributions made enough of an impact on
their daily living, for example, helping to pay for a carer for his mother.

The appellant disputed ever having worked in Nigeria apart from a brief
period in 2005 when he was used for "errands" by his uncle.  In terms of
his university education, this was paid for by his father, who had sold
shares.  His mother had worked as a teacher and although she was receiving
a pension, this was only intermittent.

When asked about the effects during his period of imprisonment on child A,
he said that SA had attempted to distract child A by taking him to various
places and SA had indicated that she had struggled to cope.



SA's evidence

SA recited the couple's immigration history and the fact that they had a
large wedding in the UK (750 guests had attended) and she had a large
family in the UK, with six siblings, including two brothers living in Kent;
one sister who lived 10 minutes' drive away; and three brothers who lived
30 minutes' to an hour's drive away.  However, SA had always been the
closest to her mother, as her older siblings had left home many years ago.
She no longer had any connections in Nigeria and had only visited it on a
couple of occasions in the last 25 years, including taking child A to
Nigeria for a couple of weeks.  In oral evidence she had suggested that her
sister lived at least half an hour away as opposed to 10 minutes away and
said that the witness statement reference to 10 minutes was in error.  She
explained that her mother's dementia had become more problematic after
2017, following the appellant's release from prison, and she was her
mother's primary carer.  Her mother would not be able to cope without SA.
Her siblings would not be able to assist in SA's absence if she accompanied
the appellant to Nigeria, as they all had their own families.  They could,
on particular occasions assist.  For example, the medical correspondence at
page [25] of one of the appellant's bundles had referred to a sister
accompanying the mother on that occasion to the medical appointment, but it
was generally SA who fulfilled this role.  SA accepted that were the
appellant allowed to stay in the UK, he would resume working and she had
not been able to think yet how to juggle matters if the appellant were at
work and she had to look after the children and her mother (SA was not
currently working).  The appellant had been very helpful to her during the
COVID pandemic.

During the appellant's absence in prison, SA had struggled to cope.  Child
A had kept asking about the appellant and they had initially told child A
that he was at work, but after a number of occasions she had to take him to
Belmarsh prison.  The couple were currently financially coping, although
running down their savings.  Were the appellant returned to Nigeria, SA
would have to rely upon state support and her "fate would be sealed".
There was nothing to return to in Nigeria and it had a very different
culture from the UK and she had no support there.   She also had the wider
support network of her UK church and she also explained about child A's
excellent educational attainment in the UK.  She accepted that her mother
could be left for several hours each day, albeit she had been fainting and
the extreme fatigue had started a few months ago.  It was put to SA, and
she accepted, that she would often be out of the house for four hours each
day, but her mother was left alone with a timetable for breakfast, lunch
and when she should take her insulin.  She could be left alone when SA went
out shopping.  Her siblings would not be able to assist SA, were the
appellant returned to Nigeria.  Whilst she had discussed this with them,
she accepted that she had not provided any witness statements from them.
She accepted that her mother did not receive carer's allowance, but she had
only recently applied for this and she was only in receipt of child
benefits.  She had been unaware of any entitlement to carers allowance and
social services, in particular, had not provided any support to the family.



The appellant's submissions

In very broad summary, Ms Parsons went through the various provisions of
sections 117B to D of the 2002 Act.  Whilst she accepted that there was not
all of the evidence that might have been adduced, there was plainly
sufficient evidence to conclude that Exception 2 was met and/or that there
were very compelling circumstances.  Put simply, SA's mother was at an
advanced stage of dementia, with all of the consequences that that
condition entailed.  The circumstances of SA leaving, namely the "go"
scenario, was therefore entirely impractical.  Similarly, if SA were to
stay without the appellant, that would rupture the family entirely and SA
would be left struggling to cope with both two young children and her
mother.  It was speculative as to what support, if any, would be provided
by the state and any support would never be a replacement for SA.  Child A
had excelled at school and there would necessarily be a substantial impact
on him.  Referring to other considerations under section 117B, the couple
both spoke English; the appellant had worked; in terms of the offending,
the fact that the appellant had not offended in the five years since his
period of imprisonment, even where, as here, he had been unable to work
because of the COVID pandemic, was testament to his likely rehabilitation.

The respondent's submissions

Ms Isherwood's primary contention was the absence of evidence and the
burden of proof.  In terms of social and cultural integration, there was no
evidence from the church with which the appellant claimed to be involved
and no evidence from the employer for whom the appellant claimed to provide
work.  The same problem undermined any assertions around significant
obstacles to integration in Nigeria.  It was far from clear that there was
complete evidence.  The remittances were simply not sufficient to
demonstrate a dependent family in Nigeria.  Moreover, whereas on the one
hand, the appellant had asserted that his mother was not living in the
original family home and renting a home, SA had referred to her as still do
doing so and also there being potentially two family homes in Nigeria.  It
was also simply not credible that SA's brother, a doctor, would be relying
on the appellant for remittances and even on the appellant's case, his
relatives were not entirely reliant upon him and clearly had their own
sources of income which had not been disclosed.

In terms of Exception 2, what was striking about this case was the absence
of any substantive evidence about the children.  Child A appeared to be
doing very well at school but there was no independent social work report
about the extent of the appellant's engagement with child A or what impact,
if any, his removal would have.  Similarly, there had been a telling lack
of consistency with SA claiming that she and her husband never spoke any
language other than English at home whilst the appellant made it clear that
he did.  Both witnesses had made it clear that they continued to have an
interest in Nigerian news and the appellant himself continued to have
regular contact with his relatives in Nigeria.  The appellant had practical
experience in the UK including two years in the construction industry and
both he and his wife were educated to degree level.  Even if the "go"
scenario were not realistic, the "stay" scenario was not unduly harsh.  SA
had a large family within the UK, a number of whom lived in close
proximity.  It was simply not enough to make the bald assertion that they
would be unable or unwilling to assist SA in circumstances where no
evidence had been adduced.  Also, whilst it was said that SA's mother had
advanced dementia, clearly we did not have the full picture as it had only
emerged during oral evidence that in fact SA left her own mother for at the
very least four hours each day whilst she was travelling to collect child A
and also on other occasions during shopping.  At the very least, the
appellant's assertion that she required 24 hour care was plainly not
credible.  There were also real concerns about the extent to which the
appellant's assertions about being re-employed and getting further work
were credible in circumstances where there was no contract or documentation
to that effect.  In the circumstances, neither the "stay" nor the "go"
scenarios were unduly harsh and there were certainly not very compelling
circumstances.

The Law

I do not recite lengthy passages from the law. Instead, I set out the
relevant statutory provisions, without gloss, and the core principles.

Sections 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
provide:

     "PART 5A

     Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

117A Application of this Part

(1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to determine
whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

(a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life under
Article 8, and

(b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
1998.

(2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
must (in particular) have regard -

(a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

(b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
considerations listed in section 117C.

(3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means the question
of whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private and
family life is justified under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases

(1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.

(2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because
persons who can speak English -

(a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because
such persons -

(a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(4)  Little weight should be given to-

(a)  a private life, or

(b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                       that is established by a person at a time when the
                  person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

(5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

(6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where-

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom.

         117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
    foreign criminals

(1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

(2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

(3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced to
a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

(4) Exception 1 applies where-

(a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
life,

(b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

(c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.

(5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

(6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

(7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted."

A person must meet an increasing scale of hurdles, to succeed in a human
rights appeal, ranging from a person who is not liable to deportation at
all, who may succeed on the basis of Section 117B(6), to the most
significant hurdle for foreign criminals who have been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of four years or more (not this appellant's case).
The appellant is in the middle, in the sense that section 117C applies to
him, but his offence is not so serious as to have resulted in a sentence of
four years or more.  Even where he cannot meet 'Exception 1', I can
nevertheless consider his circumstances through the initial lens of parts
of Exception 1 when considering "very compelling circumstances".

Bearing in mind the cases of HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176; AA
(Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296; and KB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2020] EWCA
Civ 1385, when considering "unduly harsh", I do not apply any notion of
exceptionality or an baseline of the "ordinary" effects of deportation on
"any" child.  I accept that every assessment of "unduly harsh" must have as
its focus the effects on SA; child A; and child B.  The wording "unduly
harsh" reflects section 117C(1), that the deportation of foreign criminals
is in the public interest, so it does not start off as a neutral
evaluation, but in the context of that public interest, the focus remains
on the effects on the children.  Unduly harsh effects may be common place
and are highly fact-specific, particularly as they centre on the effects on
individual children, including (but only as examples and not as a 'tick-
list') their ages; educational and emotional needs; and the role played by
the potential deportee parent.

In the assessment of "very compelling circumstances", which reflects the
strong public interest in deportation, such a public interest still has a
moveable quality, i.e. the public interest may not have the same weight for
all serious foreign criminals; and at its heart, it is helpful to assess
very compelling circumstances through the "balance-sheet" approach,
weighing on the one hand, the factors in the appellant's favour,
holistically, against the strong (but not immovable) public interest in
deportation.  Factors which can be relevant (although of varying weights
and which again are examples, and not an exhaustive list) include: the
nature of the offence (for example, whether it includes an element of
violence), its seriousness and the appellant's role in the offence, as
often reflected in the sentencing Judge's remarks; the extent of
rehabilitation and likelihood of reoffending; the depth of the appellant's
integration in the UK and quality of his relations with his wife children;
whether the family could be expected to move to Nigeria, noting that SA;
child A and child B are British citizens; whether his relationship could be
sustained after his removal; the need to promote the children's' welfare;
and the obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria (noting that
this is a broad evaluative assessment, with the concept of being "insider"
meaning the appellant having enough of an understanding of how Nigeria
works to be able to participate in it, be accepted within it, operate day-
to-day and build up a network of relationships there).

Whether or not there are very compelling circumstances, I also need to
consider the wider section 117B factors.

Findings of fact and discussion

I considered all of the evidence presented to me, whether I refer to it
specifically in these findings or not.

I am prepared to accept, just, that the appellant remains socially and
culturally integrated into the UK.  This is on the basis that the appellant
has been released from prison since 2017, following which time he has
worked for at least a period for an interior decorating company, even if he
is not employed by them.  I find that he is an independent contractor and
not an employee.  I reach this finding based on the construction industry
scheme ('CIS') documents, which suggest that he is a contractor; the fact
that he has not produced a contract of employment nor any document
supporting his assertion that he is guaranteed re-employment on the end of
the COVID restriction or any evidence of furlough payments.   Nevertheless,
despite being self-employed, the limited CIS pay documents (including
"invoice number 27" of 5th November 2020, suggesting at least 26 prior
invoices in question), indicates a pattern of work over a significant
period, as well as, on the appellant's account, that he has previous worked
in the construction industry via the railway "Sentinel" scheme, which
validates the safety of railway workers (I was shown the appellant's
"Sentinel" card).  By virtue of his continued working and also his
involvement with, and engagement in, taking his son's education, which was
reflected in a brief letter from child A's school, which refers to his
parents as being supportive and attending all pupil consultation meetings
(the letter was dated 4th December 2019, so postdates the appellant's
release from prison), I am satisfied that the appellant remains integrated
in the UK, notwithstanding his offending; and notwithstanding his
continuing contact with former criminal associates (I prefer the evidence
of the OASys report dated May 2018, noting that is likely to be objective,
whereas the appellant, with two convictions for dishonesty, as well as
clear inconsistencies in other parts of his oral evidence, is less likely
to be objective).

I find that there are not very significant obstacles to the appellant's
integration into Nigeria for the purposes of his private life, on the
evidence before me, which is scant.  He is in regular communication with
his relatives in Nigeria and accepts that he would have accommodation to
move to, were he returned there.  Whilst he is adamant that he would be
unable to work as he had been able to do so prior to leaving Nigeria and
would return without sufficient connections to do so, I am not satisfied
that he would not return to Nigeria as an "insider".  He is educated to
degree level but more importantly has practical experience in both
construction work as well as having IT qualifications, and ongoing, good
relationships with family members including his mother, who, albeit
elderly, is somebody with whom he himself has close connections, and two
brothers, one of whom is a doctor.  He accepts that he has not carried out
any job searches whatsoever in Nigeria and in fact complains more that he
would not be able to afford a "luxury" standard of living in Nigeria in the
context of resettling with his family there.  Whilst I accept that this
comment was made in the context of considering the viability of the entire
family's return, it is clear in my mind that the appellant resists return
in respect of his private life, not because of any real obstacles to
integration but because he desires a better "luxury" standard of living
than one which he would expect to have in Nigeria.

I am also far from satisfied that I have been provided with the full
picture of the family's assets and circumstances in Nigeria.  He
specifically stated that his mother was no longer living in the family home
he had lived in and was instead living in separate, rented accommodation,
with a leaking roof.  In contrast, SA confirmed that the mother remained
living in the family home; she had seen pictures of it and while it was not
in good condition, she referred to the existence of a second family home,
although when asked further details, she disclaimed any further knowledge
as she had "a lot on her mind".

I find that the partial picture I have been presented with, of limited
remittances and conflicting evidence between the appellant and SA, suggests
that the family in Nigeria have more substantial resources than they are
willing to admit to.  I am satisfied that the appellant would be able to
integrate into Nigeria were he returned there, noting he had lived there
until the age of 30; was educated to degree level; and has practical work
experience in construction in the UK, including work of a responsible
nature, as reflected in the safety requirements of the Sentinel scheme.  I
do not accept the suggestion that there is no construction work available
in Nigeria.

I turn to the effects of deportation on SA; by extension her mother; and
also their children, "A" and "B".  In this context, I start by saying that
I have been told virtually nothing about child B other than her age (3
years' old) and she is a British citizen and it is not suggested that there
are any health or other particular difficulties that might present
obstacles in the event either of the family returning to Nigeria as one
unit; or which point to the effect of deportation in the event that the
remainder of the appellant's family stay in the UK.

Turning next to child A's best interests, I know a little more, albeit
there has been no independent social worker report, rather a standard end-
of-year school report dated July 2019. From that report, child A appears to
be excelling at school (and SA confirms continues to do so) and at the age
of 7, will be at an important stage in his education; but I know little
more than that from an educational perspective, other than there was not,
when child A was attending nursery during the period of the appellant's
imprisonment, any apparent impact on his engagement in school, for example
any behavioural problems or difficulties.  Indeed the current school are
not aware of the appellant's prior offending or imprisonment and the school
have not, probably for that reason, commented on the impact of the
appellant's imprisonment. SA described his behaviour as withdrawn, while
the appellant was in prison, which I am prepared to accept, but there is no
evidence of any long-term impact.  In making the comment, I am conscious
that child A was far younger (the appellant was released in 2017); and the
period of imprisonment, reduced for parole, was for a relatively brief
period of six months and that the effect of deportation is for a period of
at least 10 years.

However, also considering the full picture of child A on the very limited
evidence, I find that that the appellant and SA have not given consistent
evidence and SA has attempted to downplay the extent to which any languages
other than English are spoken at home.  The appellant made clear that he
does speak Yoruba to child A and in the context of the wider family network
within the UK and regular contact between the appellant and relatives in
Nigeria, I am also satisfied that child A will have been exposed to the
Nigerian diaspora community, albeit I also accept that child A has only
visited Nigeria to see his paternal relatives on one occasion, when very
young.

In considering the "go" scenario, the relocation of child A to Nigeria with
the appellant would in my view only be realistic if SA similarly relocated
with him.  As I have already indicated, I am not satisfied that I have the
full picture in relation to the family's resources and connections within
Nigeria.  I do not accept as more than an assertion that on the event of
the family's relocation as a whole to Nigeria, that they would be without
adequate accommodation; without family connections and without the ability
of child A and child B to access suitable education.  Where I refer to
suitable education I do not state that the level of education would
necessarily be at the same level as the standard in London, where child A
goes to school but given the absence of evidence about the family's assets
and their historic ability to fund the appellant through a period of
graduate level education, as well, on the appellant's account, not carrying
out substantive work until the age of 30 when he came to the UK, I am not
satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that if child A were returned
with his parents as part of a family unit to Nigeria even though he is a
British citizen that this would be unduly harsh.  The viability of doing so
in turn depends on the ability of SA to similarly relocate with the
appellant and in that context I have considered SA's caring role and
arrangements for her mother.  I accept from the medical correspondence from
the mother's doctor, dated 17th June 2021, that the mother has advanced
dementia and a number of other complex medical needs.  However, I accept
the criticism of Ms Isherwood that beyond a list of diagnosed conditions,
there is little discussion about the consequences and effects of those
conditions upon SA's mother.  There is a reference to dizziness and
fatigue, with recommendations for fluid intake; good diet; exercise and
mindfulness exercises; and in another letter dated 4th November 2019 to
disorientation and an episode of delirium in 2019 for which she was
admitted to hospital.  However, I do not find as reliable the appellant's
assertions about the effects of dementia upon the mother.  On the one hand,
the appellant asserted that his mother-in-law relies upon 24 hour care from
SA, and the only break was when the mother slept; whereas on SA's own
evidence, her mother was left alone for at least four hours each day prior
to lockdown, during the period when the appellant was working as recently
as last October; and that is just in relation to the school drop-offs and
not also in relation to any shopping visits where SA also mentioned leaving
her mother alone.

While I accept that SA plays a primary role in caring for her mother, I
find that the extent of that caring role is exaggerated, and I do not
accept the assertion, which is no more than that, that SA's extensive
family, a number of whom live nearby, no more than 10 minutes away, or even
on SA's account, half an hour away, would, in the event of the family's
relocation as a whole to Nigeria, be unable or unwilling to assist SA's
mother.  The lack of any evidence whatsoever with regard to any social
services assessment, including, for example respite or domiciliary care is
relevant not only to the extent of her current condition, which in my view
is not explained simply by SA's assertion that she carries out the care
when, as is now apparent, she leaves her for extended periods of time; but
also the lack of a full picture in relation to the role that other family
members play.  SA, on her own account, has a large family within the UK;
close relationships with fellow church members within the UK; the
accommodation of SA's mother in fact belongs to the mother and the mother
is, according to page [12] of OASys report, in receipt of benefits and
indeed has in fact financially supported the appellant himself.

Whilst the arrangements may currently be that SA provides a substantial
amount of care to her mother, I do not accept that such roles would not be
taken by members of SA's immediate family in conjunction with support from
the local authority in the context of a professional domiciliary carer if
necessary.  I do not accept Mr Parsons' submission that a finding of such
assistance is speculative - it reflects the large family of SA's mother,
living near to her; and the absence of any evidence explaining why they
would not assist and why social services will not also fulfil any statutory
obligations to assist SA's mother.

In considering further whether SA's ability to return to Nigeria would be
unduly harsh I am conscious that she has not returned to Nigeria for more
than a couple of occasions in 25 years and that in reality the majority if
not all of her relatives are now in the UK and she has no substantive
friendship or networks within Nigeria.  That being said, the appellant is
in regular contact with his family in Nigeria and for the same reasons that
I regard the full picture as not having been provided in relation to his
family relations, I also conclude that the real picture is likely to be of
SA returning with the appellant and their children to suitable
accommodation; education; and where SA is educated to degree level, with
practical experience of setting up her own business, albeit a business that
ultimately did not prosper in the UK.  There has been no attempt to explore
the possibility of jobs in Nigeria.  Considering the evidence as a whole, I
am not satisfied that the "go" scenario would be unduly harsh.

In relation to the "stay" scenario, namely where SA and the couple's
children remain in the UK but the appellant is removed to Nigeria, I
conclude that the effects of this would not be unduly harsh.  SA does not
currently work.  She currently provides the primary care for her mother.
The effect of the appellant's deportation would not be to deprive the
family of accommodation or their current home setting or family network.
The couple have already explained that were the appellant allowed to remain
in the UK, he would in fact immediately seek work and so in reality the
couple would need to make suitable arrangements whereby SA would be able to
cope alone at least during working hours with her mother and also in
relation to arrangements for the children.  I do not minimise the impact of
the support for SA which the appellant provides outside working hours and
his exclusion for many years from the UK.  However, from a purely practical
perspective, I am satisfied that were the appellant removed, the
consequence of this would not be the loss of any accommodation and I am
also satisfied that in terms of finances, SA and the children, would at
least, receive financial state support, including if SA does not return to
work, the possibility of carer's allowance for her mother, for which SA has
already applied.  I am also satisfied that in the same way that SA's
relatives would assist SA's mother in the event of the entire family
relocating, similarly if the appellant alone were removed, SA's relatives
would provide substantial practical and, if necessary, financial support
for SA and her children alone in the UK.

In relation to other effects upon SA and her children, on the one hand I am
conscious that her looking after her mother and the children would be
draining and necessarily mean less time spent by SA in providing
supervision and care for her children, a role which the appellant has
played during the COVID pandemic to a greater extent.  There is no evidence
of the emotional impact on SA and her children beyond the fact of SA's
absence.  I do not fall into the trap of considering what the "ordinary"
consequences of deportation would be.  Rather, I reflect that there is
simply no evidence beyond the practical consequences (which would in my
view be substantially mitigated) as to what emotional impact, if any, there
would be upon SA and her children.  I know nothing at all about child B;
and child A has performed excellently at school, even starting off in an
educational setting when his father was imprisoned.  In summary, the
appellant has simply not adduced sufficient evidence to demonstrate that
the effect of deportation in the "stay" scenario would be unduly harsh.

I next considered the question of whether there were very compelling
circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2.  I take as my starting
point the public interest in deportation.  I accept that the appellant's
sentence was at the lower end of the scale in terms of automatic
deportation, namely only one year and was not one of violence, albeit it
was as part of a large-scale fraud.  As recorded in the sentencing remarks
of the Woolwich Crown Court of 12th June 2017 , the appellant was part of a
fraud involving 487 attempts to make purchases of �300,000, of which 168
transactions were successful, resulting in a loss of �167,000, albeit the
appellant was only personally implicated with ten victims and 25
transactions, and was not the "hub", but had been dishonest before, which
was seen as aggravating.  Moreover, none of the defendants, including the
appellant, had attempted to assist the authorities with any information to
get to the bottom of the fraud.

I also take into account as a positive factor that author of the OASys
report records a low risk of reoffending and this is reinforced by the fact
that the appellant has not reoffended since his release in 2017, albeit in
circumstances where he receives financial support from his mother-in-law
and brother-in-law, as indicated in the OASys report. I do not place
additional weight on his claim to carry out a form of  mentoring with
younger church members, given the absence of any substantive evidence,
beyond his bare assertion, but I also take into account that the appellant
has been seeking to work and, in that context, re-integrate within the
local community.

I take into account in particular that the best interests of the
appellant's children are to remain with their family as a single family
unit and I also find on a real world analysis that in the event of the
appellant's deportation, SA is likely to stay with her mother and the two
children in the UK, so that they will have limited contact with their
father, albeit the opportunity for occasional visits and regular contact
via social media and internet telecommunication.  As a consequence, the
children's best interests will not be met by the fracturing of the family.
On the other hand I am satisfied that the remaining family unit within the
UK, namely of SA, her mother and the two children and wider immediate
family in the UK, will remain a strong and loving family unit, which would
have a real mitigating impact on the adverse effects of the appellant's
deportation.

I take into account that the appellant has been in the UK since 2008
(albeit for much of which, without leave) and in the context of his work
history, is unlikely to be a burden on taxpayers.  He remains integrated in
UK society and has close relations with his wife and children. I also bear
in mind that he would return to Nigeria, where he lived until aged 30, as
an "insider", with family, access to accommodation; and necessary
experience to obtain work.

Weighing all of these factors, there would not, in my view in the
circumstances be very compelling circumstances over and above Exceptions 1
and 2 already outlined for the purposes of Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act.
The public interest in deportation, even noting the lower end of offending,
is not outweighed by the factors relating to the appellant's private and
family life, in the context of the very limited evidence provided.

In relation to the wider article 8 analysis and section 117B of the 2002
Act, I take into account that the appellant has been in the UK since 2008.
He remains integrated in UK society.  I accept that the family unit all
speak English and the appellant has worked, so he is not a burden on the UK
taxpayer.  I also take into account that for part of the period when he was
in the UK between 2014 and 2017 that he had leave to remain, albeit that
both his private life and indeed his initial family life with SA was
established when he had no leave to remain.  Weighing the effects of his
deportation upon SA and his two children, I conclude that the significant
impact upon them is mitigated to a substantial extent both by SA's
supportive family within the UK and also by the extent of the family's
resources within Nigeria, noting in reality that it is likely that SA will
choose to remain the UK with the couple's children and her mother.

In the circumstances, whilst the impact will be significant, refusal of
leave to remain is proportionate, for the purposes of an article 8
assessment.  As a consequence, the appellant's appeal against the refusal
of his human rights claim fails and is dismissed.



Decision

59. The appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   22nd July 2021






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has failed and so there can be no fee award.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   22nd July 2021




ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16545/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And via Skype                        |                                     |
|On 1st December 2020                 |On 18th December 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THORNTON
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    'OEA'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were
    given orally at the end of the hearing on 1st December 2020.

 2. Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and the Tribunal
    panel attended the hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did
    not object to attending via Skype and we were satisfied that the
    representatives were able to participate in the hearing.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Samini, who, following a hearing at Harmondsworth on
    20th January 2020, allowed the appeal of the respondent (hereafter,
    'Claimant') of the Secretary of State's refusal on 7th October 2019 of
    his human rights claim, in the context of deportation order having been
    made against him on the same date.  The deportation order was made
    under the automatic deportation provisions of Section 32 of the UK
    Borders Act 2007.  The Claimant's most recent offending had resulted in
    a sentence of one year's imprisonment, following his conviction on 12th
    June 2017 for conspiring/making false representations to make gain for
    himself or another, specifically he had been involved in a fraud of
    obtaining personal details of victims' credit cards, with a conspiracy
    to make purchases in the region of �300,000.

 4.  The Secretary of State accepted in the human rights refusal that the
    Claimant had two British national children, born in October 2013 and
    July 2018, with whom he had a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship.  The Secretary of State also accepted that the Claimant
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his wife, 'SA'.
     The Secretary of State did not accept that it would be unduly harsh
    for the Claimant's children to live in Nigeria with SA and him (whilst
    SA was a British citizen, she had been born and spent part of her
    childhood in Nigeria, up to the age of 10).  The Claimant had lived in
    Nigeria until the age of 30.

 5. In the alternative, the Secretary of State did not accept that it would
    be unduly harsh for the Claimant's children and SA to remain in the UK
    without him.  The children could be cared for by SA, who would have
    family support in the UK, as she had six siblings living in the UK.

 6. In respect of the Claimant's private life, the Secretary of State noted
    that the Claimant had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
    his life. She did not accept his social and cultural integration, in
    light of the limited period of time he had been in the UK, during which
    he had received two convictions for dishonesty, in 2012 and 2017.  The
    Secretary of State considered, but did not accept, that there were very
    compelling circumstances in respect of the Claimant's case.



The FtT's decision

 7. The Judge referred, albeit incorrectly, to the Claimant not being
    liable to automatic deportation (paragraph [7] of her decision) but
    nevertheless went on to consider the automatic deportation provisions
    of section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
    That error is therefore not one that we regard as material.  The Judge
    concluded at paragraph [14] that the Claimant had integrated in the UK,
    both socially and culturally and there is no appeal against that
    finding.  The Judge continued (at paragraph [14]) as follows:

         "if the appellant is deported, the appellant's wife [name redacted]
         would be left without  a  source  of  emotional  and  psychological
         support, as well as the appellant's proactive parental role in  his
         children's lives.  Having heard both the  appellant  and  his  wife
         give evidence, it  is  clear  that  he  does  regret  his  criminal
         behaviour and has made his best efforts to make  amends  by  having
         undertaken  various  training  courses  in  order  to  improve  his
         employment  prospect  as  decorator  working  in  the  construction
         industry.  The appellant has been financially supporting his family
         in this capacity since his release from prison two years ago.   The
         appellant and his  wife  both  care  for  their  children  and  the
         appellant is the main breadwinner in the  family.   In  considering
         the issue of welfare of the appellant's child,  I  have  regard  to
         section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration act 2009.   I
         find that in  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  appellant's
         deportation would mean that his children would be left without  the
         main source of financial support as well as the parental care  that
         the appellant provides for his children.  The appellant's  wife  is
         the main care provider for her mother who suffers with diabetes and
         dementia, and that is one of  the  main  reasons  that  she  cannot
         relocate to Nigeria where she has  no  family  or  connections  and
         where she has not lived since she was 10 years  old.   I  find  the
         totality  of  the  said  factors  do  render  the  effect  of   the
         appellant's deportation  on  the  appellant's  wife,  children  and
         mother-in-law would be unduly harsh."

 8. The Judge went on to cite the well-known authorities of MM (Uganda)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 167 and KO (Nigeria) UKSC [2018] 53, and at paragraph
    [17] stated that the Claimant's removal would mean that his children
    would be deprived of a meaningful relationship with their father.  The
    Claimant's children were settled at school, the oldest being seven
    years old in October 2020.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The Secretary of State raised the following grounds in her appeal:

      a) (1)  The Judge's reasoning that the effect of the Claimant's
         deportation would be unduly harsh was limited to the deprivation of
         a meaningful relationship with the Claimant and a loss of financial
         support.  That was not sufficient, bearing in mind the authority of
         SSHD V PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.  The Judge's findings
         suggested that the effect of the Claimant's deportation would
         merely be inconvenient and discomforting, but nothing amounting to
         severe or bleak consequences.

      b) (2)  The Judge failed to consider what the unduly harsh effects
         would be if the entire family relocated to Nigeria.  The Judge
         failed to consider what assistance the Claimant's relatives in
         Nigeria could provide in the event of the family's relocation.

      c) (3)  The Judge had failed to consider and analyse that SA's
         presence in the UK was not required to support her mother, because
         the mother could receive adequate care from the many other family
         members in the UK; and medical professionals and social services.

      d) (3)  The Judge had erred in concluding, at paragraph [18], that the
         Secretary of State's decision to refuse the human rights claim was
         disproportionate.  There had been no consideration of the
         seriousness of the Claimant's offence, with a strong public
         interest in deporting the Claimant.  The lack of further offending
         was, at best, a neutral point that assessment.  The Judge had
         failed to refer to any of the relevant statutory provisions or case
         law.

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan initially refused permission to
    appeal, but permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on
    28th May 2020.  She regarded the Judge's reasons for concluding that
    the effect of the Claimant's deportation, if SA and his children were
    to remain in the UK without the Claimant, as arguably inadequate.  She
    granted permission on all grounds.

The hearing before us

Preliminary issue on extension of time

11. A preliminary issue arose on whether we should extend time to admit the
    Secretary of State's appeal. Our reasons for extending time to admit
    the application are set out below. This issue was quite properly raised
    before us by Ms Jegarajah at the beginning of the hearing when, as we
    normally do, we went through and checked our understanding of the
    issues before us.  Ms Jegarajah helpfully provided a timeline, which
    was as follows:

      a) The refusal of permission by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chohan)
         had been promulgated on 9th April 2020.

      b) Applying the time limit in the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, rule 21(3)(aa) requires that an application be made 14
         days after the date on which notice of the First-tier Tribunal's
         refusal of permission was sent to the to the parties. Even ignoring
         the date of promulgation of the refusal decision, the time-limit
         expired, absent an extension, on 23rd April 2020.

      c) The Secretary of State renewed her application to the Upper
         Tribunal for permission on 5th May 2020, so 12 days out of time.

12. Ms Jegarajah also drew our attention to the fact that although it was
    only touched on in her skeleton argument, the time issue had been
    raised previously in correspondence with Upper Tribunal Lawyers in an
    email of 10th April 2020, prior to the Upper Tribunal's grant of
    permission, and the Claimant's representatives had suggested that this
    should be resolved by way of preliminary issue.

13. Ms Jegarajah raised was she described as an observation that there was
    a difference in treatment by the Upper Tribunal Lawyers, between on the
    one hand, the approaches of Tribunal Lawyers to breaches of time limits
    by an individual appellant, such as in this case, where the Tribunal
    Lawyer had chased, upon the Claimant's failure to file a skeleton
    argument in time, as opposed to the lack of similar proactivity where
    the Secretary of State had breached a time-limit.  When we discussed
    with Ms Jegarajah whether this was a specific issue that she was asking
    us to resolve, for the purpose of considering whether to extend time,
    she confirmed that she did not ask to us resolve that asserted
    difference in treatment, but merely asked for her observation to be
    recorded.

14. She then went on to refer to the principles for whether to grant an
    extension of time in R (Onowu) v First-tier Tribunal (IAC) (extension
    of time for appealing: principles) IJR [2016] UKUT 185. We discussed
    with her those principles, which she agreed as applicable: first,
    account has to be taken of the seriousness of the breach of the Rules.
    The more serious the breach, the less likely it is that relief will be
    granted.  Second, account has to be taken for the reasons for the
    breach.  If there is a good reason, it is more likely that relief will
    be granted.  Third, all of the circumstances of the case have to be
    considered, having particular regard to the factors highlighted by the
    Overriding Objective.  Particular care has to be given to asylum and
    humanitarian rights cases, to ensure that appeals are not frustrated by
    representatives' failures to comply with time limits.  In most cases
    the merits of the case will not be relevant unless it can be seen
    without much investigation that the grounds are either very strong or
    very weak.

15. Ms Jegarajah asserted that in granting permission, Judge Kamara had
    failed to engage with the timeliness of the application and had simply
    granted permission. The Claimant's representatives had written again in
    August 2020, raising the time issue with the Tribunal.  First, the
    delay was 12 days, so not a brief delay.  Second, there had been, to-
    date, no explanation provided by the Secretary of State for the delay.
    Third, the merits of the appeal were exemplified in the generalised
    nature of the Secretary of State's challenge. The time limit issue had
    been raised in the skeleton argument, and the Claimant, who had
    succeeded in resisting deportation, would be adversely affected by a
    grant of permission.  We reviewed where in the skeleton argument
    (running to some 36 paragraphs) the issue was raised.  It was raised,
    in one sentence of the first paragraph:

"The respondent's core submission is that the decision of the FtT is
perfectly sustainable.  The grounds amount to no more than a perversity
challenge which appeared to have been made out of time.  It is trite law
that an arguably generous decision is not by itself an error of law."

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Cunha accepted that the
    application for renewed permission had been made out of time, but she
    had not appreciated that it was an issue before it was raised at the
    hearing, and therefore in seeking to explain the delay, could only make
    the general observation that in the context of the COVID pandemic, many
    of those working in immigration litigation (both the Secretary of State
    and representatives) had faced real challenges to disruption and
    business continuity and that the delay was unlikely to have been
    intentional.  The fact that permission had been granted, was testament
    to the arguable merits of the grounds.

Conclusion on extending time

17. In reaching our conclusion that it is appropriate for us to extend
    time, we accept first that the delay of 12 days is not insignificant.
    While Ms Cunha could not provide more than a possible explanation,
    namely in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, as she had not
    anticipated that there was a time issue (for which we make no criticism
    of her, as the reference in the skeleton argument was brief), we take
    judicial notice that there has been widespread disruption and an effect
    on parties and their ability to file and comply with appropriate time
    limits.  We accept Ms Jegarajah's submission that COVID-19 does not
    provide a 'catch-all' excuse for non-compliance, but we take judicial
    notice of the fact that the Secretary of State's non-compliance took
    place at an early point during the first UK national lockdown
    (April/May 2020).  We are prepared to accept that this was a
    particularly challenging time for the conduct of litigation.

18. We did not just base our decision on the Secretary of State's possible
    explanation for the delay.  We also considered that such an extension
    of time was merited for two other reasons. The first was in relation to
    the strength of the merits of the challenge.  We put them no higher at
    this stage than being arguable merits, based on Judge Kamara's grant of
    permission. Second, as the case of Onowu counselled us, we were
    considering a human rights claim.  While there may be serious
    consequences for individuals as a result of a representative's default,
     equally in this case, relating to deportation of a foreign criminal,
    the consequences of default to the public interest in deportation also
    needed to be considered as a relevant factor, when considering whether
    to extend time.  Taking all of the above factors into account, we
    regarded it as in accordance with the Overriding Objective that we
    extend time to admit the permission application.

The Claimant's submissions

19. In her skeleton argument, Ms Jegarajah submitted that it was important
    not to treat any of the decided cases, including KO (Nigeria), as
    factual precedents.  The approach to an evaluative assessment of what
    was "unduly harsh" needed to be considered in light of the case of HA
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.  References to consequences being
    "severe" or "bleak" should not be substitutes for the statutory
    language of Exception 2, in section 117C of the 2002 Act. There should
    not be an evidential threshold when assessing "undue harshness", for
    example an "ordinary" level of harshness which could be objectively
    measurable.

20. The Secretary of State's remaining grounds were, in essence,
    disagreements with legitimate findings.  There was no requirement that
    the Judge must explicitly refer to all of the relevant statutes or case-
    law, as long as the Judge's language demonstrated that she had applied
    that law.  At paragraphs [2] to [6], the Judge had analysed the
    Secretary of State's reasons for deportation and the Judge was not
    required to answer each and every point raised in argument by the
    Secretary of State.  The Judge had plainly considered at paragraph [14]
    whether the Claimant's family could relocate to Nigeria and an argument
    that the Judge's reasoning was deficient was a high threshold, which
    the grounds did not meet.  Any perversity challenge should similarly
    fail.

21. This was not a case where the degree of harshness was no more than that
    which was ordinarily expected by deportation of a parent.  The
    Claimant's wife was the primary caregiver for her elderly mother, who
    suffered from dementia and diabetes.  The Claimant's wife had therefore
    not been the children's' sole or primary carer, with care being shared
    with the Claimant.  The Claimant had worked full-time for two years and
    the family was financially dependent on him.  The Judge had been
    entitled to find that SA was emotionally and psychologically dependent
    on the Claimant.

22. In oral submissions, Ms Jegarajah pointed out that the Judge had
    expressly referred herself, at paragraph [12], to section 117C,
    including that the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
    interest, which was one of the sections that had been put in emboldened
    font.  We were also counselled against preferring what we would have
    decided over what the Judge had decided, when the Judge had considered
    the evidence before her; see the authority of UT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1095.

23. The Judge's decision had been adequately structured, with paragraphs
    [1] and [2] dealing with the Claimant's immigration history and the
    only question was whether the effect of the Claimant's deportation was
    unduly harsh.  The Judge's analysis at paragraph [14], referred to
    above, was adequate, and the Judge's reference at [15] to not requiring
    any balancing act and focussing solely on the effect of SA and her
    children was in that context.

The Secretary of State's submissions

24. Referring to the skeleton argument on behalf of the Secretary of State,
    almost all of the Judge's findings had been limited to a single
    paragraph [14], which lacked any reasoning or engagement with the
    elevated nature of the "unduly harsh" test.  HA (Iraq) had not
    overruled the authority of PG (Jamaica) or KO (Nigeria).

25. Ms Cunha emphasised once again that there had been a failure to
    consider the unduly harsh effect of deportation within the context of
    the strong public interest in deportation of a foreign criminal.  The
    Judge's self-reference to the 'MAB' approach at paragraph [15] was a
    misdirection in law, coupled with a lack of findings and analysis at
    paragraph [14].  Paragraph [14] had referred to a loss of financial
    support which was more akin to inconvenience.  Whilst the Claimant's
    wife, SA, had been a carer while the Claimant was in prison, the Judge
    had failed to analyse or explain why SA could not get the support of
    her extensive family network, including SA's six siblings in the UK, to
    support her mother and enable SA to work, just as she had worked in the
    past, in professional roles.  The Judge's analysis at paragraph [17]
    added nothing further, largely repeating what had been said at
    paragraph [14].



Discussion and conclusions

26. We reminded ourselves of the basic principles for an appellate
    jurisdiction. The right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is on a point
    of law.  The Upper Tribunal should not interfere with an FTT decision
    because it does not agree with it or because it thinks it can do a
    better job.  We also accept that a Judge's reasoning has to be
    considered in the context of their having heard all of the evidence. It
    is not appropriate for us to focus on specific wording and seek to
    place a construction on words in isolation from the judgment as a
    whole.

27. It is in that context that we considered the limited issue in this
    case, which is whether the Judge had erred in her assessment of whether
    'Exception 2' applied, namely whether the effect of the Claimant's
    deportation would be 'unduly harsh'.  If the Judge was entitled to
    conclude that the effect was unduly harsh, the Secretary of State's
    challenge must fail.  We also accept Ms Jegarajah's submission that we
    must not add a gloss to the statutory language, and that the Judge had
    referred at paragraph [12] to the statutory provision (section 117C(1))
    that the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest,
    along with a number of other statutory provisions she had highlighted.

28. We also, however, go on to consider what we regard as the two key flaws
    in the Judge's decision.  The first is the assessment of the legal test
    and the second is the sufficiency of findings and reasoning.

29. In relation to the first issue, the Judge recited sections 117C and D
    of the 2002 Act at paragraph [12].  She then made her findings at
    paragraph [14], which as we have set out, represent the entirety of the
    findings, and then concluded that the effect of deportation would be
    unduly harsh.  The Judge then went on to cite two passages from case-
    law: the 'MAB' approach from paragraph [18] of MM (Uganda) at paragraph
    [15] of her decision, and at paragraph [16], an excerpt from KO
    (Nigeria.  In particular, at paragraph [15], the 'MAB' approach is
    cited with approval:

         "The phrase 'unduly harsh' in paragraph 399 of the Rules (and s.
         117C 5) of the 2002 Act) does not import a balancing exercise
         requiring public interest to be weighed against the circumstances
         of the individual (whether child or partner of the deportee). The
         focus is solely upon an evaluation of the consequences and impact
         upon the individual concerned."

30. That same passage was considered by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)
    at paragraphs [34] to [35]:

         "34. Judge Southern went on to consider how he would have decided
         the case applying his understanding of the approach in MAB. He
         described the difference as "stark":

             "It will be recalled that the MAB approach has been summarised
             as follows:

                  'The phrase 'unduly harsh' in paragraph 399 of the Rules
                  (and section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act) does not import a
                  balancing exercise requiring the public interest to be
                  weighed against the circumstances of the individual
                  (whether child or partner of the deportee). The focus is
                  solely upon an evaluation of the consequences and impact
                  upon the individual concerned.'

             In this appeal if there is to be no balancing exercise
             requiring the public interest to be weighed and if the focus
             is solely upon an evaluation of the consequences and impact
             upon the claimant's children, it is clear that the application
             of paragraph 399(a) can deliver only one answer, that being
             that it would be unduly harsh for the claimant's children to
             remain in the United Kingdom without their father, given that
             there is a close parental relationship which cannot be
             continued should their father be deported."

         35.  Miss Giovanetti for the Secretary of State takes issue with
         that alternative reasoning, which she criticises as applying too
         low a standard. I agree. The alternative seems to me to treat
         "unduly harsh" as meaning no more than undesirable. Contrary to the
         stated intention it does not in fact give effect to the much
         stronger emphasis of the words "unduly harsh" as approved and
         applied in both MK and MAB."

31. The Court of Appeal went on to consider these same passages at [50] to
    [53] of HA (Iraq). We do not cite those paragraphs in full, but note
    the Court of Appeal's caution against a gloss on the statutory test and
    the lack of an objectively measurable standard, but, at its core, we
    also note that the criterion of undue harshness sets a bar which is
    "elevated" and carries a "much stronger emphasis" than mere
    undesirability, as some degree of harshness is acceptable because there
    is a strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.
    The underlying question is whether the harshness that the deportation
    will cause for SA and their children is of a sufficiently elevated
    degree to outweigh that public interest in the Claimant's deportation.

32. In this case, having cited section 117C of the 2002 Act at paragraph
    [12]; having made findings and reached an apparent conclusion at
    paragraph [14], the Judge went on to cite the 'MAB approach' at [15],
    in isolation, without directing back to the need for any analysis
    needing to be in the context of the public interest in the deportation
    of foreign criminals.   Whilst recognising that we should consider the
    Judge's assessment of the legal test as a whole and not draw individual
    paragraphs out of context, we have, nonetheless, arrived at the view
    that the Judge misdirected herself in relation to the law. By
    structuring the decision as she did, the isolated self-direction at
    [15] is to be read as ignoring the context of the public interest in
    the deportation of foreign criminals  and the Judge fell into the same
    trap identified by Miss Giovanetti in KO (Nigeria), with "unduly harsh"
    becoming no more than undesirable.

33. It may sometimes be the case, because it is apparent from the reasoning
    and findings, that a Judge need not make a lengthy self-direction with
    regard to the law.  However, given the brevity of the findings at
    paragraph [14], we do not accept that it can safely be inferred that
    there was such appropriate contextualisation of the public interest in
    deportation and that the underlying question was appropriately
    considered.  In reality, the Judge's findings comprised a finding on
    the Claimant's social and cultural integration; the Claimant's previous
    criminal offending and regret for that behaviour; consideration of the
    Claimant's role in providing financial support and being an active
    parent and providing emotional support for SA, and her role as main
    carer for her mother and SA's limited connections to Nigeria.  The
    analysis is limited to that, before the Judge reaches her decision that
    the effect of deportation would be unduly harsh, at the end of
    paragraph [14].

34. In our view, while noting, with caution, the authority of UT (Sri
    Lanka), there is simply insufficient reasoning by the Judge, in
    circumstances where there has been a material misdirection in law, for
    us to be satisfied that the Judge appropriately considered the evidence
    and made appropriate findings through the lens of the appropriate test.

35. In conclusion, we accept that the Judge did err in law in not applying
    the "unduly harsh" threshold, in the context of the public interest in
    deportation, and failed to explain and reach sufficient findings to
    justify her conclusion at the end of paragraph [14].  In the
    circumstances, we regard the Tribunal's decision as unsafe and it must
    be set aside.  In doing so, there has not been any withdrawal of the
    concessions made by the Secretary of State that the Claimant has
    genuine and subsisting relationships with SA and his children and to
    the extent that there needs to be findings on the existence of those
    genuine relationships, those findings are preserved for the remaking.

Decision on error of law

36. We conclude that there are material errors here and we must set the
    Judge's decision aside.  We do so, preserving the Judge's findings that
    the Claimant has genuine and subsisting relationships with his wife and
    qualifying children.

Disposal

37. With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
    Statement, given the limited scope of the issues, it is appropriate
    that the Upper Tribunal remakes the FtT's decision which has been set
    aside.

Directions

38. The following directions shall apply to the future conduct of this
    appeal:

      a) The Resumed Hearing will be listed, if possible, before Upper
         Tribunal Judge Keith sitting at Field House on the first available
         date, face-to-face, time estimate 4 hours, to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the
         appeal.

      b) The Claimant shall no later than 4 PM, 14 days prior to the Resumed
         Hearing file with the Upper Tribunal and served upon the Secretary
         of State's representative a consolidated, indexed, and paginated
         bundle containing all the documentary evidence upon which he
         intends to rely.  Witness statements in the bundle must be signed,
         dated, and contain a declaration of truth and shall stand as the
         evidence in chief of the maker who shall be made available for the
         purposes of cross-examination and re-examination only.

      c) The Secretary of State shall have leave, if so advised, to file any
         further documentation she intends to rely upon and in response to
         the Claimant's evidence; provided the same is filed no later than 4
         PM 7 days prior to the Resumed Hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors  of  law,
and we set it aside, subject to the preserved findings.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  14th December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


