
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16688/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|By Microsoft Teams                          |On the 5th July 2021            |
|On the 23rd June 2021                       |                                |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Mohamed Jwel
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Karim, Counsel instructed by Chancery Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State has appealed against a decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Wood sent on 17 February 2021, allowing Mr Jwels's appeal on
Article 8 ECHR grounds against a decision dated 9 August 2019, refusing to
grant him leave to enter the UK as a spouse pursuant to Appendix FM of the
immigration rules.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted permission on
16 March 2021.

The hearing was held remotely. Both parties requested an oral hearing and
did not object to the hearing being held in this manner. Both parties
participated by Microsoft Teams. I am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing
could not be held because it was not practicable and that all of the issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. Both parties confirmed at the end
of the hearing that it had been fair.

Background

Mr Jwel is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1 July 1960.  He is currently 60
years old. He married his British citizen spouse in 1996 and she relocated
to Bangladesh where the family had three children who were all born British
citizens. In 2010 the family decided that the sponsor and her three
children would relocate to the UK in order for the British children to
access the British education system. Mr Jwel continued to live and work in
Bangladesh. In 2011 he applied for a visit visa which was refused. On 15
May 2019 he applied for entry clearance under Appendix FM of the rules. The
three children are now aged 22, 17 and 12.

The application was refused on 9 August 2019 on the basis that Mr Jwel did
not meet the requirements of Appendix FM because he could not meet the
minimum income requirements or the English language requirements. The
Secretary of State was of the view that there were no exceptional
circumstances which would warrant a grant of leave outside of the
immigration rules.

In his grounds of appeal to the First Tier Tribunal, Mr Jwel asserted that
it would be a disproportionate breach of his Article 8 ECHR right to family
life to deny him entry to the UK.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

At the hearing, the judge heard evidence from the sponsor and Mr jwel's
eldest son.

It was conceded by Mr Jwel's representative that he could not succeed under
Appendix FM because the sponsor had part time work and is in receipt of
Universal Credit and because Mr Jwel cannot speak English. There was some
discussion about whether Mr Jwel met the parent route of the rules, but the
judge found that he did not and that the appeal related to the Article 8
ECHR proportionality exercise only. The judge found that family life
existed between Mr Jwel and the sponsor and Mr Jwel and his 3 children.

The judge turned to whether the exclusion of Mr Jwel was necessary,
justified or proportionate. The judge took into consideration the factors
at 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He
considered the best interests of the children and having carried out the
proportionality balancing exercise decided that the strong family life
between Mr Jwel and the sponsor and children outweighed the public interest
and that to deny him entry was a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR.



Grounds of Appeal ('UT')

Flawed proportionality Exercise

It is asserted that the judge made the following errors when carrying out
the proportionality balancing exercise.

      i. failing to give sufficient weight to the public interest,


     ii. failing to give sufficient weight to the fact that the Mr Jwel did
         not meet the requirements of the immigration rules including the
         minimum income threshold,


    iii. failing to identify any exceptional circumstances;


     iv. irrationally finding that the fact that the family had been
         separated for ten years was capable of amounting to undue
         harshness,


      v. speculating as to the earning power of the sponsor if Mr Jwel were
         to join her in the UK with no evidential basis,


     vi. failing to take into account Mr Jwel's lack of English and lack of
         earning potential in the proportionality balance


    vii. carrying out a flawed balancing exercise


Mr Walker made very brief oral submissions and did not attempt to
vigorously pursue the grounds of appeal.

Mr Karim relied on the rule 24 response and took me through the decision in
detail. His oral submissions are recorded in the record of proceedings.
Essentially, he submits that the judge took into account the public
interest, gave it due deference and took into account those factors that
weighed against Mr Jwel in the balancing exercise, the judge found that
there was a strong bond between Mr Jwel and his British citizen children
and that a continued separation was not in the children's best interests.
The judge identified factors such as the hardship suffered by the children
and the sponsor and the length of the separation as well as the age of Mr
Jwel.

Permission to appeal

Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes in a decision
dated 16 March 2021

Discussion and Analysis

I first take into account importantly that the Secretary of State does not
challenge any of the judge's factual findings or the credibility of the
witnesses. This means that the judge's proportionality exercise was
undertaken against the facts as found by the judge.

The main thrust of the challenge is that the judge has given insufficient
weight to the public interest and has not given sufficient weight to those
factors which weighed against Mr Jwel in the proportionality exercise.

I am in agreement with Mr Karim that in general matters of weight are for
the judge and a challenge will only succeed where it can be demonstrated
that the judge's decision was perverse, inadequately reasoned or that the
judge took into account an immaterial factor or failed to consider a
material factor which would have altered the outcome of the appeal.

It is not submitted that the judge misdirected himself in law in relation
to the Article 8 ECHR proportionality exercise. Indeed, the judge sets out
the relevant authorities at [33], [34] and [35]. At [36] the judge finds
that Article 8 ECHR is engaged and later the judge finds that there is a
strong bond between Mr Jwel and his children which is valuable and
cherished.

It is clear from the structure of the decision that the consideration of
proportionality then encompasses paragraphs [37] to [47] with a concluding
paragraph at [48]. From [37] to [47] the judge takes into account the best
interests of the affected children, those factors which weigh against Mr
Jwel and those factors which support him.

The first ground asserts that the judge "has given incorrect weight to the
public interest". The Secretary of State does not particularise where the
judge has given the public interest incorrect weight.

The judge takes into account at [26] that Mr Jwel does not meet the
requirements of the immigration rules. At [32] the judge states;

         "In this regard I have regard to the public interest element of
         these types of appeals and the effect of sections 117A and 117B
         which are placed in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
         2002 (sic) Act, which is headed Article 8 ECHR :'Public interest
         Considerations'. They apply in all cases where a Tribunal is
         required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
         Acts breaches a person's rights under article 8".

At [33] the judge notes that the Tribunal is required to have due regard to
the respondent's policy and parliament's assessment of the public interest.
At [43] the judge states;

         "Looking at the other side of the coin, I accept that there is a
         strong public interest in excluding applicants who do not satisfy
         the certain aspects of the immigration rules".

On this basis, I do not accept the Secretary of State's submission that the
judge did not give weight to the public interest in denying entry to those
who do not meet the requirements of the immigration rules. The judge
manifestly demonstrated his understanding that there is a strong public
interest in excluding those who do not meet the rules and this was clearly
at the forefront of the judge's mind.

Tied in closely with this submission, is the submission that the judge
failed to give appropriate weight to Mr Jwel's inability to meet the
minimum income threshold in the proportionality assessment.

The judge was manifestly aware that Mr Jwel did not meet the minimum income
threshold. This is acknowledged at [26]. At [43] the judge acknowledges
that the sponsor works part time and earns significantly less than the
ï¿½18,600 limit. Indeed, the judge goes onto state;

         "In fact the figures for her earnings in 2018/2019 at page 191
         suggest that although there are some months when she is paid around
         ï¿½1,000 per month, that her yearly wage is much less than ï¿½12,000".

From this I am satisfied that the judge took into account that the family
did not come near to meeting the minimum income threshold and afforded
appropriate weight to this factor.

The judge however then went onto consider that the situation is more
"nuanced" because if Mr Jwel were permitted to come to the UK, the sponsor
would be able to work longer hours and increase her income.  The Secretary
of State's argument is that this was "speculation" on the part of the
judge. However, I am in agreement with Mr Karim that the sponsor's evidence
in her witness statement at paragraph 7 was that she was prevented from
working longer hours because of her status of a single mother and that the
judge accepted her evidence. Her evidence was not challenged by the
Secretary of State and there was no challenge to the judge's findings. The
judge's finding in this respect was in these circumstances neither
irrational nor perverse and the judge when carrying out the proportionality
exercise was entitled to take into account the effect on the household
income were Mr Jwel permitted to enter the UK.

Mr Jwel's older son gave oral evidence that he was worried that he would
not find employment in Bangladesh, from which it can be inferred that he
intends to find employment in the UK. It seems to me that since he was
studying a Masters at SOAS and attended court to support his father's
appeal, that the judge's finding that he would also be able to work to
contribute to the household income was neither irrational nor inadequately
reasoned. In any event even if this were speculation, it is not material
because he is an adult now in any event and the judge's finding that the
sponsor could work more hours was sustainable.

It is then stated that the judge failed to take into account the lack of Mr
Jwel's financial independence as stipulated by section 117B(3) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The judge expressly deals with this factor at [45]. The judge finds that Mr
Jwel is unlikely to be able to work in the UK because of his age, health,
lack of education, skills and English language. However, the judge finds
that the family as a whole has an adequate income to avoid him becoming a
burden on the state should he come to the UK. The judge's finding that Mr
Jwel would not be a burden on the state because he will be financially
dependent on his family has not been challenged. The judge has manifestly
taken into account section 117B(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002.

Similarly, I am satisfied that the judge has given weight to Mr Jwel's lack
of ability to speak English. At [26] the judge acknowledged that he was
refused on this basis under the immigration rules and considers this issue
at [46]. The judge finds against Mr Jwel. His view is that it is more
likely that Mr Jwel is unwilling to learn English rather than being unable
to do so. The judge expressly acknowledges that there is clearly a public
interest in not allowing applicants into the UK who do not have a command
of English. The judge was entitled to take into account that this
shortcoming is less conspicuous because he is coming to provide childcare
rather than to work.

In summary, I am not persuaded by the Secretary of State's submission that
the judge has failed to give weight to the public interest, nor that the
judge has failed to take into account or give weight to Mr Jwel's inability
to meet the minimum income threshold, his inability to speak English or his
lack of earning potential. I am also not satisfied that the judge erred by
finding that the sponsor would be able to work more hours if Mr Jwel comes
to the United Kingdom and that the judge was properly entitled to take this
factor into account.

The remaining grounds assert that the judge failed to identify any
exceptional circumstance which would render the denial of entry
unjustifiably harsh.

The judge gave careful consideration to the family's circumstances. The
context was of a British woman who had married a Bangladeshi national in
1996 and relocated to Bangladesh to be with her husband who at that time
had a business in Bangladesh. All three of the couple's sons were born in
Bangladesh. The judge acknowledged that in 2010 the couple took the
difficult decision to separate the family with the sponsor and the three
British children relocating to the UK in order for the children to access a
British education. The judge took into account at [36] that the family had
separated themselves out of choice and that it was their decision to
deprive the children of paternal influence.

The judge also however at [37] acknowledged that the family quite
understandably wanted to take advantage of the superior education in the UK
for the British citizen children.

The judge gave weight to the best interests of the two younger children,
finding that this was an important but not determinative issue. The judge
found that there was a strong bond between the children and their father
with regular communication between them. He found that the bond between Mr
Jwel and his children is "valuable and cherished" and that the children had
missed having their father in their lives on a day-to-day basis. The judge
found that it is in the children's best interest to live with their father.

The judge noted that the youngest child is 12 and the next child 17 and
that they are British citizens and have the rights that that status brings.
He noted that both were in important stages in their lives in terms of
development and education and that it would be untenable for them to move
to Bangladesh when they do not speak, read or write Bengali. He also noted
that this was not suggested by the Secretary of State. The judge found that
expecting the family to continue to have family life through phone calls
and social media is substandard and also pointed to the fact that it was
not the fault of the children that they were separated from their father.

The judge took into account that this was not a marriage of convenience but
a longstanding marriage and that Mr Jwel and the sponsor have been
separated for over ten years. He pointed to the fact that the sponsor could
not have reasonably been expected to envisage how matters would develop 14
years later having been married when she was 21 years old.

The judge pointed to the burden that the sponsor has faced in bringing up
her family on her own in financial and emotional terms.  The judge also
noted that Mr Jwel is now getting older and has health problems.  In the
skeleton argument Mr Karim also referred the judge to section 117B(6) of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which he submitted was
analogous.

The judge has manifestly weighed up all of the relevant factors in the
balance in a well-structured and detailed decision. I am not in agreement
that in the absence of criminality, where this was a genuine long-standing
marriage, there is no adverse immigration history as found by the judge and
there are three British children, that it was perverse for the judge to
consider that a ten-year separation should be given considerable weight as
well as the likelihood of a further long-term separation. I am not
persuaded by the Secretary of State's submission that such a separation
could not rationally be categorised as unjustifiably harsh.

At 48 the judge stated;

         "This is a finely balanced decision under article 8 outside of the
         immigration rules. However, in my judgement the balance lands in
         favour of the appellant. Whilst there remain some public interest
         in the refusal of leave to the appellant; it is my view that
         interest of the children and the sponsor all being British
         citizens, in having the appellant permitted to live in the UK and
         therefore reunite the family, are marginally stronger. Therefore I
         find that the respondent has failed to demonstrate to me that the
         exclusion of the appellant is justified or proportionate in the
         circumstances".

In summary, I am not satisfied that the grounds amount to more than a
disagreement with the weight that the judge has given to various factors in
the decision. The judge has noted that the decision was finely balanced but
has taken into account all of the relevant factors and weighed them in the
balance.

The judge's finding is perhaps generous but was firmly rooted in the
evidence and does not reach the high threshold of perversity.

In this respect I take into account the words of Reed LJ in Henderson v
Foxworth Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41 at [62];

           "It does not matter, with whatever degree of certainty, that the
           appellate court considers that it would have reached a different
           conclusion. What matters is whether the decision under appeal is
           one that no reasonable judge could have reached."

I also remind myself of the comments of Carnworth LJ in Mukarkar v SSHD
[2006] EWCA Civ 1045 approved by the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) 2017
SC10 that;

           "The mere fact that one tribunal has reached what may seem an
           unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does
           not mean that it has made an error of law, so as to justify an
           appeal under the old system, or an order for reconsideration
           under the new... However on the facts of a particular case the
           decision of a specialist tribunal should be respected".

It may have been that another judge would have taken a less generous view
in respect of the proportionality of the denial of entry, but the alleged
generosity of this decision does not render the decision unlawful.

    Conclusion

It follows that none of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are made
out and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal is upheld.



Signed                                       Date

UTJ Owens
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens                         28 June 2021




