
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17138/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2020                       |On 13th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Emmanuel [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sara Anzani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

For the sake of clarity, I will refer to Mr [O] who was the appellant
before the First-tier Tribunal as the appellant in this appeal and to the
Secretary of State as the respondent.

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 2 June 1978.  He appeals
against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas dismissing his
appeal against a decision dated 18 October 2019 to refuse his human rights
claim.  Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted on 13 March 2020
by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison.

The hearing was held remotely.  Neither party objected to the hearing being
held by video.  Both parties participated by UK court Skype.  I am
satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held because it was not
practicable and that all of the issues could be determined in a remote
hearing.  Neither party complained of any unfairness during the hearing and
confirmed at the end of the hearing that the hearing had been conducted
fairly.

Appellant's Background

The appellant has a convoluted immigration history. The appellant claims to
have entered the United Kingdom in 2007 although there is no record of his
entry.  On 16 June 2011 he was issued with a residence card as the spouse
of an EEA national valid for five years.  He divorced his EEA spouse on 6
June 2012.  He married his second wife, a British citizen of Nigerian
origin on 17 September 2013. By that time the couple had two children one
born on 23 November 2008 and one on 22 November 2012. On 10 June 2014 a
decision was taken to revoke his EEA residence card. On 30 July 2014 he was
convicted at Woolwich Crown Court of possession of counterfeit currency and
on 27 August 2014 he was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment.  On 8
October 2014 he was served with a notice of liability to deportation.  On
22 May 2015 the Deportation Order was signed. During 2015 various
representations were made on the appellant's behalf. On 30 March 2016 First-
tier Tribunal Judge Howard heard an appeal against the decision to revoke
the EEA residence card and against the decision to deport.  In that appeal
the judge decided that the appellant and his EEA spouse were in a marriage
of convenience and dismissed the EEA appeal. The judge also found that it
would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's Nigerian spouse to relocate
to Nigeria with the appellant. The judge found that the appellant's Article
8 ECHR rights were not engaged and dismissed the appeal. The appellant
appealed to the Upper Tribunal. On 5 January 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal
Judge Davey upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal finding that
there was no error of law in the judge's approach.

An unsuccessful enforcement visit was conducted at the appellant's home
address on 20 May 2018.  On 29 May 2018 the appellant made a request to
revoke the deportation order which enclosed further evidence from a social
worker regarding the effect on his children on his deportation. The claim
was refused on 5 September 2018. The appellant was detained and served with
a notice of removal window. He then lodged Judicial Review proceedings.
Permission was refused on the papers and on 17 December 2018 permission was
refused at a renewed oral hearing.  On 14 June 2019 Lord Justice Males made
an order refusing permission in respect of the fresh claim.  Four more sets
of further submissions were made resulting in a decision to refuse a human
rights claim on 18 October 2019 which carried a right of appeal.





The Respondent's decision

The respondent gave consideration as to whether it was appropriate to
revoke the deportation order under Section 32(6) of the UK Borders Act
2007. It was accepted that the appellant was living in a family unit with
his British wife and children and that he had a genuine and subsisting
parental relationship with all three of his children who are under the age
of 18. Nevertheless, it was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for
the children to relocate to Nigeria with their parents, nor for the
children and the appellant's spouse to remain in the United Kingdom without
the appellant.  The respondent considered the contents of the independent
social worker report and accepted that the eldest daughter was suffering
from distress, showing signs of anxiety and having emotional problems but
was of the view that she could access treatment in the UK. The respondent
pointed to the fact that the appellant and his partner conceived their
third child after the appellant had been served with a signed deportation
order at a time when he was aware that he might be deported to Nigeria.
The appellant could not meet paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules
because he formed his relationship with his wife when he was unlawfully in
the United Kingdom.  It was not accepted that the appellant had spent most
of his life in the United Kingdom, nor that there were very compelling
circumstances outweighing the public interest in his deportation.  The
respondent considered that the appellant had shown no regard for UK laws in
deliberately committing a fraudulent offence, his children are accessing
support for their additional needs and that this support can continue when
the appellant is deported.  It is also considered that the appellant's
partner could continue to access assistance with her mental health problems
in the UK.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge applied the principles in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKAIT 702 and
treated the findings of First-tier Tribunal Howard in the previous appeal
dismissed on 30 March 2016 and the findings of Males LJ in 2019 as a
starting point for consideration of the appeal.  The judge heard oral
evidence from the appellant and his wife.  The judge noted at [4] that the
appellant was convicted at Woolwich Crown Court of possession of
counterfeit currency and on 27 August 2014 was sentenced to fifteen months'
imprisonment.  At [8] it is said:

"As stated, the appellant was convicted before the Woolwich Crown Court and
sentenced on 27 August 2014.  The appellant had pleaded guilty to the
possession of ï¿½237,100 (in $100 bills) of US dollars.  The appellant was
dealt with as 'a mere custodian of this large quantity of US dollar ...
[but] ... there is no room for doubt in my judgment of the gravity of this
offence'."

The judge outlined the evidence before him including the oral evidence of
the appellant and his partner.  He also took into account two best
interests reports in respect of the children dated 8 May 2018 and 8 July
2019 prepared by Sally-Anne Deacon, an independent social worker, as well
as letters from an NHS Family Early Help Practitioner and the Patient
Mental Health Team.  The judge took into account that the appellant is
married to a British citizen and was living in a family unit with his wife
and three children aged ten years and 6 months, six years and 8 months and
two years and 8 months at the date of the appeal hearing.

The judge then summarised the submissions of the representatives.  Mr
Whiteman for the respondent submitted that that there were no very
significant obstacles to return to Nigeria and that it was not unduly harsh
for the family to relocate there.  The family could return to Nigeria as a
unit. There had been clear findings of fact by the previous Tribunal and
Lord Justice Males.  The consequences were not "severe and bleak" as set
out in the decision in PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.  The public
interest in removing foreign criminals outweighed the private and family
life of the appellant.

Ms Anzani submitted that it would be both unduly harsh for the children to
live in Nigeria and for them to live in the UK without the appellant.  She
relied upon the reports of Sally-Anne Deacon. She highlighted the pivotal
role that the appellant plays in the lives of the children and pointed to
the concerning levels of distress displayed by the eldest child throughout
the recent interaction with the social worker. Her submission was that
there has been a deterioration in the children's presentation particularly
since the enforcement visit.  The children's best interests would be best
served by the ongoing full-time presence of the appellant.  They have
little or no contact with Nigeria.  They are close to their maternal
grandfather and grandmother, both of whom live locally.  The children
attended schools and were extremely settled in their respective classes.
It was submitted that it would be extremely harsh for the appellant's wife
to relocate to Nigeria given her depression and low mood as well as her
full-time employment.  The whole family had been referred to the Primary
Mental Health Team in 2019 due to concerns expressed by professionals.
There was a risk that if the children were deported they would be taken
into care.

The judge's findings are at paragraphs 69 to 86 of the decision and are
somewhat brief.  At [71] the judge states:

"There is a clear public interest in deporting those who commit serious
criminal offences in the UK and the appellant can have no realistic
challenge to this principle",

The judge then states:

"On his own, this Tribunal concludes that the appellant would or could not
have any objection to the decision to deport him.  The Tribunal regards
this as a starting point for consideration of this appeal."

The judge then goes on to make the core findings at [77] to [84];

"The point is that he is not on his own.  He is married to a UK citizen
with three UK citizen children.  His dishonesty and criminal behaviour is
not their responsibility."

"It is clear that the family have significant problems.  The wife of the
appellant has mental health issues and the family as a whole are subject to
Social Services and other professional input and surveillance.  The
Tribunal is satisfied that the appellant does indeed play a pivotal role in
the lives of these children and is very supportive to his wife.  She is in
full-time employment and is, in effect, the 'bread winner'.  She is
dependent upon the appellant and so are the children, for his basic input."

"The children are well-settled in school and it is clear that they are
dependent upon the role of the appellant.  It is possible if the appellant
were to be removed from the UK there would be a dramatic and direct
consequence for the welfare of the children.  The possibility of them being
taken into care is not implausible."

"The children are UK citizens and so is their mother.  They are all well-
settled in the UK and none of the children in particular have any realistic
ties or contacts within Nigeria.  Relocation to that country would in all
of the circumstances of this case, be unduly harsh."

"The Tribunal relies upon the findings of the two best interest reports
prepared by Ms Deacon in this case.  It is clear that the consequences of
deportation in respect of the family would be devastating.

"The Tribunal has little sympathy for the appellant himself. He chose to
become involved in criminal offending despite the interests of his family."

"However, he has not offended since and it is clear that he is the primary
and often sole carer for the three children who bear no responsibility for
what he decided to do in 2014."

"In the view of the Tribunal - just - the consequences of
removal/deportation in this case are unduly harsh and potentially
devastating".

"The appeal is therefore allowed and the Tribunal is persuaded that the
exception set out in paragraphs 398 to 399 apply to this case."

The Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal and grants of permission.

The Secretary of State advances two grounds of appeal.

    Ground 1: The judge has given inadequate reasons for why it would be
    unduly harsh for the family to relocate to Nigeria.

The judge has failed to explain why it would be "severe and bleak" for the
children to relocate to Nigeria.  The judge has failed to explain why he
has departed from the previous findings of the First-tier Tribunal and the
Upper Tribunal as well as the recent decision of LJ Males particularly in
respect of the child's mother's ties to Nigeria.  The reasons given by the
judge do not provide a proper evidential basis for concluding that the
"unduly harsh" test is met.  The judge has failed to consider that there
would be no language barriers in Nigeria and no findings have been made on
the availability of schooling for the children or medical treatment for
their mother.  The social worker's report focuses on the impact of
deportation if the appellant left the United Kingdom and the wife and
children remain in the UK.  This evidence, which was not before the
previous judge, does not disturb the findings regarding relocation to
Nigeria for the entire family.  The judge improperly focused on the fact
that the offence was committed in 2014 and he has committed no further
offences.  The appellant previously appealed unsuccessfully against the
decision to deport him and since then has been trying to avoid deportation.
 He is subject to automatic deportation and can only succeed if he meets
the exceptions to deportation, which has been inadequately reasoned by the
judge.

    Ground 2: The judge has provided inadequate reasons for why it would be
    unduly harsh for the appellant's wife and children to remain in the
    United Kingdom if he is deported.

It is said that in a few short paragraphs the judge finds that the
deportation would be unduly harsh because the wife has mental health
problems, the whole family are subject to Social Services input and the
appellant plays a pivotal role in the care of his children.  The judge's
finding that the consequences of deportation would be unduly harsh and
potentially devastating are not adequately reasoned because it is not
explained why the appellant's deportation would have "severe" or "bleak"
consequences for the family. The judge failed to factor in Court of Appeal
's guidance in The Secretary of State for the Home Department v PG
(Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.  The judge has failed to consider the fact
that the appellant's wife was able to cope with the children whilst the
appellant was incarcerated and had the assistance of her parents, who live
locally.  The social worker said that the children regularly see their
mother's parents although the appellant's wife appeared to downplay her
relationship with them.  The First-tier Tribunal failed to take into
account that the appellant's wife would have the support of Social Services
and although he found that it was not implausible that the children could
be taken into care this was not borne out by the evidence.  The judge has
not given a proper evidential basis for concluding that the effect upon the
family would go beyond the inevitable effects of deportation and failed to
give adequate reasons as to how the unduly harsh test was met.

Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on 13
March 2020 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had failed to
give adequate reasons in respect of the "unduly harsh" test. The grant of
permission was not limited.

Respondent's submissions

Mr Lindsey relied on the grounds which I have set out above and amplified
them. He also pointed to the fact that when considering the issue of
"unduly harsh", the judge also took into consideration immaterial
considerations including the length of time that has elapsed since the
conviction which is not relevant to the assessment of the consequences for
the children.

Appellant's submissions

Ms Anzani's submissions are set out in Rule 24 response and enlarged upon
in her oral submissions. She submits that the judge properly acknowledged
that the findings of the previous Tribunal formed the starting point for
the analysis. The judge was clearly entitled to depart from the findings of
the previous judge in circumstances where there had been a passage of time
and evidence of professional engagement with the family which had developed
over the intervening years.  Although the judge's conclusions at [77] to
[84] are brief, that it is clear from reading the decision as a whole the
judge has taken into account the opinion of the independent social worker
in her reports. The judge was entitled to find at [78] that the family have
significant problems, the wife of the respondent has mental health issues
and the family as a whole are subject to Social Services and other
professional input and surveillance.  At [79] the judge finds that the
children are well-settled in school and at [80] that the children have no
realistic ties or contacts within Nigeria.  The judge was satisfied that
the appellant is often the sole carer for his children and plays a pivotal
role in the lives of his children and wife.  This finding was not
challenged by the Secretary of State.  She submits that the judge's
findings at [80] that relocation to Nigeria would in all of the
circumstances of this case be unduly harsh must be read in conjunction with
the preceding paragraphs.  The judge was also entitled to give weight to
the social work reports when finding that the consequences of deportation
of the appellant, leaving the family in the UK would be devastating for the
family.

Her submission is that although the judge does not refer to the term
"severe and bleak", he was clearly aware of the analysis expounded in PG
(Jamaica) and his conclusion that it is "unduly harsh" for the children to
relocate with their mother to Nigeria or to remain in the UK without their
father is not undermined by his failure to use this term.

She submits that the judge has done enough to explain to the relevant
appeal court why one party had won and one had lost.  It is not incumbent
on the judge to address each and every point.  The question is whether a
particular point in issue is of such obvious significance that the judge's
failure to address that issue in itself amounts to a failure to give
adequate reasons.  This cannot be said in the instant appeal.  The grounds
amount to a disagreement with the judge's findings.

    Discussion and conclusions

Ground 1 - failure to give adequate reasons for why it is unduly harsh for
the family to relocate to Nigeria,

The judge's conclusions on this issue are summed up at [80] where he
states;

         "The children are UK citizens and so is their mother. They are all
         well settled in the UK and none of the children in particular have
         any realistic ties or contacts within Nigeria. Relocation to that
         country would in all of the circumstances of this case be unduly
         harsh".

The starting point as correctly identified by the judge at [73] were the
previous findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard in the deportation
appeal heard in 2016, which were upheld by the Upper Tribunal on 5 January
2017 as well as the comments of Males LJ made on 14 June 2019.

FtT Judge Howard in 2016 considered the issue of whether it would be unduly
harsh for the children to relocate to Nigeria with their parents. At that
time there were two children aged 7 and 3. Judge Howard found at [32];

         "So I am satisfied it is in the best interests of the children that
         they are brought up together. So it is I ask myself if it would be
         unduly harsh for that to take place in Nigeria. The appellant's
         wife was born in Nigeria. She came to the UK when young and has
         been educated to degree level in the UK. She is employed as a
         secondary school teacher. These are significant ties to the UK, but
         she also retains significant ties to Nigeria. She affirms that she
         has been a regular visitor to Nigeria, but asserts that she does
         not feel at home there. What she has played down and significantly
         in my judgement, is her actual links to Nigeria. Given the fact of
         her visits and that she has taken her elder child there I am
         satisfied that she still has significant family living in the
         country. I am further satisfied that she has retained strong
         cultural links to Nigeria via her family and visits. It is not by
         accident that she has married a Nigerian national. The employment
         types she has in the UK are not of a type that has no application
         to Nigerian society and so I cannot conclude that it would be
         unduly harsh for her to leave with the appellant as a family in
         Nigeria".

At [33] and [34] FtT Judge Howard considered the position of both of the
children concluding that the younger child was focused on his family and
home and that the elder child at the age of 7 would adapt to life in
Nigeria.

On 5 January 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey upheld the findings
that the family could relocate to Nigeria without undue harshness although
pointed to the lack of an assessment from a specialist social worker to
show that there were any other significant adverse effects likely to arise
for ether child by the family's removal back to Nigeria. Thereafter social
work reports were prepared and submitted.

In 2019 Males LJ refused permission on a further challenge to the refusal
of a fresh claim stating;

         "notwithstanding that a report from a social worker was not
         previously before the FTT or UT in the previous decisions...
         However, nothing in the report produced amounts to evidence of
         significant adverse effects or suggests that the consequences of
         the children moving to Nigeria with their parents would be unduly
         harsh".

The judge in the decision under challenge before me states at [75]

         "It is common ground that the best interest reports were not before
         the Tribunal at the appeal in 2016. This is referred to in the
         decision before the Upper Tribunal. Both of the reports were not
         before Males LJ".

Ms Anzani's submission is that the judge has found that given the passage
of time and the additional reports before him that the judge is able to
depart from the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard. I note for
completeness that the judge erred at [75] in that it is manifest from Males
LJ's comments that he had sight of least the earlier report dated 8 May
2018 because he comments on it as above and finds that the report is not
helpful to the appellant.  I accept that he did not have the second report
which post-dates the decision and that this may have been what the judge
meant in this paragraph although it is not clear. The judge does not refer
explicitly to the passage of time but it is apparent that his reason for
departing from the previous findings is because the reports contain more up
to date information about the effect of the deportation on all of the
members of the family.

At [81] the judge relies on the "Best Interest" reports prepared by Sally
Ann Deacon to support his conclusions which he quotes earlier in the
decision.

The 2018 social work report states; (This paragraph is not replicated in
full by the judge in the decision however, I infer that the judge had
regard to it at [81] and I insert it for the sake of completeness).

         "It would unreasonable and disproportionate for the children and
         their mother as British citizens who have lived all their life in
         the UK, in the case of the children their whole lives to re-locate
         in order for them to be afforded a family life with all parties
         remaining physically close, X, Y and Z  were born and raised in the
         UK and have no affiliation with the country or any significant
         relationships with it. The older siblings have clearly stated their
         wish to remain in the UK for their family unit to remain intact and
         for them not to suffer the loss of those they love in the UK. Young
         people remaining in an environment that is familiar in terms of
         their extended family network and culture is crucial in order to
         sustain their growth and development in the future. For the
         children to relocate to a country with which they have no knowledge
         and that is indeed dramatically dissimilar in terms of culture,
         climate, education, health and expectations I feel is likely to
         undermine their sense of security and stability".

At [64] the judge points to evidence in the social work report that the
children have little or no contact with Nigeria. It is said;

         "The eldest child has visited twice. They have no other contact
         with that country. They are said to be close to their material
         grandfather and grandmother both of whom live locally".

Mr Lindsay points to the fact that in his decision at [57] the judge refers
to the appellant's wife's evidence that she took all 3 children to Nigeria
in 2017 to visit their grandmother which indicates some kind of ongoing
links to Nigeria. When reaching the conclusion that it would be unduly
harsh for the children to relocate, he submits that the judge has
manifestly failed to take into consideration the starting point of the
previous findings about the strength of the appellant's partner's ties with
Nigeria, failed to explain why that position has changed over time or how
the social work report affects those findings.

The judge at [80] appears to have accepted the social worker's conclusions
about the family's weak ties to Nigeria at face value without further
analysis when deciding that it is unduly harsh for the children to relocate
to Nigeria. The judge does not appear to have taken into account or
consider those findings which were made in the earlier decision, including
the fact that the children's mother is also of Nigerian origin, came to the
UK as a child and visits Nigeria regularly.

I am satisfied that when considering whether it is unduly harsh for the
children to relocate to Nigeria with their parents, the judge has
manifestly failed to both give a proper explanation as to why he has
departed from the findings of the previous judge in relation to the
family's ties to Nigeria and that the judge has also failed to consider all
of the factors in the round, including both children's parents' strong ties
to Nigeria, the fact that the children have extended family in Nigeria and
all visited Nigeria in 2017. The judge has failed to make findings as to
what actual difficulties the children would face beyond undermining of
their sense of security and stability as pointed out by the social worker.
There is no reference to the fact that the appellant's partner is educated
to degree level, that she herself speaks Yoruba and is familiar with
Nigerian culture, that, throughout the family's difficulties she has
carried on working as a teacher, that her employment is transferable and
that the children's father, the appellant, also has strong links to
Nigeria. There is no reference to what kind of financial or other
circumstances the family and children would find themselves in Nigeria or
acknowledgement that the family would be travelling to Nigeria as a family
which would mitigate some of the stress of being separated. Nor is there
any evaluation of whether the children could obtain an education in
Nigeria, the stages of their education in the UK or whether the appellant's
partner would be able to obtain medical treatment.

I agree with Ms Anzani that a judge does not need to set out all of the
evidence to which he refers and that the reasoning need only be adequate,
however in my view the judge here has failed to make an assessment in the
round and has failed to explain what he makes of the family's links to
Nigeria and to what extent they would be able to mitigate any difficulties
by securing employment or getting help from their families. The judge has
simply accepted the conclusions of the social work report without taking
into account the remainder of the evidence. It is no doubt the case that
the social work reports will carry weight and that the social worker has
spoken to other professionals working with the family, nevertheless when
the judge states that he has taken into account "all of the circumstances",
it is not apparent that he has in fact done this.

I also accept Mr Lindsay's submission that the judge has erred in taking
into account immaterial factors in his assessment of unduly harsh. In
particular at [72] the judge has taken into account the fact that the
appellant was previously of good character, committed the offences in 2014
and that 6 years have elapsed since then. This appears to have influenced
his finding at [80] that relocation would not be unduly harsh. I am
satisfied that this is an immaterial consideration and is not relevant to
whether it is unduly harsh for the children to go to Nigeria in line with
KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

As Ms Anzani submits, the judge has at [59] referred to PG (Jamaica) and I
agree with her that it is not an error of law per se to fail to set out the
applicable legal tests. It is not on its own a material error for the judge
to fail to refer to the words "severe" and "bleak". Nevertheless, it must
be apparent from a reading of a decision as a whole that the judge has
understood and applied the correct legal tests.

In MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 it was said

         "unduly harsh does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,
         undesirable or merely difficult. Rather it poses a considerably
         more elevated threshold. Harsh in this context denotes something
         severe or bleak. It is the antithesis of pleasant or uncomfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already
         elevated standard still higher".

This wording was approved in KO (Nigeria). In PG Jamaica the Court of
Appeal emphasises that deportation will inevitably cause hardship and
trauma to families because the effect of deportation is to separate
families and that what is required is a degree of harshness which would go
beyond what is necessarily involved for a child faced with a parent who is
being deported.

In my view, although the judge referred to PG(Jamaica), he did not explain
adequately why it would be severe and bleak for this family to relocate
together as a family to Nigeria. It was not sufficient to conclude that it
would be severe and bleak just because the children are well settled in the
UK and none of the children in particular have any realistic ties or
contacts within Nigeria. It will inevitably difficult for all school age
children who have born and spent all of their lives in the UK to relocate
to a new country. It was incumbent on the judge to set out what factors in
particular would be severe and bleak for the family when relocating as a
family unit together to Nigeria and why there would be a degree of
harshness going beyond the expected difficulties of the children relocating
with their parents at the age of 10, 7 and 4.

I am satisfied that when making the assessment of whether it is unduly
harsh for the children to relocate to Nigeria, the judge's reasoning was
inadequate in that he failed to explain adequately why he departed from the
earlier findings of the judge in relation to the family's ties to Nigeria,
failed take into account material factors as set out above, took into
account immaterial factors including the length of the time that has
elapsed since the appellant's sentence, failed to make adequate factual
findings and failed to apply the correct legal tests in respect of "unduly
harsh".

I am satisfied that this is an error of law which is material to the
outcome of the appeal.

    Ground 2 - Error in assessing whether it would be unduly harsh for the
    children to remain in the UK without the appellant

The judge's findings in respect of why it would be unduly harsh for the
children and partner to remain in the UK without him are set out at
paragraphs [78], [79], [81], [83] and [84] all of which are very short
paragraphs. The judge makes a broad reference to the Best Interest report
and at [78] takes into account the appellant's partner's mental health
issues, that the family has input from social services and other
professional input that the appellant plays a pivotal role in the care of
the children because his partner is in full -time employment and the
breadwinner.

The judge's findings in respect of why it would be unduly harsh for the
children to remain in the UK without their father are also flawed.

I take into account Ms Anzani's argument that a judge does not need to set
out all of the evidence before him for a decision to be lawful and that
there was significant evidence in the social worker's report pointing to
the significant difficulties that the family would have in their father's
absence.

However, when concluding that it is unduly harsh for the children to remain
in the UK without him, the judge also refers to the same immaterial factors
at [72] in that the appellant has not offended since 2014 and that six year
have elapsed since then. The judge also comments that children bear no
responsibility for what the appellant decided to do in 2014, but this will
be the same for all children whose parent is being deported and is not
relevant to the assessment of undue harshness.

I am satisfied that the judge failed to look at all the factors in the
round including the evidence that when the appellant was in prison the
children, the appellant's mother continued to work and was assisted by her
own parents - the children's maternal grandparents. The judge has failed to
resolve conflict in this evidence in that on the one hand it is recorded at
[58] that the children's mother says that there is not much contact with
her siblings and parents whilst the social worker refers to the close and
loving bonds with the grandparents.

The assessment of unduly harsh necessitates findings on what difficulties
the family would have in the absence of the father and what practical and
emotional assistance would be rendered by the grandparents who assisted the
appellant's partner whilst the appellant was in prison and enabled her to
continue working and these findings are missing.

The judge also concludes at [79] that;

         "The possibility of them being taken into care is not implausible".



I am concerned at the wording of this sentence. It is not clear what
standard of proof the judge is using. For the judge to make a finding that
it is likely that the children would be taken into care should the
appellant be deported there would need to be significant evidence from
social services to this effect. The evidence is that the children's mother
is a loving an involved parent who has assistance from her own parents. She
is currently under a lot of stress and pressure and is receiving input from
mental health services, but the judge's finding is premised on the wording
of the social worker who states;

         "Should he no longer be there, I feel it is inevitable that the
         concerns for the children would escalate to the a point whereby
         statutory services would need to become involved".

It is not explained by the social worker what steps social services would
take to assist the family to prevent this from happening or why this is
such a risk. The judge's conclusion that the children might be taken into
care appears to be premised on the basis that this is a possibility. The
judge's analysis is so brief that it is difficult to follow his reasoning.

The judge has failed to look at the principles in PG(Jamaica) and has not
explained adequately why the situation of these children go above and
beyond the usual difficulty and distress experienced by children whose
parent is being deported. I am conscious that there is evidence in relation
to the deterioration in the oldest daughter's mental health and that of the
appellant's partner but I am satisfied, for the reasons set out above that
the judge's findings and reasoning are inadequate in respect of whether it
would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without their
father.

    Disposal

Ms Anzani submitted that it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard de novo. Mr Lindsay remained neutral on
this issue. I have had regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's
Practice Statement and take into account that there are significant factual
findings to be made in this appeal and I find it appropriate to remit the
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision on error of law


 1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error of on a point of law such  that  it  is  unsafe  and
    cannot stand.


 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


 3. The appeal is remitted, de novo,  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard at a venue in London by any Judge  except  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lucas.

 4. No factual findings are preserved.


Signed            R J Owens                      Date 10 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


