
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/17810/2018
                                                               HU/19922/2018
                                                               HU/19923/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2020                    |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     SB
                                     DC
                                     RS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Mukulu, Counsel, instructed by Amity Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This has been a remote hearing which had been consented to by the parties.
The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (v).  A face-to-face hearing
was not held because it was not practicable, and all the issues could be
determined in a remote hearing.  The order made is as described at the end
of these reasons.

The first appellant, a citizen of Jamaica with a date of birth of 23
September 1985, is the partner of a British citizen, JM.  The second and
third appellants are her two children from a previous relationship and who
were minors at the date of application made in April of 2018.  Those
children are now 18 and 7 years of age.  However, as the judge recorded at
paragraphs 2 and 49 of the decision, since the application was made another
child was born in October 2018 and is the child of the appellant and the
sponsor.

The appellants have appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against
a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 November 2019
dismissing on all grounds their linked appeals against a decision of the
Entry Clearance Officer of 23 July 2018, a decision upheld and maintained
by the Entry Clearance Manager in the review decision of 16 January 2019,
to refuse their applications for entry clearance to join the sponsor in the
UK on the basis of family life.

Some of the issues that were in contention in the refusal decision have
been resolved by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, such as the nature of the
relationship.  Whilst finding the relationship between the sponsor and the
appellant to be genuine and subsisting, their marriage valid, and that they
had established family life together sufficient to engage Article 8 ECHR,
the First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied for the reasons set out in the
decision that the first appellant had sole responsibility for the two child
appellants. The judge also found that the first appellant could not meet
the requirements of Appendix FM. Outside the Rules, the judge found the
decision proportionate and that there were no compelling circumstances
which would otherwise have rendered the decision unjustifiably harsh.

The grounds assert that the judge made adverse findings without giving the
sponsor the opportunity to respond to the points made; these related to
wage slips.  It is also argued that the judge failed to give weight to
relevant evidence; failed to consider whether the grandmother had day-to-
day responsibility for the children and placed undue weight on the
designation of the maternal grandmother as 'legal guardian'.

Permission on all grounds was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien
on 7 May 2020.  The judge considered it arguable that, having found that
the sponsor met the financial requirements of Appendix FM, the judge then
fell into error by concluding that the sponsor did not meet the
requirements of the Rules or, alternatively, that the residual public
interest was capable of outweighing the family's Article 8 rights. In
granting permission the judge stated, "it is arguable therefore that it was
not open to the judge to dismiss the appellants' appeal".

Judge O'Brien also considered it arguable, in the alternative, that if the
judge had failed to ask the sponsor why he only produced copy documents
rather than originals the judge acted in a materially unfair manner.  Judge
O'Brien considered that although the appellant might have some difficulties
challenging the 'sole responsibility' part of the decision, if the first
appellant were to succeed in her appeal that would have been a material
factor affecting the best interests of the children and the proportionality
of excluding them from the UK.

Before reaching my decision, I have carefully considered the grounds, the
grant of permission and the oral submissions that have been made to me
today.

It seems to me that the grant of permission was made on a misreading of the
decision.  Contrary to the understanding of the judge granting permission,
the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the financial requirements of
Appendix FM were met.  The judge carefully considered the income evidence,
noting what the threshold was, and seemed to be willing to accept that the
sponsor had sufficient income to meet the threshold of ï¿½24,800.  However,
at paragraph 77, the judge noted that the specified evidence requirements
of Appendix FM-SE had not been met; the sponsor failed to provide original
payslips covering the full six month period prior to the date of
application, and failed to provide sequential bank statements demonstrating
that the earnings had been paid into the bank.  It follows from that, as
the judge found, that the first appellant could never have succeeded under
the Rules on the application as made.  I gather that prior to the making of
the decision, there was some correspondence from the Home Office in which
the sponsor may have been asked to provide some further information, but by
the time of the decision there was not sufficient information to meet the
mandatory requirements of the Rules.  If the first appellant could not
succeed under the Rules, then neither could either of the two child
appellants, as the judge noted at paragraph 82 of the decision.

It follows that there was no error in respect of the findings under the
Rules.

I also find there was no error in the judge's observation at paragraph 55
of the decision that the sponsor failed to provide with the application
payslips covering the full six-month period.  At the hearing, some further
photocopies of payslips were handed in without explanation for late
production.  However, as I have explained, that evidence should have been
provided with the application.  The Rules provide a route for entry which
should have been followed and in my view the first appellant is not
entitled to sidestep or short-circuit the mandatory evidential requirements
simply because she made a mistake or omitted to provide all the documentary
evidence required.  If it is now contended that the sponsor can meet all
the FM-SE requirements and the financial threshold under Appendix FM then
it is open to the appellants to make a fresh application taking care to
provide the correct documentation.  I cannot see that it is
disproportionate to require them to do that and, as Mr McVeety has pointed
out in his submissions, if they can prove they meet the Rules the first
appellant will be on a shorter five year route to settlement than she would
be if allowed in outside the Rules on Article 8, so it would be to her
advantage despite the extra cost of making a fresh application. However,
whether she does or does not make a fresh application, I cannot see that it
is disproportionate to require an appellant who claims to be able to meet
the Rules to actually make a proper application showing that she has met
all the specified evidence requirements.

It follows that I am not satisfied that the judge was required to invite
comment from the sponsor as to why the specified evidence requirements had
not been met.  It was for the first appellant to ensure that the
application as made met all the requirements of the Rules. In any event,
the observation the judge made at paragraph 55 about photocopies was not
material to the outcome of the case because even if original further
documents had been handed in at the appeal hearing, the first appellant
would still have failed to meet the requirements of the Rules which have to
met on application. The appeal could not be allowed on the Rules, because
this is a human rights appeal, but if she had been able to provide all the
evidence in the correct format, that would have been highly material to any
Article 8 proportionality consideration.  In summary, the appellant failed
to provide the required evidence and even at the appeal hearing the
evidence remained inadequate. In the circumstances, no material error is
disclosed by that ground, or the judge's comment about photocopies, or
because this was not put to the appellant. It was for the appellant to
ensure that the application was properly made with the correct documentary
evidence.

The judge did not accept that the first appellant had sole responsibility
for the two child appellants from the previous relationship, giving cogent
reasons for that finding, starting at paragraph 61 and going through to
paragraph 74.  I find that the grounds arguing to the contrary are no more
than a disagreement with the decision and an attempt to reargue the appeal.


The grounds argue that the judge made a misdirection in law by elevating
the grandmother's role, having been described by the first appellant as a
legal guardian, when a proper examination of the facts were to reveal that
whilst the grandmother may have had day-to-day control, the first appellant
retained the critical decision-making for the children.  It was the first
appellant and the sponsor who described the grandmother as legal guardian.
Mr Mukulu made submissions to the effect that a legal guardian is term of
art and a reference by a lay person to someone being a legal guardian
should not be held against them.  However, whatever the true legal status
of the grandmother, that was how the sponsor and the first appellant viewed
the grandmother when they were asked about that, as the legal guardian.
That, together with absence of evidence from the grandmother, and indeed of
any involvement of the first appellant from the school, led the judge to
the conclusion that the grandmother retained joint control with the first
appellant and, therefore, that the first appellant did not have sole
responsibility.  Once again, this is a matter that could have been dealt
with by some satisfactory evidence, but the evidence was effectively
inadequate and insufficient for the judge to reach the conclusion that the
appellant sought.

Contrary to the grounds it is not the case that the judge ignored the
potential role of the grandmother as having day-to-day control whilst the
first appellant retained the critical decision-making. That scenario was
specifically considered at paragraph 72 of the decision, where the judge
noted the absence of the supporting evidence. At paragraph 74, the judge
accepted specifically that it is possible to have a day-to-day carer who
may or may not assume full parental responsibility.  However, after
reviewing all the evidence, the judge concluded that the first appellant
did not have or, more accurately, had failed to demonstrate that she had
sole responsibility but that it was shared with the grandmother. I am
satisfied that cogent reasons open to the judge were given for that
finding.

Outside the Rules the judge took into account the best interests of the
children but found no compelling reasons requiring entry clearance to be
granted on the basis that the decision of the respondent would otherwise
have had unjustifiably harsh consequences. The appellants are accommodated
and maintained either wholly or partly by the sponsor in Jamaica, they have
the benefit there of other wider family members including the grandmother
and it is difficult to see how there could have been any compelling
circumstances in this case to justify granting entry clearance when the
appellant had failed to comply with the Rules.  Even taking into account
the best interests and the desirability of children to be raised together,
the judge did not err in finding the respondent's decision entirely
proportionate.

The first appellant maintains that she can meet the specific requirements
of the Rules and that she will be able to provide the necessary documentary
evidence.  As said above, she is not entitled to simply short-circuit the
requirements of the Rules and say, well I omitted to supply the correct
documentation but please let me in anyway.  As already suggested, it is
still open to the appellant to make a fresh application taking care to pay
attention to the Rules.

In the circumstances and for the reasons set out I find no material error
of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal requiring it to be set
aside.

Decision

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
                    the making of an error of law.

The appeal of each appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the linked appeals
remain dismissed on all grounds.

I make no order for costs.






                    Signed DMW Pickup


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 10 August 2020



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                    Signed DMW Pickup


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 10 August 2020
