
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17892/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2020                    |On 20 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                  GOLAM [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


   Decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Seelhoff ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 2 March 2020 by which the
appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to
grant him leave to remain on long residence and human rights (article 8)
grounds was dismissed.

By a decision sent to the parties on 28 May 2020 the appellant was granted
permission to appeal on all grounds.

The appellant's legal representatives are Thamina Solicitors, London.

Rule 34

This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread of
Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule 2(1) of the 2008
Rules, and also at rule 2(2)-(4), UTJ Gill indicated by a Note and
Directions sent to the parties on 30 June 2020 her provisional view that it
would be appropriate to determine the following questions without a
hearing:

      i) Whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved
         the making of an error of law, and if so

     ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

The parties were requested to inform the Tribunal if, despite the
directions, a face-to-face hearing was required. Both parties agreed that
the error of law consideration could properly be undertaken without a
hearing.

The parties filed written submissions upon which they rely. The appellant's
submissions of 13 July 2020 were authored by Mr. A Metzer QC and the
respondent's submissions of 20 July 2020 by Mr. S Whitwell. The Tribunal is
grateful for the care and effort taken by the parties in the preparation of
the written submissions.

In the circumstances, being mindful of the importance of these proceedings
to the appellant and to the overriding objective that the Tribunal deal
with cases fairly and justly, I am satisfied that it is just and
appropriate to proceed under rule 34.

Anonymity

The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and the parties did not seek
one before me.

The appellant

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh and is aged 39. Whilst in this
country he secured a Master's degree in Business Administration. Dependent
upon his appeal are his wife and their two children, a son aged 6 and a
daughter aged 3.

He arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General)
Student on 28 October 2009 and enjoyed leave to enter until 31 August 2013.
His leave was subsequently varied to leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)
Student until 16 January 2016. An in-time application for leave to remain
as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant was refused on 7 March 2016 and the decision
was upheld following administrative review.

The appellant applied for leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules
('the Rules') on 16 May 2016 and varied the application on several
occasions, finally on 1 October 2019 as an application for indefinite leave
to remain on long residency grounds under paragraph 276C of the Immigration
Rules ('the Rules'). The respondent refused the application by means of a
decision dated 17 October 2019.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross on 21 February
2020. The appellant was represented and gave evidence.

As evidenced by the grounds of appeal filed with the First-tier Tribunal
and the skeleton argument prepared for the hearing before the Judge, the
appellant's primary focus of argument initially rested upon long residence
under the Rules. However, upon being provided with a copy of the Court of
Appeal judgment in R (Ahmed) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2019] EWCA Civ 1070; [2020] 2 All E.R. 73 the appellant withdrew his
appeal on this ground: see [10] of decision.

The core of the appellant's case as ultimately advanced before the Judge
was that the medical condition of his son was such that (i) the appellant
would have very significant obstacles to integrating into Bangladesh upon
leaving the United Kingdom, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, or
alternatively (ii) very exceptional circumstances arose consequent to his
son's medical condition as to make return to Bangladesh disproportionate in
relation to his article 8 rights. The submission identified by the
appellant's skeleton argument of 21 February 2020 is consistent with that
orally advanced before the Judge and details:

         '29. It is submitted that the respondent did not consider that
             under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) there would be very significant
             obstacles on integration of the child in Bangladesh. The child
             lived all his life in the UK and has severe disability issues,
             which must be addressed at this early stage in his life. This
             in the view of the experts whose reports that the tribunal
             should consider. Irrespective of his age, it is because of his
             disabilities that he will not be able to integrate in a
             country that is for all intents and purpose foreign to him.
             Had it not been for his disabilities then we would have agreed
             with the respondent's view that he will be young enough to
             integrating Bangladeshi society and at school there and find
             new peers to interact with. However, he has severe interaction
             problems and there is a long way to go and as advised by the
             expert reports, he is going to need a lot of support and
             professional care and attention. So, it is submitted that in
             this case this child would have catastrophic integration
             problems because of his disabilities if he were returned to
             Bangladesh with his parents.' [Emphasis added]

In his consideration of the appellant's private life rights the Judge
expressly identified that he was to consider the medical health of the
appellant's son, who has been diagnosed with autism, in his assessment as
to whether there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
integration upon return to Bangladesh. The Judge noted the extent and
nature of the documents relied upon by the appellant at [8] of his
decision:

         '8.  ... Reviewing the documents in that section, I note that the
             most recent document is a letter from a speech and language
             therapist introducing herself to the appellant's parents,
             there is a Targets and Planning report from the child's school
             dated 12 November 2019 which does contain a section on his
             special educational needs, there are some generic appointment
             letters from October 2019, there is a school visit report from
             8 October 2019 from the speech and language therapy unit,
             there is a school report from autumn 2019, there is a similar
             speech report from April 2019, there are further appointment
             letters, there is a school report from December 2018, a speech
             and language therapy report from September 2018, some
             appointment letters from 2017 and a further copy of the
             autistic spectrum disorder report from November 2016, and from
             pages 99-101 of the bundle there are three pages of media
             reports on autism awareness in Bangladesh.'

The Judge conscientiously considered the evidence presented in relation to
the appellant's son and considered his ability, and the ability of his
father, to integrate into Bangladeshi society upon return, at [20]-[26].
The Judge clearly concluded that when taken as a whole the evidence was
simply inadequate to meet the burden of proof placed upon the appellant and
he provided detailed reasons for his conclusion, inter alia:

         '20.  In terms of the appellant's son I have considerable
             difficulties in evaluating the impact removal would have on
             him because of the lack of comprehensive or recent reports
             from medical professionals or educational professionals
             responsible for his care addressing the potential impact of
             removal. Autism as a condition has no cure so the appellant's
             son will be facing the consequences of his autism whether he
             lives in the UK or in Bangladesh. The appellant's son is not
             receiving treatment for his condition per se but rather
             educational support from what can be seen in the papers. The
             appellant himself acknowledged that the only treatment his son
             gets is speech and language therapy.

         21. The appellant himself seemed to acknowledge that such treatment
             does exist in Bangladesh albeit he had indicated it would be
             very expensive. The appellant is a healthy man of working age
             educated to Master's level in the UK. One would expect him to
             be employable on return to Bangladesh and that he would be
             employable in a good job which should facilitate his accessing
             support. The appellant has family in Bangladesh including his
             parents, his mother-in-law and siblings.

         22.  It is a common feature of autistic children that they struggle
             to cope with and adapt to change however there is nothing in
             the papers before me which shows a current evaluation of how
             difficult the appellant's son might find it to acclimatise to
             life in Bangladesh. The most recent report would be the school
             report in the appellant's bundle which notes that he has one-
             to-one support in terms of his education, that he responds
             better to familiar adults, that he has sensory needs with food
             which means his preference is for food with the texture of
             mashed bananas although he also eats mushy Weetabix and
             porridge. The report notes that he needs help with washing,
             dressing, eating and using the toilet. There is nothing which
             explains the difficulties he has getting to know adults or
             adapting to change and so it is difficult to assess whether
             this would have any significant impact on return. The
             appellant and his wife would of course support their son on
             return to Bangladesh so the two most familiar adults would be
             available to him.

         23. I was invited to find that the two news reports included in the
             appellant's bundle somehow demonstrated that there was a lack
             of treatment for autism in Bangladesh. The difficulty I had
             with this is that the appellant's father acknowledged the
             existence of special schools and supportive facilities but
             simply indicated that they have been told they were too
             expensive by family friend (sic).

         24. I do not accept that the figures of �2000 to �3000 a month
             given by the appellant are likely to be correct for the cost
             of special schooling in Bangladesh. I would need proper
             documentary evidence in order to support such figures that
             would appear to be very high for that economy. In terms of the
             two articles I have been provided, I have been provided with
             an article which suggests that often doctors were unaware of
             the clinical features of autism, its management and can
             sometimes not understand the disorder. In this case the
             appellant's son has a full diagnosis already so many of the
             problems outlined in the article simply would not be relevant.
             The report does note that schools are reluctant to have
             autistic students and notes a lack of curriculum autistic
             students again this case has to be seen in the context of the
             fact that there is a pre-existing diagnosis.

         25.  The second article talks of high numbers of children
             potentially with autistic spectrum disorders in Bangladesh but
             again this is a news report which taught anecdotally about the
             problems one family had in understanding their diagnosis but
             again the situation we have in this case is a family where the
             child has been diagnosed when the appellant's [and] presumably
             his wife have already educated themselves about the
             condition.'

Consequent to such assessment of the evidence before him, the Judge
considered the appellant under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and concluded at
[26]:

         '26.Without more specific information and reports focused on the
             potential challenges to the appellant's son in relocating to
             Bangladesh I do not consider that I am in a position to make a
             finding that there would be very significant obstacles to his
             integration on return to Bangladesh. It is important to
             remember that the test is not whether or not he would be as
             well supported in Bangladesh as he would be in the UK.'

The Judge therefore found that the evidence relied upon by the appellant
came nowhere close to establishing that his son would suffer very serious
obstacles in integrating upon relocation to Bangladesh, let alone suffering
the asserted 'catastrophic' problems.

In considering article 8 rights outside of the Rules, the Judge concluded,
at [27]:

         '27. In terms of article 8 outside the rules I note that there is
             minimal weight to be attached to the appellant's own private
             life. He and his family would be removed as a unit as there is
             no basis for the rest of them to continue living in the UK and
             accordingly there would be no interference in family life. In
             terms of the son's freestanding private life I note that he
             has not been lawfully resident (although as a child he should
             not be penalised for this) in the UK and that his condition
             appears to have prevented him building the ties one would
             expect a child of his age to build in the UK. Whilst he might
             struggle [on] return to cope with the change that does not
             enhance any private life he might have in the UK. Bearing in
             mind the weight to be attached to the public interest in
             immigration control I am satisfied that in all the
             circumstances of this case, and on the evidence before me,
             refusal is proportionate and justified.'

Grounds of Appeal

The grounds of appeal were not drafted by Mr Metzer. They were drafted by
counsel who did not represent the appellant before the Judge and are narrow
in scope.

Ground 1 asserts that the Judge failed to make findings under section 55 of
the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and places reliance upon
the Supreme Court judgment of Zoumbas v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2013] UKSC 74; [2013] 1 W.L.R. 3690.

Ground 2 asserts that the Judge failed to lawfully consider the appeal
before him in light of the test laid down as to 'integration' by the Court
of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016]
EWCA Civ 813.

Decision

Before considering the grounds of appeal it is appropriate to observe that
they present no challenge to the Judge's rational criticism of the quality
of the evidence relied upon before him. There is a singular lack of
relevant medical or professional evidence as to the difficulties, or
otherwise, the appellant's son may or may not have in integrating upon
relocating to Bangladesh. The Judge's conclusions as to the very limited
objective documentary evidence as to treatment and schooling in Bangladesh,
in the form of the news articles, is again rational in the circumstances
and is unchallenged.

A further and striking problem arising from the grounds of appeal is that
they are constructed upon the documentary evidence relied upon without any
clear identification that the Judge found such evidence to be wholly
unsatisfactory in permitting the appellant to meet the burden of proof
placed upon him. As there is no challenge to the Judge's findings as to the
documentary evidence, this Tribunal must consider the evidence placed
before the First-tier Tribunal as inadequate and is not permitted to seek
to travel down the hazardous path of identifying the potential strength of
whatever future evidence may be obtained.

Ground 1 is a complaint that the Judge did not expressly have regard to the
best interests of the appellant's son and made no findings pursuant to
section 55 of the 2009 Act. The core of the ground is identifiable at para.
7:

         '7.   Respectfully, there has been no independent assessment of the
             child's position applying the principle summarised in Zoumbas.
             The child's best interests have been considered as part and
             parcel of the parent's balancing scales and, in doing so, it
             is arguable that the assessment has been contaminated by the
             other factors that FTJ Seelhoff held against the appellant
             himself.'

At para. 6 of the grounds the author specifically places reliance upon
�10(7) of Lord Hodge's judgment in Zoumbas, namely that 'a child must not
be blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the
conduct of a parent', though the Tribunal notes that the Judge expressly
observed this legal principle, at [27] of his decision.

The Tribunal notes the written submissions of Mr. Metzer, which have been
authored in his usual careful and helpful manner. Beyond observing that the
Judge did not make an independent assessment of the child's best interests,
and so there not having been a 'primary consideration' of his best
interests, little more is said.

The difficulty for the appellant in advancing this ground is that whilst
there was no express assessment as to the child's best interest, it is
clear that the Judge sought to consider them in the context of the child
remaining with his parents who provide him with love and care. The question
as to where the family reside, which is linked in this matter to the
ability of the child to integrate upon relocation to Bangladesh, was
ultimately decided by the inadequacy of the evidence relied upon. With the
appellant being unable to meet the burden placed upon him to establish very
significant obstacles for him, and his son, to integrate upon return to
Bangladesh then no reasonable Judge could find anything other than the best
interests of the son are to reside with his family and return with them to
their home country. This ground enjoys no merit.

The second ground of appeal relies upon a purported failure by the Judge to
self-direct himself in relation to the broad evaluative judgment to be made
to integration as identified by the Court of Appeal in Kamara. However, as
observed above this ground is rooted upon the documentary evidence being
capable of identifying the asserted 'strain' upon the appellant's child
integrating upon his relocation. As already noted, there is no challenge to
the Judge's reasoning and conclusion as to the inadequacy of the
documentary evidence relied upon. The Judge reasonably concluded that the 6-
year old child would be returning to Bangladesh with his parents and whilst
he may have some struggles, they were not sufficient to establish very
significant obstacles. No other alternate conclusion could properly be
reached consequent to the unchallenged assessment of the evidence even if
there had been express consideration of the Court of Appeal's judgment in
Kamara. Taking this ground at its highest, even if there were an error it
cannot be considered material.

For the short reasons detailed above, the grounds advanced are simply
incapable of possessing the substance required to establish material errors
of law in circumstances where the evidence relied upon is incapable of
permitting the appellant to meet the burden of proof placed upon him. This
is a matter where permission to appeal ought properly not to have been
granted by the First-tier Tribunal because it has given the appellant and
his family false hope. The appellant may have better served to properly
heed the concerns of the Judge as to the evidence collated to date and
consider whether appropriate medical or professional evidence could or
could not be secured to sustain a cogent submission as to integration under
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

For the reasons detailed above, the appeal must be dismissed.



Notice of decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of a material error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 2 March 2020, is upheld and
the appeal is dismissed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 14 August 2020




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed, and no fee award is payable.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 14 August 2020
