
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/17732/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Decision & Reasons           |
|by Skype for Business                         |Promulgated                  |
|on 16 December 2020                           |On 12 January 2021           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             MATI ULLAH FAROOQI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 14 October 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Lea, promulgated on 25 February 2020.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal 10 March 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Simpson, dated 28 April 2020.

     vi) Directions of the UT, issued  on  2  July  2020,  with  a  view  to
         deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law and (b)
         if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

    vii) The appellant's submissions in response, filed on 20 July 2020.

   viii) Note by UTJ Smith, dated 25 September 2020, explaining that the  UT
         would be assisted by more developed submissions,  and  directing  a
         hearing by remote means.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  The technology enabled an effective hearing.

 3. The grounds as originally presented are, firstly, that the  FtT  failed
    to  consider  factors  relevant   to   the   appellant's   ability   to
    (re)integrate in Pakistan [in terms  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
    immigration rules] - an expert report; Home  Office  policy  on  taking
    account of national attitudes;  dearth  of  mental  health  facilities;
    stigma attached by the community to the mentally  ill;  and,  secondly,
    that  the  FtT  failed  to  consider  those  factors  in  relation   to
    exceptional circumstances and undue harshness.

 4. The appellant subsequently crystallised his appeal  into  two  grounds:
    failure to apply the law as stated in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17; and
    speculation, or irrationality, about the appellant's mental  health  on
    return, and support in Pakistan.

 5. The directions of UTJ Smith sought expansion and specification of those
    two grounds.

 6. AM was not published until the day after the grant of  permission;  but
    as Mr Byrne said, the law is to be  taken  as  always  having  been  as
    stated by the Supreme Court.  If the FtT's  decision  cannot  stand  by
    reference to the law as subsequently understood, it would  fall  to  be
    set aside.  This  argument  has  to  be  considered,  even  without  an
    application to amend the grounds.

 7. AM, however, does not have the consequence that all  cases  on  medical
    grounds must be reheard.

 8. The second ground can be accommodated within the original application.

 9. The first ground was well developed by Mr Byrne.  The FtT's decision is
    underlaid by the previous test, which may be  summarised  as  "imminent
    risk of dying".  It did not anticipate the test as  later  approved  by
    the Supreme Court.

10. The Court said at [22]:



      Following a careful analysis of the decision in the D case and of its
      own decision in the N case, the Grand Chamber in the Paposhvili case
      expressed the view in para 182  that  the  approach  hitherto  adopted
      should be "clarified". The Convention is a living instrument and when,
      however appropriately, the ECtHR charts its growth,  it  may  generate
      confusion for it to claim to  be  providing  only  clarification.  The
      court proceeded as follows:

                 "183.  The Court considers that the 'other very exceptional
                 cases' within the meaning of the judgment in N v The United
                 Kingdom (para 43) which may raise an issue under article 3
                 should be understood to refer to situations  involving  the
                 removal of a seriously  ill  person  in  which  substantial
                 grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  he  or  she,
                 although not at imminent risk of dying, would face  a  real
                 risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
                 the receiving  country  or  the  lack  of  access  to  such
                 treatment,  of  being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and
                 irreversible  decline  in  his  or  her  state  of   health
                 resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to   a   significant
                 reduction in life expectancy. The  Court  points  out  that
                 these situations correspond to a  high  threshold  for  the
                 application  of  article  3  of  the  Convention  in  cases
                 concerning the removal of  aliens  suffering  from  serious
                 illness."


11. Mr Byrne said that AM not only changed the legal test,  it  placed  the
    onus on the SSHD, a point which was also not considered by the FtT.

12. On onus, the Supreme Court said at [32 - 33]:


      The Grand Chamber's pronouncements in the Paposhvili case about  the
      procedural requirements of article 3, summarised in para 23 above, can
      on no view be regarded as mere clarification of  what  the  court  had
      previously said; and we may expect that, when  it  gives  judgment  in
      the Savran case, the Grand Chamber will shed light on the extent  of
      the requirements. Yet observations on them may even now be  made  with
      reasonable confidence. The basic principle is that, if  you  allege  a
      breach of your rights, it is for you to establish it. But  "Convention
      proceedings do  not  in  all  cases  lend  themselves  to  a  rigorous
      application of [that] principle ...": DH v Czech Republic (2008)  47
      EHRR 3, para 179. It is clear that, in  application  to  claims  under
      article 3 to resist return  by  reference  to  ill-health,  the  Grand
      Chamber has indeed modified that principle. The threshold, set out  in
      para 23(a) above, is for the applicant to adduce evidence "capable  of
      demonstrating that there are substantial grounds for  believing"  that
      article 3 would be  violated.  It  may  make  formidable  intellectual
      demands on decision-makers who conclude that  the  evidence  does  not
      establish "substantial grounds" to have to proceed to consider whether
      nevertheless it is "capable of demonstrating" them. But,  irrespective
      of the perhaps unnecessary complexity of the test, let no one  imagine
      that it represents an undemanding threshold for an applicant to cross.
      For the requisite capacity of the evidence adduced by the applicant is
      to demonstrate "substantial" grounds for believing that it is a  "very
      exceptional" case because of a "real" risk of subjection to  "inhuman"
      treatment. All three parties accept that Sales LJ was correct, in para
      16, to describe the threshold as an  obligation  on  an  applicant  to
      raise a "prima facie case" of potential  infringement  of  article  3.
      This means a  case  which,  if  not  challenged  or  countered,  would
      establish the infringement: see para 112 of a useful analysis  in  the
      Determination of the President of the Upper Tribunal and  two  of  its
      senior  judges  in AXB  v  Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
      Department [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC). Indeed, as the tribunal proceeded to
      explain in para 123, the arrangements in the  UK  are  such  that  the
      decisions whether the applicant has adduced evidence to the  requisite
      standard and, if so, whether it has been successfully  countered  fall
      to be taken initially by the Secretary of State and, in the  event  of
      an appeal, again by the First-tier Tribunal.

      In the event that the applicant  presents  evidence  to  the  standard
      addressed above, the returning state can seek to challenge or  counter
      it  in  the   manner   helpfully   outlined   in   the   judgment   in
      the Paposhvili case at paras 187 to 191 and summarised at para 23(b)
      to (e) above. The premise behind the guidance, surely  reasonable,  is
      that, while it is for the applicant to adduce evidence  about  his  or
      her  medical  condition,  current  treatment  (including  the   likely
      suitability of any other treatment) and the effect on him  or  her  of
      inability to access it, the returning state is better able to  collect
      evidence  about  the  availability  and  accessibility   of   suitable
      treatment in the receiving state. What will most surprise  the  first-
      time reader of the Grand Chamber's judgment is the reference  in  para
      187 to the suggested obligation on the returning state to dispel "any"
      doubts raised by  the  applicant's  evidence.  But,  when  the  reader
      reaches para 191 and  notes  the  reference,  in  precisely  the  same
      context, to "serious doubts", he will realise  that  "any"  doubts  in
      para 187 means  any  serious  doubts.  For  proof,  or  in  this  case
      disproof, beyond all doubt is  a  concept  rightly  unknown  to  the
      Convention.


13. The FtT's decision was unavoidably based on case law  which  had  since
    been superseded.  The live issue is whether that  (constructive)  error
    is one which requires the decision to be set aside;  a  question  which
    overlaps with the second ground.

14. Mr McVeety's submission was straightforward.  The legal test remains  a
    high one, and the appellant's case did not come near it.  There was  no
    evidence of any treatment he receives in the  UK  which  would  not  be
    available in Pakistan.  He declines to take any treatment  here,  other
    than a pill which costs a small amount (as he elects to  be  prescribed
    from England, not Scotland, where the medication would be  free).   The
    same medication is available at low cost in Pakistan, about 50 pence  a
    day.  There was no error in the FtT's conclusion that  his  return  was
    not likely to lead to any deterioration in his condition.   His  family
    in Pakistan wished to see him and would support him, while in the UK he
    has no relatives and lives with a sympathetic friend and his family.

15. In response, Mr Byrne said that an evidential basis had not  been  laid
    for the respondent's submission.  The  materials  which  the  appellant
    placed before the FtT included a  well-documented  history  of  medical
    interventions and reviews  in  the  UK.   He  suffers  from  a  primary
    psychotic illness, with  depressive  symptoms.   It  was  an  error  to
    suppose that a daily tablet was all the care  required.   In  Scotland,
    there is a statutory mental health  regime  surrounding  the  appellant
    with safeguards, including compulsory intervention if needed.  That was
    to be contrasted with the inadequacy  of  mental  health  provision  in
    Pakistan.

16. I reserved my decision.

17. The appellant suffers from serious mental disorder, and his case  is  a
    sad one, as is clear from the  decision  of  Judge  Lea  and  from  the
    previous decision of Judge D'Ambrosio.   Those  are  not  unsympathetic
    decisions.  They are not based on depreciating the appellant's evidence
    and circumstances, but on a realistic evaluation.  The grounds on which
    this case was first brought to the FtT (which have  become  the  second
    ground, as now argued) are only  a  complaint  that  matters  were  not
    considered when they plainly were, and disagreement with  the  outcome.
    The appellant was unable to specify any aspect of  the  evidence  which
    was not considered by the FtT, and which might have made a  difference.



18. The FtT said at [14] that the appellant's case was well  short  of  the
    high test for article 3.

19. Recasting that in terms of Paposhvili, the appellant has not founded on
    any evidence showing  a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of
    appropriate treatment in  Pakistan  or  the  lack  of  access  to  such
    treatment,  that  he  might  be  exposed  to  a  serious,   rapid   and
    irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense
    suffering or to a significant reduction in his  life  expectancy.   The
    evidence is that his situation, which presently does not  involve  such
    risk, would be much the same (or  even  slightly  better,  as  the  FtT
    thought, although that is not the crux).

20. The appellant has not specified any evidence "about his or her  medical
    condition, current treatment (including the likely suitability  of  any
    other treatment) and the effect on him or her of  inability  to  access
    it", such that the onus "to collect evidence about the availability and
    accessibility of suitable treatment in the receiving state" might  pass
    to the SSHD.  In any  event,  the  respondent  did  refer  the  FtT  to
    considerable information about facilities in Pakistan before  the  FtT.
    The appellant has not shown that, based on all the background  evidence
    from both sides, the FtT erred in concluding as it did.

21. There is no error in the FtT's decision, apart from  the  retrospective
    change of legal approach to medical cases in general.  There is nothing
    in the tests, as now stated, which, on the evidence before the FtT  and
    the findings it made, might have led to another outcome.

22. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      16 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

