
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18537/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft Teams    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 June 2021                             |On 14 July 2021               |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                              Mrs Samina Naveed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, instructed by Ibrahim Consultants
Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal against
the decision of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who dismissed her appeal
against the respondent's decision of 31 October 2019 refusing a human
rights claim.

2.   The judge noted the appellant's immigration history.  She has been in
the United Kingdom since 6 September 2007.  She married the sponsor, Mr
Muhammad Asif on 25 December 2007 in an Islamic ceremony.  Like the
appellant, Mr Asif is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was granted indefinite
leave to remain in the United Kingdom, under what is known as the Legacy
Scheme, on 20 February 2019.  The appellant had had a previous human rights
appeal which was refused by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 7 July
2017.

3.   It was conceded on behalf of the respondent that the relationship
between the appellant and Mr Asif is genuine and subsisting.  She stated
that there were insurmountable obstacles to her return to Pakistan, that
she had not left the United Kingdom since 2007, she had suffered stress and
the sponsor, Mr Asif, became ill with hepatitis C, she had no immediate
family in Pakistan and she and her partner were in the process of seeking
fertility treatment and as a consequence met the requirements of EX.1.1 of
Appendix FM.  In the alternative, she argued that her removal from the
United Kingdom would amount to a disproportionate interference in her and
her partner's private and family life due to the length of their stay and
their connections in the United Kingdom, the fact that they are not
dependent on public funds, the sponsor's earning capacity, the fact that
they are of good character and that the appellant was receiving treatment
for stress and fertility issues.

4.   The judge rightly made as her starting point the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge in 2017.  The judge there found neither the appellant
nor the sponsor to be credible witnesses, mainly due to the evidence
concerning the sponsor's health.  He had been found to have contracted
hepatitis C and liver disease.  The appellant said that he was unable to
take care of himself and she was providing his sole care and support.  The
medical evidence provided showed that his treatment had been successful and
his health issues had been resolved save for routine check-ups.  The judge
also found that he was working as a builder, decorator and interior
designer, he was not housebound and he was active, undertaking manual work.
 The judge in 2017 found the appellant and the sponsor to have exaggerated
the current state of the sponsor's health and found that that damaged their
credibility accordingly.

5.   In her witness statement, the appellant said that Mr Asif had been
diagnosed with hepatitis C and fibrosis of the liver and had been receiving
treatment for a number of years.  She said that the treatment, which was
very aggressive and came with a number of side effects, had left him
severely weak.  He was tested every few months to monitor his health.  He
also suffered from depression and anxiety due to the uncertainty over her
immigration status.

6.   The judge at the hearing in 2020 observed that no evidence had been
produced regarding the sponsor's depression and anxiety.  She found that
the appellant had persisted in exaggerating the sponsor's current health
issues.  There was no evidence before her to suggest that his hepatitis C
and liver problems were anything other than resolved.  She saw no reason to
depart from the judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility, in 2017.

7.   She also saw no reason to depart from the earlier findings in relation
to the appellant's command of the English language.  The appellant had used
an interpreter at the previous hearing and also did at this hearing.  She
bore in mind that confidence in a second language might play a part in
determining whether a witness requested or used an interpreter to give
evidence, but she found herself unable to discern the appellant's level of
English from the current proceedings and was not assisted by any
examination or test results.

8.   The judge also found that the appellant had not shown that the sponsor
earned a minimum of ï¿½18,600 and therefore she could not satisfy the
financial eligibility requirements.  She found discrepancies between the
figures that were received into the sponsor's bank account and the figure
declared to HMRC for the tax year of 2016/17 and found the sponsor's
credibility damaged as a consequence.

9.   The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules, reminding
herself of the guidance in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and Agyarko [2017]
UKSC 11.  She made a balance sheet analysis of the positives and negatives
in the case and concluded that the public interest in the appellant's
removal significantly outweighed the family and private life she had
established in the United Kingdom; removal would not result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant and sponsor and would
not therefore be proportionate [given the sense otherwise of what is said
at paragraph 42, I consider that the judge must have meant to say
"disproportionate" at that point at the end of paragraph 42].

10.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal first on the
basis that the judge had not made any decision as to whether there were any
insurmountable obstacles under EX.1 although this had been argued, and in
addition, when assessing proportionality the judge had failed to take into
account and/or attach adequate weight to the factors in the appellant's
favour, referring in particular to the amount of time that the appellant
had been in the United Kingdom, the appellant's ongoing treatment and the
fact that she was looking after her husband and was stressed due to his
health issues, that she was not a burden on the public funds, was of good
character and had established a private life in the United Kingdom for a
lengthy period.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

11.  In his submissions, Mr Mustafa relied on the points made in the
grounds.  Despite the adverse findings, the decision was flawed due to the
failure to make any finding on the question of whether there were
insurmountable obstacles to the family re-integrating in Pakistan.  This
was a material error of law.

12.  He also argued that it was relevant that the sponsor had been granted
indefinite leave to remain, and that, given that he was a failed asylum
seeker, account should have been taken of the fact that he had claimed to
be at risk on return to Pakistan.

13.  In her submissions, Ms Isherwood relied upon and developed the points
made in the Rule 24 response.  It was accepted that the judge had not
referred to EX.1, but it was argued that that was not material.

14.  The asylum claim of the sponsor had not been accepted.  He had been
granted leave under the Legacy.  The judge had taken proper account of the
findings of the earlier judge and considered the previous history and
looked at all the evidence.  The positives and negatives had all been
considered and the test outside the Rules was a high one.

15.  By way of reply, Mr Mustafa argued that it was quite clear that the
judge had not considered the issue of insurmountable obstacles to return to
Pakistan and had not taken into account the significant fact that the
sponsor was a qualified person, having been granted indefinite leave to
remain.

16.  I reserved my decision.

17.  The first point can be disposed of relatively briefly.  It is clear
from EX.1 in Appendix FM of HC 395 that the paragraph applies if the
applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is
in the UK and, as in this case, settled in the UK, and there are
insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
outside the UK.  Under EX.2 it is said that for the purposes of EX.1.(b)
"insurmountable obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which
would be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would
entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

18.  It is common ground that the judge did not consider whether or not
such insurmountable obstacles existed in this case.  I do not agree that
that can be regarded as an immaterial error, despite the weighty adverse
findings otherwise made by the judge.  It was a point that needed to be
considered and that was not done, and the failure to do so amounts to a
material error of law.

19.  As regards the consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules, the only
element, in my view, lacking from that evaluation is that same point of a
consideration of whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles to
family life continuing outside the United Kingdom.  The judge gave very
careful consideration otherwise to Article 8 outside the Rules, setting up
a balance sheet in which she considered all the relevant matters.  Though
she did not mention it at that point, she was clearly aware of the fact
that the sponsor has indefinite leave to remain, and the failure to make
express reference to that in no way materially mars her decision.  I should
say also that I see no force to the point that the sponsor was a former
asylum applicant.  As Ms Isherwood pointed out, he was granted
discretionary leave under the Legacy policy and thereafter indefinite leave
to remain, and it cannot possibly be said to follow from those grants of
leave that his claim to be at risk on return to Pakistan was accepted or
that it had any weight.

20.  Accordingly, there will have to be an evaluation of whether or not
EX.1 applies in this case and the findings in that regard will have to be
factored into the evaluation of Article 8 outside the Rules.  In light of
the fact that the judge's findings are otherwise unchallenged, my
provisional view is that it would be most appropriate for the matter to go
back to her for her to make a decision on EX.1 and to re-evaluate her
consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules in light of that and her other
findings.  Unless I receive representations persuading me to the contrary,
within fourteen days of the date of promulgation of this decision, the
appeal will be remitted to Judge Verghis at Hatton Cross for her to
complete her decision.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 9 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

