
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/18800/2019
                                                               HU/18797/2019
                                                               HU/18794/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by UK Court Skype                    |On the 22nd June 2021                |
|On the 28th May 2021                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                               MISS SARITA RAI
                               MISS BINDRA RAI
                          MR MANI PRASAD JIMEE RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants     Ms Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Howe and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants are nationals of Nepal born on 31 August 1975, 18 May 1977
and 22 June 1981 respectively. They appeal against the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Oliver sent on 26 January 2021 dismissing the
appellants' appeals against the decisions dated 16 September 2019 to refuse
them entry clearance to the United Kingdom as adult dependent children of a
former Gurkha soldier.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 9 March 2021 on the basis that it was
arguable that the judge has failed to analyse the evidence and failed to
give adequate reasons for his findings. In particular, First-tier Tribunal
Judge Scott Baker was concerned that there was no finding as to whether
family life is enjoyed between the sponsor and the appellants.

The hearing was held remotely and neither party objected to the manner of
the hearing.  Both parties participated by Skype for Business.  I am
satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held because it was not
practicable because of the current Covid- 19 restrictions and that all of
the issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  Neither representative
complained of any unfairness during the hearing and both representatives
confirmed at the end of the hearing that the hearing had been conducted
fairly.

Background

The appellants applied for settlement on 3 June 2019 to join their mother
in the United Kingdom.  She in turn had been granted settlement in the
United Kingdom in 2015 as the widow of a former Gurkha soldier.  The
application was refused on 16 September 2019 and the refusal was upheld on
review by the Entry Clearance Manager on 28 November 2020.  The basis of
refusal was that the appellants did not meet Annex K of the immigration
rules in respect of adult dependent children of former Gurkha soldiers,
that the appellants did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules
in respect of family life in accordance with Appendix FM and there was no
breach of Article 8 ECHR because family life does not exist between the
appellants and the sponsor.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor.  The judge found that the
appellants' reliance on their mother's pension was "in part" contrived and
commented that the appellants all claimed that they had not been able to
find work in respective periods of 27,25 and 21 years. The judge did not
accept that the appellants were not living independently. The judge found
that there was no greater emotional dependence between the appellants and
their mother than that of the normal emotional bonds between adult
relatives. The appeals were dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal

It is asserted that the judge misapplied the law by failing to apply the
relevant legal principles to the facts of the case. The judge failed to
apply the correct test to consider whether there was evidence of "real,
committed or effective" support being provided by the sponsor to the
appellants. The judge failed to adequately explain why he reached the
conclusion that the appellant's reliance on their mother's pension was "in
part" contrived. The judge dealt inadequately with the fact that the
appellants lived with their mother enjoying family life with her until she
left Nepal. The judge did not consider whether family life existed prior to
the sponsor's departure and ignored the fact that continued cohabitation
was demonstrative of "real, effective or committed support".  The judge
failed to take into account the frequency of contact between the parties
and the sponsor's visit to Nepal as well as the fact that there was a
stronger emotional connection after the death of the appellants' father.
The judge did not make findings on whether there was "real, effective or
committed" support and required some compelling or exceptional factor
thereby elevating the relevant threshold.

Rule 24 response

It is submitted that the judge directed himself appropriately and that the
grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with the judge.

Discussion and Analysis

Ground 1 - Misdirection in law

It is asserted by the appellants that they lived with their widowed mother
in Nepal prior to her departure for the UK in 2015. They continue to live
in the family home. They continue to be maintained by the sponsor and have
access to her Gurkha widow Service Pension. The appellants are all
unmarried and unemployed. Their sponsor provides for their living expenses
and gives them emotional support through daily phone calls. Had the
appellant's father been able to apply for settlement he would have applied
for it and the appellants would have been born in the UK. Ms Nnamani's
submission is that although the judge was clearly aware of the appropriate
tests, the judge failed to apply the principles to the facts of the case
thereby misdirecting himself in law.

Ms Nnamani submits that the judge fails to refer to the correct test of
"real, effective or committed" support at all when making his findings on
family life. The judge misapplied the law by failing to apply the
principles in respect of family life, particularly in the context of Gurkha
families. The judge failed to give weight to the authorities that suggest
that where a child has not set up an independent household this will be
evidence of the existence of family life, that the family members all lived
together in a family unit and that in 2009 the appellants father died
leaving the sponsor a widow as a sole parent living with her children. Ms
Nnamani points to the principles in Uddin that continued cohabitation is
indicative of the existence of family life. Had the judge applied the
principles correctly, he would have found that family life was engaged.

Mr Lindsay resisted the appeal. His submission is that the judge has set
out all of the relevant caselaw and on that basis it is difficult to argue
that the judge has misdirected himself. It would only be where the judge
manifestly failed to follow the authorities that there would be an error of
law. He further submitted that the judge was entitled to find that family
life did not exist between the sponsor and the appellants. The decision was
rational and adequately reasoned.

I am satisfied that the judge did set out the relevant authorities from
[10] to [16]. Indeed, much of his decision is a recitation of the relevant
caselaw.  He refers to Rai v ECO, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320, Uddin v
SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338 and Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

At [10] the judge explicitly states;

         "in the case of adult Gurkha dependents it has recently been
         emphasised in Rai v ECO, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 that there
         is no need for a test of exceptionality and the irreducible minimum
         to show family life is that there be real, committed or effective
         support.  In Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338 it was held that "the
         test for the establishment of Article 8 family life in the Kugathas
         sense is one of effective, real or committed support. There is no
         requirement to prove exceptional dependency".

Having recited the caselaw at length the judge's conclusions are in three
short paragraphs at [18], [19] and [20]. The judge was clearly aware of the
relevant test of "real, committed and effective" support. The judge accepts
that there is financial dependency although finds that this is "in part"
contrived and then focuses primarily on emotional dependency finding that
the situation of the appellants is akin to adult children in the UK who
live with their parents principally for economic reasons. The judge states
at [19] and [20];

         "At the respective ages of 45, 43 and 39 and living together, the
         appellants no doubt have a close bond with each other, but I do not
         accept that they are not living independently, but rather that they
         live together as a matter of convenience."

         "The most important question to be answered is whether they are in
         a state of emotional dependence on their surviving parent. Under
         the strict terms of Annex K, they cannot now be said to be in such
         a state with their father, since he died 11 years ago. I transfer
         that question to their mother. They were living with both parents
         until their father died in 2009. At that time, they were
         respectively aged 34, 32 and 28.  I find no reason to suggest that
         their situation is substantially different from that of many young
         people, including in the United Kingdom, who continue to live with
         their parents principally for economic reasons. At the time of
         their father's death, I find that they were not in a state of
         emotional dependence on him beyond that normally to be found
         between adult children and their parents. I find no reason to think
         that they have since then developed a greater emotional dependence
         on their mother".

         "no reason to think they have since [the death of their father]
         developed a greater emotional dependence on their mother".

It is an established principle that in general a judge from a specialist
Tribunal can be expected to have applied the correct legal test.
Nevertheless, although I am satisfied that the judge was aware of the test
and set it out earlier in the decision, my view is that the judge has
failed to properly apply the test in line with the caselaw and failed
properly to apply to the particular circumstances of the case the
principles bearing on the concept of family life in Ghising (Family life
-adults- Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) which was endorsed in R (on
the application o f Gurung and others v SSHD) [2013] 1 WLR 2546.

The judge leaps from finding that there is no emotional dependency at [20],
stating that no exceptional circumstances were argued at [21], to finding
at [22];

         "in these circumstances, I find that their family life right [sic]
         are insufficient to outweigh the public interest in the maintenance
         of immigration control".

Firstly, the judge does not explicitly explain why the support provided by
the sponsor does not amount to "real, effective or committed" support.
Indeed, the test is not explicitly referred to in these concluding
paragraphs.  The judge focuses primarily on emotional dependency.

Secondly the judge makes no distinct and definite conclusion as to whether
family life does or does not exist between the sponsor and the appellants.
The judge's analysis is confused because at [22] as quoted above, the judge
appears to accept that there was family life but that the decision was
proportionate.

Thirdly, in my view the judge has erred by failing to grapple with those
factors which pointed to the existence of family life including the fact
that the appellants lived with the sponsor in the same household until the
sponsor left for the UK in August 2015, some six years after her husband
died, the sponsor's status as a widow, the regular communication and visit
and the continued provision of financial support, in the context of
Nepalese culture.

I am satisfied that the judge erred by failing to properly apply to the
particular circumstances of the case the principles bearing on the concept
of family life.

I am satisfied that this is an error of law and that had the judge applied
the authorities correctly and made a lawful finding on whether family life
existed, there may have been a different outcome in this appeal. I am
satisfied that this is a material error.

    Ground 2

Ms Nnamani's second argument is that the judge has not adequately explained
why the appellants' reliance on the sponsor is "in part" contrived and that
the judge has not explained why he does not accept that there is no
emotional dependency between the appellants and the sponsor when there was
evidence before the judge that the sponsor, who is a widow, had travelled
to Nepal to visit the appellants, sends them money from her pension in the
UK as well as giving them access to the pension in Nepal and contacts them
very regularly. The appellants continue to live in the family home where
they lived with the sponsor prior to her coming to the UK.

Mr Lindsay's argument is that the judge's reasoning was sufficiently clear
and adequately reasoned and the judge's findings were open to him.

In relation to financial dependence, his submission is that the judge was
entitled to find that the financial dependency was "in part" contrived
since the sponsor's other children had been able to find work and set up
their own households, and because so many years had passed since the
appellants reached their majority. No reason was advanced why the
appellants were unable to find work in the last two decades since they
reached their majority. The sponsor has not explained why the appellants
cannot find work and the judge was entitled to find that this is a
dependence of choice.

I am in agreement that the judge's findings on financial support are
inadequately reasoned. The uncontested evidence before the judge was that
the three appellants do not work and are reliant on their mother the
sponsor for financial support through the Gurkha pension and remittances
from the UK. The sponsor gave evidence that the appellants live in a remote
area where it is difficult to grow crops and it is difficult to find work.
It was also accepted that the three appellants are single, unmarried and
remain in the family home. The judge's view that the financial support was
"in part" contrived does not explain why he rejected the sponsor's evidence
that it is difficult to find work.

In any event, implicit in his finding that the financial dependency was "in
part" contrived is an acceptance that there exists financial dependency The
fact that the appellants' siblings are married and have work does not mean
that the appellants are not supported by the sponsor and does not
disentitle the appellants from having family life with the sponsor. The
other adult children manifestly are living independently, and it is not
asserted that they continue to have family life with their mother.

Mr Lindsay's submission is that the challenge to the judge's findings on
emotional support only amounts to a disagreement.

He further submits that just because there is some financial support does
not mean that family life exists between the appellants and the sponsor.
His argument is that the judge heard the evidence, that there was a range
of rational responses, and it was not perverse of the judge to find that
family life did not exist between the sponsor and the appellants.

I am also satisfied that the judge's findings on the existence of family
life are inadequately reasoned in view of the level of communication
between the appellants and the sponsor, the existence of long term and
ongoing financial support, the fact that the adult children still live in
the same family home and the sponsor's own evidence that she relies even
more on her children since her husband died.

I am satisfied that had the judge applied the current legal test to the
facts of the appeal, in that the appellants lived with the sponsor who was
a widow prior to her leaving the UK, continue to live in the family home,
have relied on the sponsor for regular financial support since their father
died, have not formed independent family units of their own and have
regular communication with the sponsor, the judge may have come to a
different conclusion on whether there is "real effective and committed"
support. On this basis I am satisfied that there is a material error of
law.

I therefore set aside the decision and preserve the following facts.

       a) The appellants are three single children of the late Purna
          Bahadur Rai a Nepalese Gurkha who died on 4 October 2009.

       b) He was discharged on 6 August 1967 after exemplary service.

       c) The appellant's mother entered the UK on 12 August 2015 issued
          under discretionary arrangements for Gurkhas discharged prior to
          1 July 1997.  She did not apply for her children to come to the
          UK earlier because of lack of funds.

       d) The three appellants were born on 1975, 1977 and 1981. Had their
          father been allowed to settle in the UK following his discharge
          (which he would have done according to the sponsor), they would
          all have been born in the UK.

       e) The appellants lived with their parents in Sankhuwasabha until
          their father died. Thereafter they lived with their mother until
          she left Nepal. They remain living in the family home which is
          rented.

       f) The sponsor has only returned once to Nepal to visit because of
          limited funds. She calls her children on a daily basis using
          calling cards. The sponsor is very close to her adult children.

       g) The children are supported by her through the Gurkha pension
          which one of her children collects every month. It is a journey
          of 3 hours to collect the pension. They also grow some vegetables
          but need financial support for essentials.

       h) The appellants are not employed.

       i) The sponsor also sends additional money to the appellants from
          her UK pension.

       j) The sponsor has three additional children who are all married and
          live independently with their own families.

Disposal

There was a discussion between the parties as to the most appropriate way
of disposing this appeal, were I to set the decision aside. Ms Nnamani was
content for me to re-make the appeal or alternatively wanted it to be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Lindsay's submission was that any
re-making would be subject to what findings I preserved.

I am satisfied that there are sufficient findings preserved for me to re-
make the decision.

Re-making

At the outset of the appeal, Mr Lindsay confirmed that were it to be
accepted that Article 8 (1) is engaged because there is family life between
the sponsor and the appellants, the denial of entry to the appellants would
be disproportionate absent any countervailing factors such as criminality
because of the historic injustice in accordance with the authority of Rai.


I turn to the jurisprudence on family life as set out by Lord Justice
Lindblom at [17] to [20] of Rai.

          1.  In Kugathas   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph
             17 of his judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as
             meaning "support", in the personal sense,  and  if  one  adds,
             echoing the Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or
             "effective" to the word "support", then it represents ...  the
             irreducible minimum of what family life implies".  Arden  L.J.
             said (in paragraph 24 of  her  judgment)  that  the  "relevant
             factors ... include identifying who are the near relatives  of
             the appellant, the nature of the links between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

          1. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in Kugathas had  been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                  reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.
                  A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be  whether
                  or not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If
                  he is still single and living  with  his  parents,  he  is
                  likely to enjoy family life with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                  suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old,
                  who resides with his mother and  has  not  yet  founded  a
                  family of his own,  can  be  regarded  as  having  "family
                  life"."

          1. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in Gurung (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances  "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50  to  62  of  its  determination
             in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy),  including
             its  observation  (at  paragraph  62)  that  "[the]  different
             outcomes  in  cases  with   superficially   similar   features
             emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1)  is  highly
             fact-sensitive".

          1. To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton  in Singh  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
             Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  630 (in  paragraph  24  of  his
             judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                  referred lead to any difficulty in determining the correct
                  approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.
                  In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of  immigration
                  control, there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to
                  the existence or absence of family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
                  European Commission for  Human  Rights  cited  approvingly
                  in Kugathas did  not  include   any   requirement   of
                  exceptionality. It all depends on the facts. The love  and
                  affection between an adult and  his  parents  or  siblings
                  will not of itself justify a finding  of  a  family  life.
                  There has to be something more. A young adult living  with
                  his parents or siblings will normally have a  family  life
                  to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family
                  life with his parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a
                  family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.  On
                  the other hand, a young adult living independently of  his
                  parents may well not have a family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8."

Having taken into account the preserved findings, I have considered on an
individual fact sensitive basis whether family life exists between the
sponsor and the appellants. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities
for the reasons below that there is real, effective and committed support
between the sponsor and the appellants notwithstanding that the appellants
are all adults well over the age of 18 and have been living apart from
their mother since 2015. I give great weight to the fact that the
appellants have never left the family home and have not established their
own family units or independent households. The appellants have always been
financially dependent on their parents and since their father died, they
have remained financially dependent on their mother.  They are reliant on
this financial support to meet their essential living needs and indeed
require additional remittances from their mother from the UK. They remain
in the same home that they lived in with their mother prior to her leaving
Nepal. I take into account the cultural context of the situation of
unmarried children in Nepal. I take into account the length and quality of
the financial support as well as the ongoing close love and affection
between the sponsor and the appellants as indicated by the daily phone
calls which have continued over a number of years, the visit to Nepal and
the sponsor's status as a widow as well as the sponsor's evidence that she
misses her children.

Having found that that Article 8 (1) is engaged, in view of Mr Lindsay's
concession, I allow these appeals.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeals are re-made. The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed           R J Owens                               Date 10 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

