
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18609/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2020                      |On 23 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                         Mr Lak bahadur purja magar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nepal, born on 29 October 1983, appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against the respondent's decision dated
    8 August 2018 refusing entry  clearance  for  settlement  as  an  adult
    dependent relative.  The basis of the application was in terms  of  his
    relationship with his mother, who is  the  widow  of  a  former  Gurkha
    soldier.

 2. His appeal was dismissed by a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("the
    FtJ") after a hearing on 13 August 2019.  The nub of the appeal  before
    the FtT, and of the appeal before  me,  is  in  terms  of  whether  the
    appellant has established that he has family life with his mother  such
    as to engage Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant's father died on 20 June 2003.  His wife, the appellant's
    mother, achieved settlement in the UK in 2010.   In  2011  two  of  her
    other children were also granted settlement and a third in 2015.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant's mother, Mrs Hira Purja Pun,
    and his brother Krita Bahadur  Purja  Magar,  as  well  as  from  a  Mr
    Atiparsad Pun, a family friend.

 5. The FtJ recorded at  [36]  that  it  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the only route upon which he could succeed was in  terms
    of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), and that that
    depended on whether it could  be  shown  that  there  was  family  life
    between the appellant and  his  mother  and  other  siblings.   It  was
    accepted that unless Article 8(1) was engaged,  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed. The submissions on  behalf  of  the  appellant  were  directed
    towards the issue of family life.

 6. After the FtJ set out in detail the evidence and arguments on behalf of
    the parties, he made clear, detailed, findings of fact.  He found  that
    there was evidence of funds being sent to the  appellant,  although  he
    accepted the argument on behalf of the respondent that the evidence did
    not establish that those funds were sent on a monthly basis.   At  [54]
    the FtJ said this:

         "I have been referred to a plethora of  cases  on  the  meaning  of
         family life, probably the most recent being  Jitendra  Rai.   There
         has to be effective, or committed,  or  meaningful  dependency  and
         that does not only mean financial, but  it  also  means  emotional.
         While I have no doubt at all that Mrs. Pun loves her son, and  that
         her son loves her, I ask myself whether there is any real  evidence
         that since she left in 2010, the appellant has shown,  or  she  has
         shown any real dependency emotionally on the other."

 7. In the next paragraph he referred to the appellant's age, 35 years, and
    said that he was getting on with his life which  consists  of  managing
    the livestock and land that the family have at  the  family  home.   He
    said that it was clear, although there  was  not  much  evidence  about
    them, that there are  other  family  members  in  Nepal  with  whom  he
    presumed the appellant converses.  Nevertheless, he found that all  the
    statements talk in generalisations and there is  very  little  specific
    evidence  as  to  how  the  parties  conduct  their  daily  lives.   He
    concluded, therefore, that it was  very  difficult  to  see  where  the
    evidence is that a 35 year old needs emotional support from his mother.

 8. At [56] he said that Mrs Pun made the decision in 2010 to avail herself
    of the right that she had, to come and settle in the UK.  He went on to
    state that at that time she believed she could bring  her  two  younger
    children, which transpired on appeal to be correct, and  it  must  have
    been understood that she  could  not  at  that  time  bring  her  other
    children.

 9. He concluded that the family themselves must have  decided  that  their
    lives,  such  as  they  were,  permitted  that  outcome  without  undue
    interference with their family lives.  He said that had that  not  been
    the case, presumably even though she had the right to  come  here,  Mrs
    Pun would have stayed in Nepal.  He went on to state that  he  did  not
    criticise the family in any way for taking up a right  that  they  have
    been given "but it clearly was a choice" and that no-one compelled them
    to come to the United Kingdom.  He found that  in  making  that  choice
    they must have considered the then probability  that  Mrs  Pun's  other
    children would not be joining them.

10. He said that, to some extent, defines the family life as the family saw
    it.  The adults were obviously leading to some extent their  own  lives
    even then, and that it must be much more so the case in  the  10  years
    that had passed.

11. He referred to the family returning to  Nepal  where  there  are  other
    family members  and  which  is  their  country  of  origin,  and  where
    presumably they have friends and where they  still  have  a  home.   He
    found that the fact that they  return  to  Nepal  between  them  pretty
    frequently, given the difficulty of finances, did not indicate that the
    sole purpose of their visit was to be with the appellant, although that
    may have been "a purpose".

12. At [59] the FtJ said that he did not find it conclusive one way or  the
    other whether money was sent every day, every week, or every  month  to
    enable the appellant to live.  He was living  in  a  village  in  Nepal
    where it would appear the villagers survive by growing their own  food,
    having their own  livestock  and  getting  on  with  their  lives.   He
    accepted that "the money that is sent is almost certainly used  by  the
    appellant to supplement such income as he may  have  from  his  farming
    and/or helping others in the village."  He observed that there did  not
    appear to be an entirely consistent account of the appellant's  day-to-
    day activities, and a consistent account might have been expected if he
    was truly dependent on his mother.

13. In relation to previous Tribunal decisions relating to the  appellant's
    brothers, the FtJ referred to submissions on behalf of  the  respondent
    to the effect that certain aspects of them prove that the appellant was
    not present (in the household in Nepal) in 2010.  The  submissions  for
    the appellant were that  there  clearly  was  family  life  within  the
    family.

14. The FtJ concluded that the earliest of the Tribunal's decisions in 2011
    was not determinative of the position in the household in 2011  because
    it was written  with  regard  to  the  two  appellants  who  were  then
    appealing and whose appeals were allowed.  He pointed out that  he  did
    not have the evidence that was before the judge on that  occasion,  and
    the appellant with which the instant appeal  was  concerned  would  not
    necessarily have been a relevant party, or part  of,  the  evidence  in
    that case which related to the two younger children.   He  went  on  to
    accept that even if this appellant went away for training in Nepal,  he
    had not necessarily left the household.

15. At [62] he concluded that the appellant is living in the family home in
    Nepal, and is getting on with his  life.   He  had  lived  without  his
    mother for 10 years and although she may well wish that he  could  join
    her in the United Kingdom, which is her wish too, that of  itself  does
    not make family life.  He  accepted  the  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, "to an extent", to the effect  that  family  life  does  not
    necessarily stop if one party leaves the  country.   However,  he  said
    that there must come a point where the two parties involved are  living
    in separate countries, and have done so  for  the  best  part  of  nine
    years, such as to mean there would need to be some very cogent evidence
    of "real and committed dependency"  other  than  the  appellant  merely
    living in the family home with some money being sent to him  from  time
    to time.

16. He noted that the family speak to each other, but that is what families
    do in most cases.  When dealing with adults, however, there  needed  to
    be more than was put before him in  this  appeal  to  establish  family
    life.  He said that it was more than simply an exercise of ticking  off
    boxes and saying that there was financial dependence,  home  dependence
    and phone calls such as to mean that there was family  life.   The  FtJ
    said that he had got no evidence at all of the content  of  any  family
    life, and had no evidence of what the family do together when they  are
    in Nepal "if indeed they do anything".

17. He thus concluded that Article 8(1) was not engaged and that it was not
    necessary, therefore, for him to consider the issue of proportionality.

18. At [65] he referred to the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant
    to the effect that had it not been for  the  constant  changes  in  the
    Rules, and if the Rules as they now stand had existed at the  time  the
    appellant's mother first applied, all the appellants would  undoubtedly
    have joined  her.   However,  he  concluded  that  the  fact  that  the
    decisions were made when the law was such  that  the  family  were  not
    going to be able to join Mrs Pun, helped to decide  whether  there  was
    the sort of dependency that is required.  He found that "in its strange
    way" that helped define the fact that the decision to leave, and  leave
    the adults, was a good indication  that  there  was  not  the  sort  of
    dependency required to engage Article 8.

    The grounds and submissions

19. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's  decision,  in  summary,
    argue that the FtJ misdirected himself as to the  law  in  relation  to
    family life and applied the wrong test. In  that  context  the  grounds
    quote variously from the FtJ's decision.

20. The grounds also rely on Rai  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  New  Delhi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320 at [17] on the meaning of family life to the effect
    that there has to be "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  support  or
    dependence.  It is argued that the FtJ applied a  different  test,  for
    example at [54] stating that there has to be "effective, or  committed,
    or meaningful dependency" and stating that there needs to be dependency
    which is  effective  or  committed  as  well  as  being  financial  and
    emotional.  Similarly, at [54] the FtJ wrongly asked  the  question  of
    whether the appellant has shown "any real dependency emotionally".  The
    grounds cite a further example at [55] where the FtJ stated that it was
    very difficult to see where the evidence was that a 35 year old  "needs
    emotional support from his mother". Again, it is argued that that is an
    incorrect test.

21. The other main element of the grounds is in terms of the  FtJ  focusing
    on, or emphasising, the family's, or more particularly the  appellant's
    mother's, "choice" to leave Nepal and settle in the UK,  leaving  other
    children, including the appellant, behind.  It is argued that  this  is
    contrary to what was said at [38] and [39] of Rai.

22. In relation to the appeal of the appellant's brother  in  2016,  it  is
    argued that whereas the FtJ dealt  with  the  2011  appeal  of  another
    brother, he failed to take into account the 2016 appeal  of  the  other
    brother, Bhesh, who was only 18 months younger than  the  appellant  in
    this appeal and whose circumstances were identical to his.  He came  to
    the UK about a year before this appellant's  application.   His  appeal
    was  allowed.   Given  that  his  circumstances  were,  "identical"  or
    "virtually identical" to that of his brother, it is argued that had the
    FtJ considered this evidence he would have found that there was  family
    life between the appellant and his mother.

23. In submissions, Mr Tufan conceded that if Article  8  was  engaged  the
    appeal would need to be resolved in favour  of  the  appellant  in  the
    light of the authorities.  However, it was submitted that the FtJ  gave
    sufficient reasons for concluding that Article 8 was not  engaged.   He
    considered the lack of evidence in support of the relationship in terms
    of family life.

24. It was further submitted that the facts of this appeal were similar  to
    those in Gurung & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at [48] and [50].  In the circumstances, it was  open
    to the FtJ to conclude that Article 8 was not engaged.

25. Nevertheless, Mr Tufan did accept that it may be that the  decision  in
    Gurung is at odds with the guidance given in Rai.

26. In her submissions, Ms Jaja relied on the grounds.  She submitted  that
    in addition to the misdirection and misapplication of the correct  test
    in terms of an assessment of family life, at [65]  the  FtJ  compounded
    the  errors  by  finding  that  when  the  decisions   were   made   in
    circumstances when the law was such that the family were not  going  to
    be able to join Mrs Pun, that helped him to decide  whether  there  was
    family life.

27. Ms Jaja referred, amongst other things, to the  facts  which  supported
    the contention that there was family life.  Thus, the family  were  all
    living together before Mrs Pun left Nepal.  Three of the siblings  have
    now been accepted as having had family  life  with  her.   One  of  the
    appellant's brothers is only 18 months  younger,  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed in 2016.  This appellant is still living in the family home and
    had not previously left the household.

28. It was submitted that accommodation was a pointer towards family  life.
    He has no employment except farming.  There is financial support  which
    the FtJ found at [59] supplemented the farming income.

29. Although the FtJ said at [59] that  there  did  not  appear  to  be  an
    entirely  consistent   account   about   the   appellant's   day-to-day
    activities, it was not clear to what this was a reference.

30. Other pointers to the existence of family life are the  regular  visits
    by the appellant's mother to Nepal in 2012, 2015, 2016, 2017  and  2018
    as recorded at [28] of the FtJ's decision, as well as the  evidence  of
    phone contact.  Similarly, the appellant is unmarried, as in  the  case
    of Rai, and does not have an independent family life.

31. In relation to the decision in Gurung relied on by the respondent, that
    was a case which was decided on its own facts. There it was found  that
    there was a lack of evidence of family life between the appellants  and
    their father who was their sponsor.  That is not the  only  basis  upon
    which the appeal of this appellant was dismissed.

    Assessment and conclusions

32. As already identified, the issue in  the  appeal  before  the  FtJ  was
    whether there was family life between the appellant and his mother,  in
    particular.  In Rai the Court of Appeal set out  the  legal  principles
    relevant to the assessment of whether there is family life.  At [17]  -
    [20] the court said the following:

         "17. In Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17  of  his
             judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             "support", in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"
             to the word "support", then it represents ... the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life  implies".  Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the "relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

         18.  In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in  Kugathas   had   been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

             "61.     Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                  reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.
                  A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be  whether
                  or not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If
                  he is still single and living  with  his  parents,  he  is
                  likely to enjoy family life with them. ...".

         The Upper Tribunal set out the  relevant  passage  in  the  court's
         judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs  46  to  49),  which
         ended with this (in paragraph 49):

             "49.     An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                  suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old,
                  who resides with his mother and  has  not  yet  founded  a
                  family of his own,  can  be  regarded  as  having  "family
                  life"."

         19.  Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in  Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances  "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination  in
             Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including  its
             observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the]  different  outcomes
             in cases with superficially similar features emphasises to  us
             that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

         20.  To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):

             "24.     I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                  referred lead to any difficulty in determining the correct
                  approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.
                  In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of  immigration
                  control, there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to
                  the existence or absence of family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
                  European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly  in
                  Kugathas   did   not   include    any    requirement    of
                  exceptionality. It all depends on the facts. The love  and
                  affection between an adult and  his  parents  or  siblings
                  will not of itself justify a finding  of  a  family  life.
                  There has to be something more. A young adult living  with
                  his parents or siblings will normally have a  family  life
                  to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family
                  life with his parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a
                  family life at midnight as he turns 18 years  of  age.  On
                  the other hand, a young adult living independently of  his
                  parents may well not have a family life for  the  purposes
                  of Article 8."

33. At [54]  the  FtJ  expressly  referred  to  the  decision  in  Rai  but
    unfortunately appears to have adopted a  test  other  than  that  which
    appears in Rai at [17] and onwards.  I agree with what is said  in  the
    grounds in terms of the FtJ having applied  an  elevated  test  to  the
    question that needed to be determined.  What has to be real,  committed
    or effective, is support and  not  dependency,  as  explained  in  that
    decision.

34. Similarly, the FtJ adopted an elevated test at [54] when  stating  that
    there needed to be financial and  emotional  dependency.   That  again,
    elevates the test beyond that described in Rai.

35. Again, where, at [63] the FtJ said that there needed to  be  some  very
    cogent evidence of "real and committed dependency" this also represents
    a misapplication or misstatement of the correct legal test as  set  out
    in Rai.

36. In addition, I consider that there is force in the grounds in terms  of
    what the FtJ said at [56], [57] and [65]  on  the  issue  of  "choice".
    This was the same error as was identified in Rai from [38].  There, the
    Court of Appeal said this:

         "38. Throughout his findings and conclusions with regard to article
             8(1), the Upper Tribunal judge concentrated on the appellant's
             parents' decision to leave Nepal  and  settle  in  the  United
             Kingdom, without, I  think,  focusing  on  the  practical  and
             financial realities entailed in that decision. This was, in my
             opinion, a mistaken approach.

         39.   The  Upper  Tribunal  judge  referred   repeatedly   to   the
             appellant's parents having chosen  to  settle  in  the  United
             Kingdom, leaving the appellant in the family  home  in  Nepal.
             Each time he did so, he stressed the  fact  that  this  was  a
             decision they had freely made: "...  not  compulsory  but  ...
             voluntarily undertaken ..." (paragraph 20), "...  having  made
             the choice to come to the [United  Kingdom]"  (paragraph  21),
             "... the willingness of the parents to leave  ..."  (paragraph
             23), and "... their voluntary leaving of Nepal and leaving the
             Appellant ..." (paragraph 26). But that, in my view,  was  not
             to confront the real issue under article 8(1)  in  this  case,
             which was whether, as a matter  of  fact,  the  appellant  had
             demonstrated that he had a family life with his parents, which
             had existed at the time of their departure to  settle  in  the
             United Kingdom and  had  endured  beyond  it,  notwithstanding
             their having left Nepal when they did."

37. In the light of the matters identified above, I am satisfied  that  the
    FtJ erred in law such as to require his decision to be set  aside.   It
    was agreed by the parties that in those circumstances I was able to re-
    make the decision on the basis of the evidence before the FtT.

38. Above, I have summarised the evidence that  was  before  the  FtJ.  The
    evidence is that the family were all living  together  before  Mrs  Pun
    left Nepal.  Three of the siblings have now been accepted as having had
    family life with her.  One of  the  appellant's  brothers  is  only  18
    months younger than him, and his appeal  was  allowed  in  2016.   This
    appellant is still living in the family home  and  had  not  previously
    left the family household.

39. He is provided with financial support  which  supplements  his  farming
    income. The fact that there are, and have been, regular visits  by  the
    appellant's mother to Nepal in 2012, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 is  also
    a matter to be taken into account. I accept that those visits have been
    to see the appellant. There is evidence of phone  contact.   Similarly,
    the appellant is unmarried, as in the case of Rai, and does not have an
    independent family life.

40. It is the combination of those facts which establishes on a balance  of
    probabilities that there is in this case real, committed, and effective
    support such that there exists family life between  the  appellant  and
    his mother.

41. As indicated at [23] above, it was conceded on behalf of the respondent
    that in those circumstances the proportionality balance under Article 8
    would fall to be decided in favour of the appellant when assessing  the
    public interest in the light of the 'historic injustice' principle that
    applies to Gurkha cases.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed on Article
    8 grounds.

    Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and re-made, allowing the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            Date: 08/04/2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

