
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18185/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2021                            |On 1 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                           Muhammad Saleem Akhtar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Briton Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent on 23 October 2019 refusing him leave to remain on human  rights
grounds.

2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  with  his  wife  on  17  August
2011.  They had entry  clearance  valid  for  180  days  as  a  visitor  in
accordance with their two year multi entry family visit entry clearance. On
14 February 2012, a few days before his six  months'  (180  days')  maximum
length of visit was about to lapse he claimed indefinite leave to remain on
the basis that he was a parent of a person settled in the  United  Kingdom.
That  application  was  refused  and  the  subsequent   appeal   dismissed.
Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted but the  appeal  was
dismissed and the appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 18 July 2013.

3. When this appeal was dismissed by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal
Judge McKee said (I am told, I  have  not  seen  the  judgment)  that  "the
appeals are allowed to the limited extent that the decisions to remove  the
appellants are unlawful".  The appeals against  the  other  decisions  were
dismissed on all other grounds.

4. I mention this because it features in the appellant's  witness  statement
and in the papers before me but as far as I can see nothing  turns  on  the
point.  While the Upper Tribunal upheld the decision to dismiss the  appeal
on human rights grounds and/or under the Rules,  Judge  McKee  pointed  out
that there should not have been a removal decision.  I find that  does  not
impact on my decision at all.

5. It seems that the appellant remained in  the  United  Kingdom  apparently
without permission and on 24 February  2017  made  further  representations
which were not treated as a fresh claim and were refused with reference  to
paragraph 353 of HC 395 on 4 January 2018.  The decision that they were not
a fresh claim was challenged by way of judicial review but  permission  was
refused on 1 August 2018.

6. On 5 February 2019 the appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
basis of his private and family life.  That is the application that led  to
the decision complained of.  It is accepted that the appellant's wife  died
on 19 October 2019.  The appellant suffers from various health problems and
it is his case that he has found it difficult to come  to  terms  with  his
wife's death.  The appellant married on  5 April  1974  and  so  had  been
married for over 45 years when his wife died.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was given  by  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Kekic.  Unusually  I  set  out  most  of  the  reasons  for  granting
permission because, with respect, it sets the scene for the  appeal  before
me.  Judge Kekic said:

  "[The appellant] recently lost his wife and seeks to  remain  in  the  UK
  with his two sons and their families.  He suffers  from  numerous  health
  conditions,  including  kidney  and  heart  disease,  depression,  memory
  impairment and anxiety.

  The grounds are not clearly presented but appear to be an attack  on  the
  judge's conclusion that there were no very significant obstacles  to  the
  appellant's reintegration on return to Pakistan.

  The judge accepted that the appellant needed care and  supervision,  that
  this was being provided here  by  relatives  and  that  his  two  married
  daughters in Pakistan would not be able  to  provide  it.   However,  she
  concluded that arrangements could be made for a carer in Pakistan.

  Arguably the judge's finding that a carer could  replace  the  round  the
  clock care and supervision provided here by his family  was  unreasonable
  and the conclusion that he would not face very significant  obstacles  on
  return was consequently flawed."

8.  Regrettably  the  use   of   the   word   "unreasonable"   caused   some
misunderstanding leading  to  a  rather  inappropriate  "Rule  24"  notice,
pointing out that "reasonableness" was  not  the  necessary  test  but  not
appreciating that Judge Kekic had in mind that the issue  was  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision although clear was  "unreasonable"  in
public law terms.

9. I turn now to the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  the
subject of the appeal before me.

10.  The  judge  directed  herself,  correctly,  that   the   most   helpful
Immigration Rule for the purpose  of  conducting  an  Article  8  balancing
exercise was 276ADE.  It is plain from paragraph 25  on  the  Decision  and
Reasons that the judge had in mind paragraph 276ADE(vi) which provides that
a person seeking to show that he has established a human right to remain in
the United Kingdom based on private life who is over 18 years  of  age  but
has not lived in the United Kingdom  for  twenty  years  would  face  "very
significant obstacles" in the way of his integration into  (in  this  case)
Pakistan.  The judge then reminded herself that the appellant had  made  an
earlier application and considered the  decision  promulgated  on  4  April
2013,  reminding  herself,  again  correctly,  that  this  decision  was  a
necessary starting point.

11. The judge also  reminded  herself  that  she  should  be  alert  to  new
evidence and found the two new circumstances that might make  a  difference
are the appellant's declining health and that fact that his now widowed and
so without a partner.

12. At paragraph 28 of the Decision and Reason  the  judge  found  that  the
appellant had lived for 67 years in Pakistan and would certainly be  enough
of an insider to know how life in Pakistan  is  carried  on  but  was  "not
satisfied that the appellant will have the capacity to  participate  or  to
operate without family support".  The judge noted that  the  appellant  has
sons in the United Kingdom and married daughters in Pakistan.  However  the
judge found that although they could not provide for the appellant's day-to-
day care, they would give him emotional support.

13. When the appellant last lived in Pakistan he had accommodation  provided
by the government of Pakistan which could not be expected to  be  available
now but the judge did not accept that it  would  be  "impossible"  to  rent
suitable accommodation, or even that  finding  accommodation  would  be  "a
significant obstacle" because the appellant has a pension and was therefore
able to rent.

14. The judge noted the  appellant  had  health  problems  and  this  health
generally had deteriorated.  He had had a heart condition when  he  arrived
in 2011 but since then, in 2014, he had suffered another heart attack.   In
2012 he was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease and had  suffered  mental
health  problems  and  memory  problems  since  he  was  widowed  and  been
prescribed antidepressants.   The  judge  said  that  the  appellant  would
"clearly" need a carer but noted there was no  evidence  to  say  the  sons
could not assist paying for a carer if necessary.  The  judge  acknowledged
evidence from the sponsor that there was no way of ensuring the care was of
a professional standard.

15. The judge found that in the event of the  appellant's  return  he  would
continue to receive a pension and support from his family and would be able
to access the Pakistan healthcare system as he had done when he lived there
and previously.

16. The judge found that he would be able to find accommodation.

17. The judge acknowledged that the appellant's sons do not want him  to  be
alone in Pakistan but that is not the point.  When he came  to  the  United
Kingdom he came on a  temporary  basis  and  ought  not  to  have  had  any
expectation of settling.  With the support of family members or  carers  he
could participate and operate in Pakistan and the judge concluded that none
of the obstacles raised could not be overcome or that overcoming them would
cause serious hardship.

18. The judge particularly directed her mind to a letter from a Dr  Nishtar.
 This is at page 31 of the bundle dated 10 February 2020.  Dr Salman Sanzar
Nishtar is a consultant  cardiologist  whose  report  of  16  January  2020
includes the observation:

  "I believe you are currently not fit to return to Pakistan without strong
  family support as well as to undertake a long haul flight".

19.  This  sentiment  is  repeated  at  the  end  of  the  letter  with  the
observation:

  "overall your current mental and physical health  requires  close  family
  support and supervision, which is available in the UK".

20. The judge noted that the  sponsoring  son  had  indicated  that  he  had
considered going to Pakistan if necessary and the judge said  at  paragraph
30:

  "There is no reason why the family could not return to Pakistan with  the
  appellant, see him safely settled and cared for and then  return  to  the
  UK.  I therefore find that the appellant has not shown  that  there  are
  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  back  into  Pakistani
  society."

21. The judge then explained why in her judgment  the  appellant  could  not
rely on Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

22. The judge then returned to Dr Nishtar's letter and  explained  that  she
did not understand him to be saying that the appellant could not travel  or
return with family support.  Rather she understood that  Dr  Nishtar  meant
that return was possible with family support  which  the  judge  found  was
forthcoming.  The judge concluded by expressing herself satisfied that  the
appellant could return to Pakistan "with family support" and concluded that
the public interest required the appellant to be refused leave.

23. The judge did record that the appellant had not learnt English but  made
plain that during his time in the United Kingdom he had been  supported  by
his immediate family and that medical bills  had  been  settled  privately.
Whatever has happened here this appellant is not someone  who  has  been  a
burden to the public purse and the judge made that clear.

24. The renewal grounds, drawn by Ms Jones who appeared before  me,  give  a
very helpful outline of the history of the case and  important  strands  of
evidence and complain at paragraph 25 that the judge's finding based on the
appellant's sponsor going with him  to  Pakistan,  and  thereby  separating
himself from his own private and family life,  particularly  his  wife  and
daughter, is not a long-term solution.

25. She said that the finding  at  paragraph  26  that  the  family  support
essential for the appellant's wellbeing can  be  replaced  by  a  carer  is
unreasonable.

26. The thrust of Ms Jones's submission before me is that the  decision  was
self-contradictory.  The judge clearly accepted that  the  appellant  could
not cope on his own if he were just returned to  Pakistan.   As  the  judge
made plain at paragraph 29, the decision was based on the appellant needing
a carer and going back with family support.

27. With respect to Ms Jones this  is  not  contradictory.   The  judge  has
explained how this appellant, who  is  clearly  not  a  well  man,  can  be
expected to establish himself in his country of nationality.   He  has  the
funds.  He has daughters who could be expected to offer some social support
and family in the United Kingdom who would be prepared to travel  with  him
and to start him off.

28. Mr Clarke submitted succinctly that the decision was not perverse,  that
is it was not unreasonable but something that the judge had  explained  and
was entitled to conclude. The judge had had regard to the medical  evidence
and was not contemplating a return in isolation but with the family support
that the doctor said the appellant needed.

29. Ms Jones further submitted that the appellant could not  be  removed  in
his present  condition  and  so  the  appellant  had  shown  insurmountable
difficulties because he could not get himself  to  Pakistan  to  start  the
process of reintegration.

30. I do appreciate that there was evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
that the appellant's present state of distress following his  wife's  death
means he is no longer able to sleep on his own but one of  his  sons  sleep
with him in his bedroom.  Clearly no carer can  be  expected  to  replicate
that degree of care but this is not a case where there was medical evidence
to say that the appellant's present position is justified or not  going  to
change.

31. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly  contemplating  the  appellant
being taken to Pakistan and helped to reintegrate by one of his  sons  with
some supervision from his daughters. The sone  would  then  return  to  the
United Kingdom having helped the appellant start his new life.  This is not
perverse or contrary to the evidence but is recognising that the  appellant
has current difficulties but not accepting that they are  very  significant
obstacles.

32. I do not agree that difficulties on removal  are  important  here.   The
difficulty is with very significant obstacles to integration  and  that  is
something that only starts when removal has been completed.

33. Before concluding I just sit back and take an overview of this case.   I
am very aware that the  appellant  is  now  a  man  showing  the  signs  of
advancing years and the wholly  understandable  grief,  expressed  as  deep
loneliness, following the end of a marriage that lasted over 45 years.  The
fact of the matter is that he has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  2011
when he  arrived  on  a  visit  visa  and  although  he  has  made  various
applications to extend that leave, his presence in the United  Kingdom  has
been never better than extremely precarious.  As far as I can see for  much
of the time he had no leave at all.  The difficulties that will follow from
returning to Pakistan now could have been diminished if he had left in  the
first place when his appeal was dismissed.

34. The law is not completely  unfeeling  in  such  circumstances  and  does
provide relief on human rights grounds but, for the reasons I have given, I
am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
they do not exist here.   The  very  real  problems  in  returning  can  be
overcome.

35. The judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant will  get  support
(not live with) his daughters in Pakistan and at least one of his  sons  in
the United Kingdom will travel with him to help him re-establish himself.

36. A further thought occurs to me.  If  the  appellant  leaves  the  United
Kingdom and returns to Pakistan and really cannot establish himself, he may
be able to apply to come back under the Rules  with  the  advantage  of  an
informed application based on evidence, rather than speculation,  but  that
is not the reason I make my decision, that is simply an observation.

37. No error of law has been established and I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 June 2021                   |








