
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18882/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th November 2019                |On 6th December 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                    MISS YENNEY ALEXANDRA GONZALES OCHOA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr G Dingley, instructed by the appellant through
direct access
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
were given orally at the end of the hearing on 29 November 2019.

Introduction

The parties are referred to as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.
This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chana (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 24 July 2019, by which she
allowed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal of her
human rights claim. While the grounds of appeal had referred to a claim of
humanitarian protection, the parties confirmed that no such claim had been
made to the respondent and this was not relied on by the appellant.  The
respondent had refused the appellant's application of 2 February 2018, in a
decision ('the Refusal Letter') dated 24 July 2018. The gist of the refusal
had been that the appellant had applied for leave to remain based on lawful
long residence; which had been broken by extended absences in her country
of origin, Colombia; a relationship with a previous partner had broken
down, and the appellant could not qualify under the 10-year private or
family life routes of the Immigration Rules.  There were not very
significant obstacles to her integration in Colombia.

The FtT's decision

The FtT concluded that there was a break in lawful residence, but also that
the appellant and her new partner were in a genuine relationship, which had
begun shortly after the appellant's February 2018 application.  The FtT
concluded that as the appellant's new partner worked in the aerospace
industry and Colombia did not have an aerospace industry, he could not, as
a British national, be expected to relocate to Colombia.  Noting section
117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the FtT concluded
that the respondent's public interest considerations would not be
compromised by granting the appellant leave to remain in the UK to continue
her family life with her current partner.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The respondent lodged grounds of appeal which are that the FtT had failed
to consider that the relationship between the appellant and her current
partner was of sufficiently recent duration that it did not qualify as a
'partner' relationship under paragraph GEN 1.2 of Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules.  The assertion that because the partner had specialised
in aerospace in his area of work, that he would be unable to work in other
industries was unsupported by evidence. Whilst the FtT had referred in
passing to section 117B of the 2002 Act, the FtT had failed to consider the
limited weight to be given to the appellant's private life and the fact
that the couple's relationship been established when the appellant's status
was precarious. Those submissions had been made by the respondent at the
FtT hearing but had not been considered, or rejected without adequate
explanation.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow granted permission on 15 October 2019. He
regarded it as arguable that when considering section 117B of the 2002 Act,
the FtT had not identified which, if any, of the statutory factors applied
in the appellant's case and the FtT had arguably not considered how those
factors affected the proportionality exercise carried out by the FtT.



The hearing before me

The appellant's submissions

In terms of the hearing before me, without discourtesy to the
representatives, their submissions were relatively brief.  Mr Dingley
provided a Rule 24 response, noting that the FtT had clearly considered the
appeal outside the Immigration Rules, so that whether the couple met the
definition of paragraph GEN 1.2 was not relevant.  The FtT had considered
whether there were insurmountable obstacles to the couple's family life
continuing in Colombia, as referred to at paragraphs [31] and [33] of the
decision, and accordingly, the appellant satisfied section EX.1(b) of the
Immigration Rules.  Similarly, the FtT had considered the factors under sub-
sections 117B(1) to (5) of the 2002 Act, including: the fact that the
appellant gave her evidence in English, at [15] and [34]; she had been in
the UK for eleven years lawfully and was not a burden on society, running a
business as a self-employed person.  I was invited not to 'pick over' the
FtT's decision in a 'microscopic search' for an error, as counselled by the
Court of Appeal in NH (India) [2007] EWCA Civ 1330.

The respondent's submissions

Mr Melvin reiterated that the FtT had given very limited reasoning about
why the appellant's partner could not relocate, simply because he worked in
a specific industry; and why it would be unduly harsh to expect the couple
to relocate to Colombia.  The FtT's decision was simply not sustainable in
terms of the adequacy of her reasoning.

Error of law discussion

While brevity in a decision is to be commended, I concluded that the FtT's
conclusions on the couple's ability to relocate to Colombia; and
consideration of the proportionality of refusal of leave to remain, in the
context of section 117 of the 2002 Act, were inadequately explained, to the
extent that they amounted to an error of law.

In simple practical terms, the FtT did not explain why, if the appellant's
partner was an engineer, he would not be able to work in an industry other
than the aerospace industry in Colombia.  Whilst I have no reason to doubt
Mr Dingley's submission that far more detailed evidence was provided to the
FtT, the practical difficulty was that the more detailed evidence on
claimed obstacles to the couple's return to Colombia had not been analysed
and explained by the FtT.   Instead, the impression from the FtT's decision
was that because the appellant's partner worked in a relatively specialised
industry, he would be unable to reskill or retrain. The FtT's reasoning on
that issue was not adequately explained.  Whilst the FtT was entitled to
take into account the other relevant factors such as the couple's unborn
child and the fact that the appellant spoke English, nevertheless the
insufficiency in the reasoning about the couple's inability to relocate to
Colombia materially affected the proportionality assessment and meant that
the FtT's decision did contain an error of law, and must be set aside.
However, in reaching that decision, I preserve the findings that the
appellant and her partner, Mr Chessman, are in a genuine relationship and
that Mr Chessman works within the aerospace industry, in a specialised role
and is not able to speak Spanish, the first language of Colombia.

Decision - error of law

I conclude that the FtT's decision did contain an error of law and I set it
aside, while preserving the findings set out above.

Remaking

The parties' representatives were content that I remake this decision
rather than remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant had made an application under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, to submit the birth certificate of
the couple's son, born on 11 June 2019.  Mr Melvin expressly consented, on
behalf of the respondent, to my considering the fact of the birth of the
couple's child as a new issue, for the purposes of remaking the FtT's
decision.  The couple's son is a British citizen, and so is a 'qualifying
child' for the purposes of the Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of the
2002 Act.  While he made no formal concession, Mr Melvin indicated that he
could see that in the current circumstances, on the basis that the
appellant now appeared to meet the Immigration Rules, requiring her to
leave the UK and apply for entry clearance might be disproportionate,
noting the well-known authority of  Chikwamba v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1779.

Mr Dingley urged me to consider the authorities of ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
UKSC 4, Zoumbas [2013] 1 WLR 690; and MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, now that the
appellant was the mother of a very young British child.  The respondent's
previous decision had obviously had no regard to considerations under
section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 or the
primary consideration of the best interests of the child.  Noting section
117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the fact that the appellant had a genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with her son was not disputed; and it was
in the best interests of such a young child to remain with both his parents
in the UK.  There were no issues concerning her eligibility (e.g. criminal
convictions or dishonesty) and while her continuous presence had been
broken by her visit to Colombia, her country of origin, her presence in the
UK had been lawful.

Discussion and conclusions

I concluded that on the basis of the circumstances as they now existed,
namely the genuineness of the relationship between the couple; and the fact
that they had a British son, while the barriers to the couple's returning
to Colombia due to Mr Chessman's specialism remained far from clear, it
would be wholly disproportionate to expect the appellant to leave the UK
and to reapply for entry clearance from Colombia.  I concluded this for the
following reasons.  First, it is highly likely that the appellant would
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, noting that there are no
issues about her suitability or eligibility and the fact of her genuine
relationship with Mr Chessman, which is nearly 2 years in duration.
Second, not only would it be in the best interests of the appellant's son
to remain the UK with both parents, but it would not be reasonable to her
expect to leave the UK with her very young son, or to leave that son in the
UK without her. The child is a British national, is only three months' old
and needs the stability and support of both parents, in a setting with
which both parents are familiar.    It would not be reasonable to expect
the child to leave the UK, noting the absence of powerful reasons
justifying a decision expecting him to do so, so that the appellant meets
the requirements of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which is determinative
of the proportionality issue.

    Remaking - decision

I remake the FtT's decision by allowing the appellant's original appeal to
the FtT.  The refusal of her leave to remain is disproportionate and in
breach of her rights under article 8.




         Signed    J Keith Date:  4 December 2019

         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith







    To the respondent - fee award

In light of the fact that the appeal only succeeded because of the new
matters, to which the respondent gave consent that I consider, I did not
regard it as appropriate to make a fee award in the appellant's favour.




         Signed   J Keith  Date:  4 December 2019

         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
