
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19338/2018 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|And via Skype                           |On 3rd February 2021                |
|On 13th January 2021                    |                                    |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PAKISTAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MUHAMMAD WAMIQ AFZAL
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)



Representation:
For the appellant:              Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:             Ms E Harris, instructed by Briton
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were given
orally at the end of the hearing on 13th January 2021.

Both representatives and I attended the hearing via Skype, while a hearing
room remained open for public access at Field House.  The parties did not
object to attending via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives
were able to participate in the hearing.

The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Brewer (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 4th March 2020, who,
following a hearing at Taylor House on 17th February 2020, allowed the
appeal of the respondent (hereafter, 'Claimant') of the Entry Clearance
Officer's refusal on 7th June 2018 to grant the Claimant entry clearance
under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules as the dependent son of Mr
Mohammed Afzal (the 'Sponsor').

In essence, the sole issue before the FTT was whether the sponsor had sole
parental responsibility for the Claimant's upbringing the purposes of
paragraph 297(e) of the Immigration Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer
accepted that the Sponsor was present and settled in the UK and that there
would be adequate maintenance and accommodation if the Claimant were
admitted to the UK to join the Sponsor.  The Entry Clearance Officer also
accepted that the Sponsor and the Claimant were related as claimed.

The FtT's decision

The FtT reminded herself of the leading authorities of TD (paragraph
297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 and Buydov v
Entry Clearance Officer, Moscow [2012] EWCA Civ 1739, and concluded that
the Sponsor had sole parental responsibility for the Claimant.  Whilst the
Claimant remained living with his biological mother (he was 17 � years
old), and his mother played some role in his daily living arrangements,
assisted by financial support provided by the Sponsor with whom he had not
resided since 2010; and whilst the Claimant's mother had not abandoned him
or abdicated all responsibility, the arrangements were for the Sponsor to
be responsible for all of the decisions in the key areas of the Claimant's
life, for example financial, educational and residence decisions (�25).

Having considered the evidence, the FtT allowed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The Entry Clearance Officer initially lodged a ground of appeal, on which
she no longer seeks to rely, (relating to the Sponsor's status), permission
for which was refused by a First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro) on 18th May
2020.  The Entry Clearance Officer renewed her application on a different
ground, specifically that the FtT had erred on the one hand in concluding
that the Claimant's mother had not abdicated all responsibility, whilst on
the other hand, finding that the Sponsor had sole parental responsibility.
The weight attached to family life between the Claimant and Sponsor should
not have greater weight than the family life between the Claimant and his
mother who continued to provide all day-to-day care for him, along with his
four siblings.



The grant of permission by the Upper Tribunal

The Upper Tribunal (Judge Owens) subsequently granted permission for this
appeal to proceed on all grounds on 13th August 2020, on the basis that the
FtT had arguably failed to consider that the situation was exceptional, if
both parents were involved in the Claimant's upbringing.

The hearing before me

I identified with the parties at the beginning that the sole focus in
relation to this case was whether the FtT had erred in terms of her finding
of sole parental responsibility. The Entry Clearance Officer relied on the
authority of TD for the proposition that in the case of two parents
involved in a child's care, there needed to be exceptionality to find that
one had sole parental responsibility.  The authority of Buydov did not
resile from that principle, where, as here, the other parent had day-to-day
care for the child.

The Entry Clearance Officer's submissions

Mr Melvin confirmed that the Entry Clearance Officer did not challenge the
FtT's findings, although he pointed to one nuance in relation to the
claimed communications between the Sponsor and the Claimant's school, which
he queried the plausibility of in light of the time difference between the
UK and Pakistan.

Nevertheless, the central focus in relation to this appeal was that the
FtT's finding that the Sponsor had sole parental responsibility for the
Claimant "bordered", (in Mr Melvin's words), on the perverse.  In
particular, the FtT had referred to the Sponsor "taking part in all
decisions", as noted at �[15] of her decision, which was not the same as
exclusively taking the decisions and indeed on checking the reference at
�[3] of the Claimant's mother's witness statement, this referred to the
Sponsor taking part in rather than taking all of the decisions.

The Claimant's decisions

Ms Harris relied upon the Claimant's Rule 24 response.  The FtT had set out
clearly the relevant law and noted the comments of the Court of Appeal in
Buydov that sole responsibility remained a question of fact in each case
and although, where two parents are involved in a child's life, the usual
starting point would be that both parents have responsibility for the
child's upbringing, that was not a presumption of law and did not import a
separate requirement of exceptionality. The question was always one of
fact. The FtT had made detailed findings as set out at �[24] about the
arrangements for the Claimant, from which the FtT had concluded that the
Sponsor had sole parental responsibility and these facts as found were not
substantively challenged.  In particular, and a nuance in this case, was
that the Claimant had not lived with his mother throughout his life and
indeed since 2010 when the Sponsor came to the UK.  The Claimant had
previously been living with his paternal grandparents, and sadly by virtue
of the Claimant's paternal grandmother passing away, the Sponsor had
regarded it appropriate that the Claimant should live temporarily with the
Claimant's mother, for a brief period, prior to the application being made
in June 2018.  Ultimately the decision that the Sponsor had sole
responsibility for the Claimant was one of fact and was open to the FtT to
make on the evidence before her and did not disclose any error of law.

In oral submissions, Ms Harris referred me to the authority of Buydov, in
which the Court of Appeal emphasised that there was no requirement of
exceptionality.  Buydov states at �[19]:

    "There may be some risk of misreading the distinction as such a
    presumption, or as importing some independent legal test of
    exceptionality, if one were to take out of context one part of the
    helpful summary ... of TD..... The IAT clearly did not mean to impose a
    legal test.  Its review of the cases is predicated on the fundamental
    proposition that the issue of sole responsibility is one of fact.  It
    was doing no more than identifying where the necessary factual enquiry
    is likely in most two-parent cases to lead and as such the proposition
    is accurate."

That case then went on to consider, although not as a precedent case, the
other side of the factual dividing line of Alagon v ECO, Manila [1993] Imm
AR 336, where the father remained living in the country of origin,
occupying the same house as the child, but took no part in the child's
life.  In that case, there was no more than a friendly co-existence.

Even if it were challenged that there might be a difference in the
Claimant's mother's evidence about the Sponsor "taking part" in all of the
decisions, she had not given evidence, whereas the Sponsor had and his
evidence, which was not substantively challenged in the grounds of appeal,
was that he took all of the decisions alone.

Discussion and conclusions

First, I accept Ms Harris's submission that the requirement of sole
parental responsibility does not import a test of exceptionality or a
presumption of shared parental responsibility in what may be termed a "two-
parent" case.  It may well be that in "two-parent" cases, the factual
enquiry is likely to lead to a finding of shared responsibility, but as
Buydov makes clear, that is not the same as a presumption or a test of
exceptionality.

I also noted that while Mr Melvin said that the FtT's conclusion "bordered"
on the perverse, he did not in fact advance a perversity challenge or go on
to suggest that the evidence before the FtT did not entitle the FtT to
reach the findings that she did.

I have considered the clearly structured and detailed findings of the FtT.
She correctly reminded herself of the law at ��[17] to [18] in relation to
the authorities of TD and Buydov.  As she correctly noted, the Court of
Appeal in Buydov held that it was not necessary to show that one parent had
entirely abandoned or abdicated interest in the child to show that the
other parent had sole parental responsibility; and the question was one of
fact.  She also reminded herself correctly at �[19] that the provision of
financial support did not necessarily mean that the person providing such
support had sole parental responsibility.

In these circumstances, the FtT was at pains to remind herself of the fact-
sensitive nature of the assessment and the correct test, in terms of it not
being an "abdication of responsibility" test or one of exceptionality.  She
set out clearly at �[24] the various findings which form the basis of her
conclusion at �[25] that the Sponsor has sole parental responsibility.  For
the sake of brevity, I do not cite these findings in full, but they set
out, as Ms Harris cogently reiterated, the chronology and the recent nature
of the Claimant's residence with his mother, as well as the Sponsor being
the main point of contact and making key decisions in respect to various
aspects such as the Claimant's schooling, religious studies, and medical
treatment.

The FtT noted at �[25] that sole financial provision should not be a
determinative factor and that there had not been an abandonment or
abdication of all responsibility, but it was clear from the Ft's findings
that the Claimant's mother's role was correspondingly limited, and such
conclusions were open to the FtT to make in a two-parent case, just as they
were in Alagon.

In the circumstances, I accept Ms Harris's submissions that there was no
perversity in the FtT's decision (even if perversity had been the basis of
a challenge); that the FtT had correctly reminded herself of the law;
correctly applied the law; and the conclusions she reached were clearly
explained and unarguably open to her to reach on the evidence before her.
In particular, the FtT's conclusion that the Claimant met the requirements
under paragraph 297(e) of the Immigration Rules was one that was unarguably
open to her to reach and the FtT did not err in reaching that conclusion.

In the circumstances, the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal against the
FtT's decision fails.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  20th January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


