
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                        |                                      |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      |Appeal Number: HU/19330/2018 (P)      |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 December 2020                  |                        On 14        |
|                                     |December 2020                        |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                                   Between

                                  ZEENAT BI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This is an appeal, with permission granted by FtT Judge Adio, against a
    decision which was  issued  by  Judge  Lodge  following  a  hearing  in
    Birmingham on 22 May 2019.  The judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on human rights grounds.


 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing  before  the  judge.   In  the
    grounds of appeal before Judge Adio, the appellant explained how it was
    that she came not to attend the hearing.  Judge  Adio  noted  that  the
    judge could  not  be  faulted  for  the  decision  to  proceed  in  the
    appellant's absence but that it  appeared  to  be  the  case  that  the
    appellant was not aware of the hearing and that  it  was  arguable,  in
    these circumstances, that there had been a procedural irregularity.

 3. The papers were placed before me on 7 September 2020, on which  date  I
    signed directions to the parties which were as follows:


         [1] It is my provisional view that the decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Lodge) is vitiated by procedural  irregularity  for
         the reasons given by Judge Adio in granting  permission.   In  sum,
         the difficulty is that the appellant was  unaware  of  the  hearing
         before Judge Lodge because  the  person  who  had  previously  been
         assisting her, to whom the notice of hearing  had  been  sent,  had
         passed away.


         [2] As explained by Judge  Adio,  these  assertions  appear  to  be
         supported by what is and is not on the Tribunal's  file,  including
         the fact that  the  appellant  had  timeously  responded  to  other
         communications.  In the circumstances, I am minded to find that the
         decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a  point  of
         law and to set aside that decision and remit the appeal for hearing
         afresh before another judge of the FtT.


         [3] I therefore direct that either party has 14 days from the  date
         on  which  these  directions  are   issued   in   which   to   make
         representations on the course set out immediately  above.   In  the
         event that no such submissions are received, the Upper Tribunal  is
         likely to make  the  order  above  without  a  hearing  or  further
         directions.

 4. My directions were sent to the parties by email on 23 October 2020.  To
    date, there have been no submissions received from  either  party.   In
    the circumstances, I consider it fair and just to determine this appeal
    without a hearing under rule 34.  The parties have had  an  opportunity
    to make submissions on the single issue which  arises  and  the  proper
    outcome is, in my judgment, appreciably clear.


 5. I am satisfied that the decision of the judge is vitiated by procedural
    impropriety for which  he  bears  no  responsibility.   The  notice  of
    hearing was demonstrably sent only to a person at the  Coventry  Muslim
    Resource who had been assisting the appellant as a McKenzie Friend  but
    she was not aware of it and he has passed  away  during  the  pandemic.
    Like Judge Adio, I note that the appellant has  responded  promptly  to
    other communications and I am prepared, on balance, to accept that  she
    was not aware of the hearing and that she would have wished  to  attend
    if she had known about it.


 6. The proper course, in the circumstances, is for the decision of the FtT
    to be set aside in its entirety and for the appeal to  be  remitted  to
    the FtT for hearing afresh by a judge other than Judge Lodge.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision  of  the  FtT  is
set aside and the appeal is remitted to be heard afresh in the FtT.

No anonymity direction is made.

Postcript

The decision set out above was sent to the Upper  Tribunal's  administrative
staff for promulgation on 18 November.  On 20  November,  Fordham  J  handed
down judgment in R (JCWI) v President of UTIAC [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin).   I
have considered whether to alter the decision above in  light  of  what  was
decided by the Administrative Court and have decided not to  do  so.   In  a
case such as this, it would have  been  appropriate  to  proceed  without  a
hearing irrespective of the pandemic and the  guidance  notes  issued  as  a
result of it.  Indeed, the procedure which was followed in this  case  -  of
identifying a procedural irregularity in the FtT's process  and  giving  the
parties an opportunity to comment on a likely set aside - has been  followed
for at least the last two decades.  The parties have had an  opportunity  to
comment on the outcome which was foreshadowed in  my  directions  and  chose
not to do so.  The proper course remains for the decision to  be  set  aside
and the appeal remitted to the FtT.  No proper purpose would  be  served  in
seeking further submissions, orally or in writing.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                             11 January 2021
