
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19135/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2021                       |On 5 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                SRK (aka RSA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is 29 October
1962.  In my decision dated 10 March 2021 I anonymised the Appellant in the
light of medical evidence regarding the Appellant's health.

The Appellant's immigration history

Applications made in the name SRK

The Appellant's immigration history is as follows. The Appellant applied
for entry clearance as a visitor on 3 September 1998.  He was granted a
multi-visit visa on 14 May 1999 which was valid until 14 May 2001.  He was
then granted a five year visa which was valid until 22 May 2006.

On 23 May 2001 an application was made for a six month multi-visa ("the
2001 application").  The application was refused on 24 May 2001.

On 27 May 2001 the Appellant left Pakistan, arriving in the UK on 30 May
2001.  He returned to Pakistan on 11 November 2001.  He came back to the UK
on 13 October 2002.  He returned to Pakistan on 11 December 2002.  He came
back to the United Kingdom on 13 December 2002. On 16 June 2003 he made an
application for leave to remain.  This application was refused on 18 July
2003.  On 14 September 2003 the Appellant left the UK. On 19 September 2003
the Appellant returned to the UK on the same day his leave to enter as a
visitor was cancelled.

On 7 October 2003 the Appellant was refused leave to enter and on 16
October 2003 directions were made for his removal to Karachi.  However, the
Appellant did not show for his flight on 18 March 2005.  On that day he
applied for settlement under the long residency Rules.

On 28 January 2009 he made an application for asylum. On 24 January 2010
the Appellant notified the Secretary of State that he had left the UK on 23
December 2008.

Applications made in the name RSA

The Appellant made an application for entry clearance on 26 November 2009
as a spouse.  He was issued with a spouse visa which was valid from 31
December 2009 until March 2012.  On 5 January 2010 he entered the UK.  On 6
June 2011 he applied for a transfer of conditions pertaining to his leave
to remain.  He was issued with a transfer of conditions on 6 June 2011.
The application was for a transfer of leave to remain onto a new passport
as a previous passport had been lost. On 29 March 2012 he applied for
settlement in the UK as the victim of domestic violence.  The application
was refused on 16 May 2012.  On 18 May 2012 he applied for LTR as the
spouse of a settled person.  His application was refused on 8 March 2013.
On 10 December 2013 he applied for LTR under the domestic violence
concession.  On 11 December 2013 he was issued with LTR outside of the
Immigration Rules (IRs) until 10 March 2014.

On 6 March 2014 he re-applied for settlement as the victim of domestic
violence.  On 14 June 2014 his application was refused under paragraph 289C
with reference to 289A(iv) of the IRs.  The decision was reconsidered by
the SSHD. On 3 November 2014 the Appellant was refused ILR under paragraph
322(1C)(iv) of the IRs; however, he was issued with LTR outside the IRs
which was valid until 2 May 2017.

On 17 December 2014 the Appellant applied for a replacement biometric
residence permit (BRP) card and this was re-issued to him on 5 January
2015.  He re-entered the United Kingdom on 26 July 2016, 16 October 2016
and 20 March 2017.  On 5 April 2017 the Appellant applied for LTR under a
domestic violence concession.  On 1 June 2017 his application was rejected.
 On 26 June 2017 he re-applied for settlement in the United Kingdom as the
victim of domestic violence.  His application was refused on 20 December
2018.  The decision was maintained on administrative review on 22 May 2019.
 On 13 August 2019 the Appellant made an application for LTR in the UK on
Article 8 ECHR grounds.  This gave rise to the decision which is the
subject of this appeal, namely that on 7 November 2019.

The decision of 7 November 2019

It is necessary for the purposes of this hearing to set out certain parts
of the SSHD's decision. The Respondent refused the application on
suitability grounds, the salient parts of which read as follows.

"...  Your application falls for refusal on grounds of suitability in
Section S-LTR under paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) of the Immigration Rules because
it is noted that you have utilised two separate identities, that of [RSA] -
Pakistan - 29 October 1962, and that of [SRK] - Pakistan - 29 October 1961.
 This has previously been investigated by the Home Office and denied by
yourself.  However, in your witness statement dated 29 August 2019 you have
confirmed that you have utilised both identities for the purpose of gaining
entry to the United Kingdom.

It is also noted from your refusal dated 20 December 2018, that Home Office
records and databases show a unique fingerprint match for you, between both
of these identities.  Even were this not to be the case, it is noted that
your image has clearly been used throughout all of the applications, that
each of the applications outline that you work as a travel agent or within
the travel industry and each application also bears a virtually identical
signature throughout all applications in relation to both identities.
Furthermore, it is details that within the Appeal Promulgation of 8 October
2004, the findings in regard to your conduct with reference to a claimed
fraudulent application have also been noted.  In this instance, [SRK],
stated that an application for a Business Visa was not submitted by him but
was instead a forgery.  Paragraph 10 states, 'Two days after the appellant
was issued with the 5 year Multiple Entry Visa, an application was
submitted to the ECO, in his name and bearing details materially identical
to his, for a business visa.  That application was refused for lack of
credibility/evidence that the applicant was a Hong Kong resident
businessman and agent for clients desirous of purchasing property in the
United Kingdom.  The appellant denied that he was that applicant, claiming
that it was a forgery'.  The appellant was not found to be a reliable
witness and his account was not accepted in relation to the claimed
fraudulent application (Paragraph 12)].  Lastly, the Immigration Officer's
Explanatory Statement states, 'I am satisfied that either false
representations were employed, or material facts were not disclosed for the
purpose of obtaining leave' - TN3/363248 - Refusal of Leave to Enter
Notice, 7 October 2003.

It was also noted on your refusal of 20 December 2018 that your complicity
in the above fraud amounted to an extremely serious attack on the
maintenance of effective immigration controls and the public interest more
generally.

Therefore, your application is refused under Paragraphs S-LTR.1.6 and S-
LTR.4.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

The Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State.  I
set aside the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aziz, who
dismissed the appeal.  I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had made a
material error.  My error of law decision reads as follows:-

"30. I conclude that the judge made a material error.  It was incumbent on
him to make clear findings in respect of the Immigration Rules.  This was
an essential element of the proportionality assessment.  The failure to
make clear findings on suitability infects the decision.  Ground 1 is made
out.  It is a material error.

31.  In respect of ground 2, while I accept the judge did not consider the
background evidence when concluding that the Appellant would not be able to
access mental health treatment in Pakistan, I do not accept that the judge
failed to properly consider the medical evidence from the Appellant's GP
and the psychiatric report from Dr Hashmi.  Insofar as the social worker's
evidence is concerned, the judge properly engages with this at paragraphs
66 and 67.  The judge made lawful and sustainable findings relating to the
Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan regarding accommodation, family
support and financial support on return to Pakistan.  There is no challenge
to these findings.  The judge considered the medical evidence and the
evidence of the social worker in the context of those findings.  The
evidence was based on the Appellant returning to Pakistan alone and without
support, but the judge did not accept this to be the case.  However, I
accept that the issue of accessibility of mental health treatment must be
considered in the context of the background evidence, which the judge did
not do.

32.  In respect of ground 3, I was told at the hearing that in 2014 the
Secretary of State did not rely on the Appellant's previous conduct.  This
would accord with the decision of Judge Crawford, who found that the
Appellant met the Immigration Rules insofar as victims of domestic violence
are concerned save for the application of paragraph 322(1C) because of a
recent conviction for driving whilst disqualified.  I accept that this may
be a matter to be put into the balance when assessing proportionality.

33.  For the above reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  The findings of fact made by
the judge are lawful and sustainable he has been found to have knowingly
used two identities and to have used deception.  However, the UT will
consider the application for the suitability Rules.  However
proportionality must be considered.  The UT will make findings in respect
of suitability under the Rules and consider proportionality in the light of
those findings and the availability of treatment in Pakistan in light of
the CPIN.

34.  The matter will be listed for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

35.  I make the following directions

(1)  The Secretary of State is directed to produce the following by 20
March 2021:

(i)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Jhirad's decision from 2004.

(ii) The Secretary of State's decision which was the subject of the appeal
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford and the decision granting leave
following the appeal being allowed.

(2)  If it is intended that the Upper Tribunal hear further evidence from
the Appellant or any other witness, the Appellant is directed to serve and
file further witness statements and make an application under Rule 15 of
the 2008 Procedure Rules by 30 March 2021.

(3)  If an interpreter is required, the Appellant must notify the Tribunal
seven days before the resumed hearing.

(4)  Both parties should be in a position to address the UT in relation to
Mahmood (paras.S.LTR.1.6. & S.LTR.4.2; scope) [2020] UKUT 00376.

..."

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge made a number of findings which have been maintained.  It is
necessary to set out parts of my decision dated 10 March 2021 in order to
appreciate which findings have been maintained and why.

"4.  The judge heard evidence from the Appellant.  There was evidence from
the Appellant's GP and a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Hashmi.  The
judge also had a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the
Appellant's appeal in 2014 (the decision of FTTJ Crawford).  The Appellant
had been found to be a victim of domestic violence by Judge Crawford.

5.   The judge recorded the Appellant's oral evidence.  Although there was
a finding by the Tribunal in 2004 (Judge Jhirad) that he had made false
representations, the Appellant denied this.  He accepted using two separate
identities, but his evidence was that he did not intend to be dishonest.
The Appellant's evidence, as recorded by the judge is that he lives alone
here in the UK in council property.  He has returned to Pakistan on three
or four occasions in the past ten years.  When he visited, he stayed at his
brother's home.  He is on medication for depression.  He has high blood
pressure, high cholesterol, and back pain.

6.   The judge heard from the Appellant's sister, [K].  Her evidence was
that she sees the Appellant on a regular basis, every four to six weeks.
She said that he lived alone and that he is depressed.  She confirmed that
they have siblings in Pakistan.

7.   The judge heard from the Appellant's nephew [MK].  He said that his
uncle, the Appellant, cannot return to Pakistan because most of his family
are now living in the UK and he is settled here.  He would find it
difficult to settle in Pakistan.  The family here has been supporting him.
However, it would be more difficult for them to continue to do so if he
were to return to Pakistan.

8.   There were other witnesses who gave evidence in the form of witness
statements in support of the Appellant.

9.   At paragraphs 50 - 53 the judge stated

'50. What the appellant takes issue with is any intention to be dishonest
or to deceive in the use of these two identities.  At paragraphs 16 - 18 of
his statement (pages 3 - 4 of the appellant's bundle) he provides the
following explanation for why he changed his identity from [SRA] to [RSA].
He says that he met [SQ] (a British national) on 7 January 2006.  They met
in Southall and commenced a relationship.  He explained to her at that time
that he did not have legal status in the United Kingdom.  In May 2008, he
left Pakistan with all his travel documents.  His travel documents were
arranged by [SQ].  They married in Pakistan on 9 June 2008 and his new wife
arranged everything for him.  At this time, she strongly recommended that
he change his name slightly through an agent in Pakistan to help him have a
'fresh start'.  He was not aware that this would cause an offence and he
did not intend to mislead any authority.  That is why he began using the
name [RSA].  He was advised by his former wife that as his middle name was
[S], there should not be any problems.  The name change was to show that as
he is married, he is in a genuine relationship.  It was only after he took
legal advice from a solicitor did he realise that such an innocent mistake
could be viewed as a fraudulent.  It was never his intention to make false
representations and he did not know that it was a very serious matter.

51.  I find the appellant's explanations to be weak and lacking in
credibility.  The appellant himself recognises in this part of his
statement that he has a poor immigration history.  He does so when he says
that he explained to [SQ] when they met in Southall in 2006 that he had no
status.  When he therefore made his entry clearance application in 2009, it
was against that backdrop of a very poor immigration history.  An
immigration history which included an application being refused by the
respondent because the appellant had made false representations.  A finding
that was upheld by the First-tier Tribunal in 2004.  Any entry clearance
application made in 2009 in which he disclosed his true identity would
bring to surface that adverse immigration history.

52.  I do not believe the appellant when he says that he only followed the
advice of [SQ].  Even if I am wrong and he presented a different identity
on her say so, I do not for a moment believe he is as na�ve as he is making
himself out to be and that he did not think that he was doing anything
wrong.  Therefore, it matters not whether or not it was on the advice of
[SQ] or any other party that he changed his name.  The fact remains that
when he changed his name from [SRA] to RSA] that was an untruth, a lie and
he would have been fully aware of it.  Similarly, when he changed his date
of birth from 29 October 1961 to 29 October 1962, this was another untruth,
another lie and he would have been fully aware of it.  Given the baggage of
his poor immigration history, there was clear motive on the part of the
appellant in hiding his previous identity and the various explanations that
he now gives about the name change (such as giving him a fresh start or
showing that he was genuinely married to his partner) lack credibility and
only serve to further undermine this appellant as a witness of truth.

53.  Before moving on, in arriving at the above findings, I have fully
taken into account the submissions of Ms Bachu on this issue.  She
attempted to draw a picture of the appellant being under the influence of a
very controlling wife at that time.  She said that the evidence for this
could be found in the determination of Judge Crawford, when he heard the
appellant's appeal in September 2014 and accepted that he had been a victim
of domestic violence.  Whilst Ms Bachu valiantly represented the appellant,
I am afraid that I am not persuaded by the force of her arguments.  This
was not an application that was made under duress or coercion (the
appellant has not suggested any such thing).  Whatever may have gone on in
their marriage after the appellant arrived here, I find that the appellant
(whether or not it was on the advice of his former wife,) was fully aware
when he made that entry clearance application in 2009 (and all subsequent
applications) that in seeking to change his name and date of birth that
these were untruths and that for him to now argue that he was unaware that
such falsities might be interpreted as being dishonest lacks any
credibility.'

10.  In relation to having made false representations in 2001 the judge
referred to findings of Judge Jhirad in 2004.  Judge Jhirad upheld the
Respondent's assertion that the Appellant had sought to make false
representations.  The judge applied Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702 finding no
reasons to depart from the findings in 2004.

11.  The judge found that the Appellant does not have a partner or
dependent children here.  She accepted that he was part of a large extended
family in the UK whom he regularly visited.  He lives in Birmingham and the
extended family in High Wycombe.  The judge said as follows in relation to
the Appellant's health:

'64. Another important feature of the appellant's claim are his health
issues.  There is a letter from his GP dated 11 February 2020 and served
separately on the Tribunal.  Dr Alia Siddiqi confirms that the appellant is
taking medicine for depression and mental health issues.  He also suffers
from hypertension and high cholesterol.  There is no evidence that he is
being treated for back pain (as the appellant asserts).

65.  There is a psychiatric report from Dr Salman Hashmi dated 11 February
2020.  He diagnoses the appellant with symptoms of recurrent depressive
disorder of a moderate to severe degree.  I take into account what the
report has stated and take no issue with the diagnosis.'

12.  There was also evidence from a social worker before the judge.  The
judge considered this and stated as follows:

'66. Finally, I note that there is also a social worker's report, dated 15
January 2020 and contained at pages 13-33 of the appellant's bundle.  The
report has been prepared by Ms Catherine Kinyanjui.  She concludes that any
change to the appellant's current circumstances would present a risk to his
opportunities for recovery and would impact upon his private and family
life in the United Kingdom.  The report places much emphasis on the
domestic violence which the appellant experienced from his ex-wife and
which has caused him mental distress and impacted upon his mental health.
She states that it is unclear what accommodation or income would be
available to the appellant should he be forced to relocate to Pakistan and
this presents a risk of financial hardship.  There will also be risk of
deterioration in his mental health.

67.  I take into account this social worker's report.  However, the finding
of the report are based on the information that was before her and in
particular, that presented to her by the appellant.  This Tribunal has to
form its own independent judgement in light of the evidence before it.  In
this respect, there is no evidence before the Tribunal that the appellant
would not be able to access mental health treatment in Pakistan.
Furthermore, as my findings below indicate, the appellant does have a
family support network in Pakistan and the United Kingdom to help him
resettle.

13.  Although the judge accepted that the Appellant had spent periods of
his life in Hong Kong, he did not find him to be credible and he did not
accept the evidence that he had lived in Hong Kong when he was a child and
that he had only returned to Pakistan throughout his adult life as a
visitor.  The judge said that the Appellant is 'too unreliable a witness
for me to be persuaded that he has been away from Pakistan for such a
lengthy period'.

14.  The judge found that the Appellant continues to have family, cultural
and linguistic ties to Pakistan, noting that he gave evidence in Urdu and
he accepted that he made regular visits to Pakistan in the last decade.

15.  The judge referred to the evidence that the Appellant has two brothers
in Pakistan who live in the same property.  They have a domestic servant in
the property to help them.  One of the brothers has mental health problems
and the other brother is not working, however, he has several children in
the United Kingdom who financially support them.

16.  The judge noted the Appellant's evidence that he was being currently
financially supported by his family in the UK.  The judge found that there
was no reason why the Appellant could not be financially supported in
Pakistan in the same way as he is currently in the UK.  He is supported by
his UK-based family and this could continue.

17.  The judge found that there is a family support network and a home for
the Appellant in Pakistan.  Should he be unable to find work he could be
supported by his UK family as is the current position.

18.  The judge noted, at paragraph 73, that the Appellant had stated in
evidence that there was nothing wrong with him in respect of working.  His
evidence was that he felt that he would be unable to find work because of
his age.  However, the judge did not accept that he was so old that he
would not be able to find employment.

19.  The judge found as follows in respect of paragraph 276ADE:

'75. Paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules: In light of the above findings, the
application falls for refusal under the suitability requirements for the
reasons set out by the respondent in the refusal letter.  I find that the
appellant has clearly and deliberately used two separate identities in
various immigration applications that he has been making.  I find that he
deliberately changed his identity when making an entry clearance
application in 2009 for leave to enter as a spouse.

76.  I also find that there are no reasons for this Tribunal to depart from
the findings of the 2004 Tribunal, which had made findings that the
appellant had made false representations when seeking leave to enter in
2003.  The application cannot therefore succeed under the Immigration Rules
as the suitability requirements are not met.

77.  However, in the alternative, I do not find that there are very
significant obstacles to private life continuing in Pakistan.  Even if the
appellant has spent many years away from the country, he continues to have
family, cultural and linguistic ties to his country of birth.  He has a
family support network and a home to return to in Pakistan.

78.  Even if he is unable to find employment (and I do not find in his
favour on this issue), he can be supported by his UK-based family.  He is
currently being financially maintained by them in the United Kingdom and
there is no reason at all why such support cannot continue if he moved to
Pakistan.  As the evidence of the witnesses confirmed, he has two brothers
in Pakistan who are being supported by UK-based family members and there is
no reason at all why the appellant cannot be supported by the same family
members who currently support him in this country.

79.  I fully taken into account the appellant's mental health issues and
the documentation that he submitted in support.  However, there is no
evidence why any treatment for his mental health, high blood pressure and
high cholesterol cannot be received in Pakistan.  Whilst I accept that
having been in the United Kingdom for so many years, that there will be
some level of hardship that he will endure, applying the case law in this
area, I do not find that these hardships amount to very significant
obstacles.  Therefore, his appeal cannot succeed under paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) either.'''

The IRs

The relevant IRs are as follows:-

"Section S-LTR: Suitability-leave to remain

S-LTR.1.1.    The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain on
grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2. to 1.8. apply.

...

S-LTR.1.6.    The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to
the public good because their conduct (including convictions which do not
fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character, associations, or
other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.

S-LTR.4.1.    The applicant may be refused on grounds of suitability if any
of paragraphs S-LTR.4.2. to S-LTR.4.5. apply.

S-LTR.4.2.    The applicant has made false representations or failed to
disclose any material fact in a previous application for entry clearance,
leave to enter, leave to remain or a variation of leave, or in a previous
human rights claim; or did so in order to obtain from the Secretary of
State or a third party a document required to support such an application
or claim (whether or not the application or claim was successful).

..."

Mahmood

Both parties made submissions in relation to Mahmood, the head note of
which reads as follows:-

"1.  Paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of Appendix FM does not cover the use of false
representations or a failure to disclose material facts in an application
for leave to remain or in a previous application for immigration status.

2.   Paragraph S-LTR.4.2. of Appendix FM is disjunctive with two
independent clauses.  The Home Office is consequently obliged to plead and
reason her exercise of discretion to refuse an application for leave to
remain based on one or both of those clauses.

3.   The natural meaning of the first clause in paragraph S-LTR.4.2
requires that the false representation or the failure to disclose any
material fact must have been made in support of a previous application and
not be peripheral to that application.

4.   The use of the words 'required to support' in the second clause in
paragraph S-LTR.4.2 confirms a compulsory element to the use of the
document(s) within the application or claim process, and the obtaining of
the document(s) must be for the purposes of the immigration application or
claim."

The UT stated as follows in the main body of the decision:-

"i)  Disjunctive nature

77.  The exercise of refusal on suitability grounds under this paragraph is
discretionary in nature by application of paragraph S-LTR.4.1.

78.  Paragraph S-LTR.4.2. is specific as to its scope of application and
the combination of a semicolon with 'or' establishes an exclusive sense to
the rule by which two independent clauses are joined, so establishing the
paragraph's disjunctive nature.  Mr.  Jarvis accepted on behalf of the
respondent that consequent to such disjunctive nature, the respondent is
obliged to explain why the applicable discretion has or has not been
exercised in respect to this Rule.

79.  The two separate basis upon which the respondent may exercise
discretion to refuse an application for leave to remain can be summarised
as i) the use of false representations or a failure to disclose any
material fact in a previous application and ii) the use of false
representations in order to obtain a document required to support such an
application.  Consequent to their independent nature, the Tribunal is
satisfied that reliance upon one or both of the elements must be
specifically pleaded and reasoned by the respondent in her decision letter,
or if upon becoming aware of further information the respondent seeks to
exercise her discretion during the course of the subsequent appeal process
it should be by means of an addendum decision providing reasons with an
appellant being given sufficient time to counter the serious nature of the
underlying allegation as to conduct.

ii)  The applicant has made false representations or failed to disclose any
material fact in a previous application for entry clearance, leave to
enter, leave to remain or a variation of leave, or in a previous human
rights claim'

80.  By her decision of 14 December 2017, the respondent relied upon the
first independent clause of paragraph S-LTR.4.2. concerned with the
applicant having made false representations in a previous application for
leave to remain or a variation of leave, or in a previous human rights
claim.

81.  Mr. Jarvis did not seek to persuade us that a broad reading should
properly be applied to this clause so as to permit any false representation
arising in an earlier application, regardless of whether it was made in
support of the application and regardless of whether the falsity was drawn
to the respondent's attention, as being sufficient to enable the refusal of
an application.  We agree that Mr. Jarvis was correct not to because such
approach would clearly go beyond the natural meaning of the words used in
this clause of the paragraph.  The use of the first 'or' in the sentence is
inclusive, bringing together two separate elements namely the making of
false representations and the failure to disclose any material fact, which
relate to a 'previous application'.  If the intention had been to adopt the
broader approach, the word 'any' would have been used in the first element,
concerned with false representations, as well as in the second, concerned
with failure to disclose material.  Further, the plain meaning of 'has made
false representations ... in a previous application ...' is that the false
representation is made in relation to a previous application.  There is no
counter-indication that any false representation not made in support of the
application, should be read into this clause.

82.  In this matter the appellant has consistently informed the respondent
that whilst he dishonestly assumed an identity and a NI number to secure
employment, and used the identity as a British citizen to secure access to
the NHS, he was open and honest to the respondent as to the employment and
tax documents accompanying the application having been secured through the
use of the false identity.  We consider it important that the P60 forms,
genuinely issued but the product of dishonesty as to identity, were
peripheral to the application for leave to remain on long residence
grounds.  Their purpose was to demonstrate long residence, but it was not a
requirement of the relevant rule that the appellant provide P60s.  They
were relied upon by the appellant to establish his long residence, a task
they were capable of satisfying, and not to establish that the appellant
was the person named upon them.  Nor did the documents establish that the
appellant enjoyed a right to work lawfully in this country or to meet any
financial requirement established by any relevant paragraph of the Rules.
The false representation in this matter was in providing various employers
with a dishonestly assumed identity and NI number to secure employment.
The employment and tax documents were produced consequent to the appellant
having secured employment in his false identity.  Having openly informed
the respondent from the outset as to his actions, there were no false
representations made on the appellant's behalf in his application that he
was a British citizen called Rezaul Karim who was born in 1976, possessed a
particular NI number, was lawfully entitled to work and through the course
of lawful employment had earned the sums detailed by the eleven P60 forms.

83.  Upon considering [17] of the decision we are satisfied that the Judge
materially erred in adopting the broader interpretation of the first
independent clause of paragraph S-LTR.4.2.  Whilst observing that the
appellant had openly declared that he assumed the identity of Mr. Karim to
secure employment, the Judge considered the innate characteristic of the
documents are containing 'false representations' through the deliberate
dishonesty employed to secure them.  Such an approach uncoupled the
requirement that the false representation be made 'in a previous
application' and instead broadened the use of a false representation to the
securing of any document used in the previous application, even if there
were clear and adequate admissions to the respondent from the outset as to
the circumstances in which the documents were obtained.

84.  We conclude that paragraph S-LTR.4.2. is disjunctive with two
independent clauses.  The respondent is consequently obliged to plead and
reason her exercise of discretion to refuse an application for leave to
remain based on one or both of those clauses.  By her decision of 14
December 2017, the respondent only relied upon the first clause.  The
natural meaning of the first clause requires that the false representation
or the failure to disclose any material fact must have been made in support
of a previous application and not be peripheral to that application.  The
reliance upon employment and tax documents, openly confirmed to have been
secured through the long-time use of a false identity, was peripheral to
the previous application for leave to remain on private life grounds under
paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and also peripheral to the earlier application for
ILR on long residence grounds.  The Judge therefore materially erred in
finding that the suitability requirement established by the first clause of
paragraph S-LTR.4.2. was applicable to the appellant."

The Evidence

The Appellant relied on the evidence that was before the First-tier
Tribunal.  I have set out the relevant parts of the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal.

Mr Clarke in response to my directions submitted a letter from the Home
Office to the Appellant's home address dated 29 November 2017.  This letter
states as follows:-

"It would appear from our records that you have used two different
identities in your dealings with the Home Office.

[RSA] - 29 October 1962

[SRK] - 29 October 1961

Can you please provide an explanation as to why you have used two separate
identities."

There is a letter from the Home Office to the Appellant dated 23 October
2018 in the same terms.

Mr Clarke also relied on a decision letter of 20 December 2018.  The part
of the decision specifically relied upon is the third paragraph under the
heading

Reasons for Decision

Suitability

and it reads as follows:-

"It is understood that you have utilised two separate identities, that
[RSA] Pakistan - 29 October 1962 and [SRK] - Pakistan 29 October 1961.  On
29 November 2017 and 23 October 2018, the Home Office contacted you and
asked you about the use of the two above referred identities.  On each
occasion you stated that you had never used two identities and asserted
that you were being confused with your brother's child, who you claim bears
a similar appearance and has similar details to you.

However, Home Office records and databases show a unique fingerprint match
for you, between both of these identities.  Even were this not to be the
case it is noted that your image has clearly been used throughout all of
the applications, that each of the applications outline that you work as a
travel agent or within the travel industry and each application also bears
a virtually identical signature throughout all applications in relation to
both identities."

Neither party had been able to obtain a copy of Mr Jhirad's decision.  I
heard full submissions from both parties

Dr Hashmi's report of 11 February 2020

This report was before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is no update. Dr
Hashmi assessed the Appellant on two occasions.  He states under the
heading "Diagnosis" that the Appellant has symptoms of recurrent depressive
disorder of a moderate to severe degree.  He identified symptoms of
depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.  Under the heading Summary
of Findings and Recommendations Dr Hashmi states that in his opinion the
Appellant suffers from severe depression with predominant psychological,
biological and cognitive symptoms though he has emotional symptoms as well
as negative thinking and behaviour patterns.  The symptoms included a
persistent low and sad mood, impairment in attention, memory,
concentration, decision-making, severe insomnia, anhedonia, loss of
appetite, fatigue and tiredness, feelings of guilt and hopelessness,
pessimism and loss of interest in any activities and a tendency to isolate
himself and a death wish.

Dr Hashmi states:

"If left to his own device, the Appellant is not likely to cope with life
in general and would possibly not function well, since there would be no-
one to remind him, support and guide him and motivate him.  He would
neglect his activities of daily living; he would probably starve himself
and stay in bed all day.  His self-care, hygiene and health would worsen
and given his anosognosia (lack of insight into his difficulties), his
vulnerability would exponentially increase."

Dr Hashmi goes on to state that the Appellant is not competent to
understand his own best interests and that it would be difficult for him to
cope and manage on his own in a new and strange environment without any
consistent and appropriate support "such as what he receives from his close
family in UK, he would rapidly deteriorate".

In Dr Hashmi's opinion the "serious mental illness is persistent and non-
remitting, in spite of being on antidepressants".  In his opinion the
Appellant would benefit from getting long-term psychological support in
terms of psychotherapy as well as a psychiatric review of medication.

Dr Hashmi states that there is

"growing evidence for a trauma-based explanation of developing chronical
enduring depression.  There is a history of domestic violence and emotional
trauma, and he experiences nightmares and flashbacks on a regular basis, he
has post-traumatic anxiety and this is likely to be complicating and
aggravating factor in his chronic depression and dysfunction".

The conclusion drawn by Dr Hashmi is that it would not be prudent for the
Appellant to change his environment and to leave his support network and
available access to healthcare and therapy.  The Appellant is

"very likely to deteriorate in his symptoms and I am particularly worried
about his suicidal thoughts and lack of drive in caring for himself and
asking for help.  He is likely to severely neglect his basic needs if
detached from his current support network."

Under the heading "Prognosis" the doctor states as follows:-

"When he is adherent to a suitable antidepressant medication in a
therapeutic and effective dose, he is likely to gradually become more
attentive, animated, interested in life and would be able to function
better and think clearer.

He is also likely to show modest improvements in hygiene, motivation and
self-care.

The negative prognostic factors that unfortunately shared a dim light on
the possibility of a complete return to his once normal personality include
the spectre of separation from his immediate family and the constant
support they provide to him.

I believe that he would deteriorate into dysfunction without regular
support from his family that he has trusted and relied on for many years, I
would therefore recommend that he should continue to get this vital support
from his immediate family in the UK."

The Country Policy and Information Note Pakistan: Medical and healthcare
provisions Version 2.0 September 2020 ["the 2020 CPIN"].

I set out the relevant parts of the 2020 CPIN relied on by the parties.

"1.  Healthcare system

             ...

1.1.3    MedCOI noted in January 2020: 'Pakistan is ranked 154 among 195
countries in terms of accessibility and quality of healthcare.'4

1.3  Affordability and health insurance

             ...





1.3.3    The MedCOI response, dated 29 January 2020, noted:

'A project in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and parts of Islamabad is providing
'health cards to ensure government-subsidised health insurance for poor and
needy families'.  The Sehat Sahulat Program provides 'significant financial
coverage, and province-wide accessibility to secondary and tertiary
treatment facilities.'  This model was built to align with Pakistan's
commitment to introduce Universal Health Coverage (UHC) by 2030.  Achieving
UHC is part of Pakistan's sustainable development goals.

                  'In 2017 a health insurance scheme was launched in the
                  federal capital, FATA and Punjab to provide coverage for
                  families earning USD 2 per day or less.  Families included
                  in the scheme are entitled to an annual treatment costing
                  USD 2,600.  This can include conditions and treatments
                  like cancer, traumas caused by accidents, burns,
                  complications from diabetes, infections and bypass
                  surgeries.'14

1.3.4    The Prime Minister's National Health Programme, known as the Sehat
Sahulat Program (SSP), benefitted people living below the poverty line,
persons with disabilities (residing in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, Gilgit
Baltistan, Islamabad Capital Territory and Punjab) and transgender persons
(across Pakistan)15.  The SSP was described as '[A] milestone towards
social welfare reforms; ensuring that the identified under-privileged
citizens across the country get access to their entitled medical health
care in a swift and dignified manner without any financial obligations.
The SSP program's objective is to improve access of the poor population to
good quality medical services, through a micro health insurance scheme.'16

             ...

1.4  Public sector

1.4.1    WHO EMRO noted in regard to the public health sector:

'Public sector health care systqqem endeavors to deliver healthcare through
a three level healthcare delivery system and a range of public health
interventions. The first level includes Basic Health Units (BHUs) and Rural
Health Centers (RHCs) founding the fundamental of the primary healthcare
model, secondary care encompassed first and second referral facilities
providing acute, ambulatory and inpatient care through Tehsil Headquarter
Hospitals (THQs) and District Headquarter Hospitals (DHQs) and tertiary
care including teaching hospitals.

'...The numbers of doctors, dentist, nurses and LHVs [Lady health care
visitors] have increased and availability of one doctor, dentist, nurse and
one hospital bed versus population has gradually improved.'22

1.4.2    Pakistan Today, a Pakistani English-language daily newspaper,
reported in January 2020 that the public sector served 30% of the
population of Pakistan23.

1.4.3    The Government of Pakistan runs the Expanded Programme on
Immunisation (EPI) which 'aims to vaccinate children aged 0-15 months
against ten Vaccine Preventable Diseases (VPDs) and pregnant women.'24 See
also Healthcare facilities -

         Public

1.5  Private sector

1.5.1    WHO EMRO noted on the private sector:

'The private health sector constitutes a diverse group of doctors, nurses,
pharmacists, traditional healers, drug vendors, as well as laboratory
technicians, shopkeepers and unqualified practitioners.

'...The rising population pressure on state health institutions has allowed
the private sector to bridge the gap of rising demand and limited public
health facilities.  A number of private hospitals, clinics and diagnostic
labs has increased considerably and is contributing health services in the
country.  Majority of private sector hospitals has sole proprietorship or a
partnership model of organization.  Stand-alone clinics across Pakistan are
the major providers of out-patient care majority of these clinics falls in
the sole proprietorship category.'25

1.6  Non-government organisation (NGO) provision and assistance

1.6.1    The BTI 2020 report noted:

'Pakistan has a vast array of associations and organizations representing
the interests of different communities.  These include trade unions,
student unions, bar associations, peasant organizations, journalist unions
and charity organizations.  Welfare associations, both formal and informal,
are a significant source of social support, often filling a governance
vacuum or providing a social safety net.  Such third-sector entities also
play a prominent role in providing emergency services and health care.'27

1.6.2    MedCOI noted, in a response dated 29 January 2020, 'Charity
hospitals may also provide free healthcare to the underprivileged.  One
chain of hospitals described in an article by Andalou Agency is said to
provide care from the primary level up to cardiac surgery and treatment for
pediatric cancer.'28

                    ____________________________

                    4  MedCOI, 29 January 2020

                    14 MedCOI, 29 January 2020

                    15 SSP, 'Frequently Asked Questions', nd

                    16 Sehat Sahulat Program, 'About the program', nd

                    22 WHO EMRO, 'Pakistan Health Service Delivery', nd

                    23 Pakistan Today, 'Pakistan's healthcare system', 8
                      January 2020

                    24 Government of Pakistan, 'Expanded Program on
                      Immunization', nd

                    25 WHO EMRO, 'Pakistan Health Service Delivery', nd

                    26 Pakistan Today, 'Pakistan's healthcare system', 8
                      January 2020

                    27 Bertelsmann Stiftung, 'BTI Pakistan Country Report
                      2020', (p13), 2020

                    28 MedCOI, 29 January 2020".

"4.12    Mental health

4.12.1   According to the WHO Mental Health Atlas 2017 profile for
Pakistan, there were 11 psychiatric hospitals in the country, 800
psychiatric units in general hospitals and 578 residential care facilities,
all offering inpatient care99.  As per the WHO's report, there are 3,729
outpatient mental health facilities in the country, of which 3 were for
children and adolescents only100.  There were 624 community-based (non-
hospital) psychiatric outpatient facilities101.

4.12.2   A report published in 2020 on mental healthcare in Pakistan noted:

'Mental healthcare is provided mostly by public health sector although
there have been some recent developments in the private sector as well.
Psychiatric care offered by different sectors generally highlights the
influence of the British allopathic system on psychiatric care.  [...]
There are around 400 qualified psychiatrists working in Pakistan.  Most of
the psychiatrists are working in urban cities although the posts of
district psychiatrists have also been created throughout the country.
Psychiatrists, in general, are working single handed, although major
centers in the country are developing multidisciplinary services.'102

4.12.3   In February 2020, The News International reported on mental health
and suicide:

'Psychological problems in Pakistan are widespread. According to one
estimate, around 50 million people in Pakistan suffer from mental
disorders.  A range of psychiatric disorders have been reported, such as
depression, substance and alcohol misuse, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder,
and post-traumatic stress disorder.  According to one estimate, 36 percent
of Pakistanis suffer from anxiety and depression, which is often caused by
strained family and friend relations, the feeling of not fitting in the
society, the unstable economic and political conditions of the country
giving rise to unemployment and poverty.'103

4.12.4   Asia Times, an international news outlet that reports on Asia,
noted in February 2020, 'It is worth noting that 18 years after the
enactment of the Mental Health Ordinance 2001, only three Pakistani
provinces have mental-health rules in place...'104

4.12.5   The 2020 report on mental healthcare in Pakistan noted that mental
health problems were taboo and people were reluctant to reveal a mental
illness105.  The report also stated:

'In Pakistani culture, it is commonplace to approach spiritual or
traditional healers in cases of physical or mental illnesses.  Faith
healing is the traditional way of treatment for mental ailments in this
culture, as people usually perceive mental illness to be the result of
supernatural influences.  Use of faith healers is irrespective of socio-
economic factors as it usually depends on the person's belief toward
spiritual healing.  Faith healers are a major source of care for people
with mental health problems in Pakistan, particularly for women and those
with little education.'106

4.12.6   Similarly, The News International noted in February 2020
'[S]eeking help for psychological disorders is problematic in Pakistan.
Mental illness is often associated with supernatural forces such as
witchcraft, possession, and black magic.  Families often hide mental
illness to prevent the patient from adverse stereotyping.'107

4.12.7   MedCOI noted in November 2018 and May 2019 that treatment for post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was available at the Combined Military
Hospital, Lahore (public facility), the Shaikh Zaid Hospital, Lahore,
(private facility), Curelink Healthcare, Rawalpindi (private facility) and
Karachi Psychiatric Hospital, Karachi (private facility), including:

                .  Inpatient, outpatient and follow-up treatment by a
                  psychiatrist

                .  Inpatient, outpatient and follow-up treatment by a
                  psychologist

                .  Psychiatric treatment by means of psychotherapy: other
                  than cognitive behavioural therapy

                .  Psychiatric treatment of PTSD by means of cognitive
                  behavioural therapy

                .  Psychiatric treatment of PTSD by means of EMDR

                .  Psychiatric treatment of PTSD by means of narrative
                  exposure therapy108 109.

4.12.8   MedCOI noted in June 2019 that psychiatric treatment and treatment
for drug addiction was available at the private facility Dost Foundation
Hayatabad, Peshawar and the public facility Free Meth Drug Addict Centre
Peshawar City:

                .  Psychiatric treatment of drug addiction in a specialized
                  clinic (rehab.)

                .  Psychiatric treatment of drug addiction;
                  inpatient/clinical care with methadone

                .  Psychiatric treatment of drug addiction; outpatient care

                .  Psychiatric treatment of drug addiction; outpatient care
                  with methadone

                .  Inpatient treatment by a psychiatrist

                .  Outpatient treatment and follow up by a psychiatrist

                .  Inpatient treatment by a psychologist

                .  Outpatient treatment and follow up by a psychologist110.
                  See also Drug addiction.

4.12.9   According to MedCOI, in a response dated 21 March 2020, inpatient
and outpatient treatment by a psychiatrist and psychologist was available
at the Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, and Shifa International
Hospital, Islamabad (private facilities)111.  Both facilities also provided
long-term psychiatric outpatient care and clinical treatment112.

4.12.10  According to the WHO Mental Health Atlas 2017, persons pay at
least 20% towards the cost of mental health services / psychotropic
medicines113.

4.12.11  On the cost of inpatient psychiatric treatment, a MedCOI response
dated 21 June 2018 noted:

'At the Karachi Psychiatric Hospital, a fee is charged according to the
patient's ability to pay.  For impoverished patients, a nominal fee or free
outpatient consultations are offered.  A consultation in the hospital by a
senior psychiatrist, according to the online price list for 2018, is PKR
1,580 for the first visit, and PKR 1,430 for subsequent visits.  For a
junior psychiatrist, the costs are PKR 1,080 for the first visit and PKR
690 for subsequent visits.

'Inpatient daily fees ranges from PKR 2420 to PKR 3800 in a ward, to PKR
5,210 for a semi-private room.  The hospital also offers private rooms from
PKR 6,970 per day.  The inpatient fee includes room, bed, food, psychiatric
medications, doctor's fee and machine treatments.'114

4.12.12  The same response noted:

'[T]he Aga Khan Hospital provides treatment for schizophrenia and accepts
mustahiq [deserving] patients.  Other healthcare facilities also treat
under-privileged or mustahiq patients for free or at subsidised rates.
Examples of such facilities are the Psychiatric Care and Rehabilitation
Center in Karachi with 100 inpatient beds, funded through donations and
Zakat and run by the non-profit organisation Karwan-e-Hayat Institute for
Mental Health Care, and the Free Deport Line Clinic, in the regime of the
Pakistan Association for Mental Health (PAMH) and funded through
donations.'115  See Affordability and health insurance for further
information on Zakat.

                        ____________________________
                        99 WHO, 'Mental Health Atlas 2017', 2017
                        100    WHO, 'Mental Health Atlas 2017', 2017
                        101    WHO, 'Mental Health Atlas 2017', 2017
                        102    Javed, A., et al, 'Mental healthcare in
                           Pakistan', (pp7-8), 2020
                        103    The News, Dispelling myths about mental
                           health', 16 February 2020
                        104    Asia Times, Challenges to mental health law
                           in Pakistan, 24 February 2020
                        105    Javed, A., et al, 'Mental healthcare in
                           Pakistan', (p7), 2020
                        106    Javed, A., et al, 'Mental healthcare in
                           Pakistan', (p7), 2020
                        107    The News, Dispelling myths about mental
                           health', 16 February 2020
                        108    MedCOI, 27 November 2018
                        109    MedCOI, 28 May 2019
                        110    MedCOI, 29 June 2019
                        111    MedCOI, 21 March 2020
                        112    MedCOI, 21 March 2020
                        113    WHO, 'Mental Health Atlas 2017', 2017
                        114    MedCOI, 21 June 2018
                        115    MedCOI, 21 June 2018".

Submissions

Mr Clarke indicated at the start of the hearing that the Secretary of State
no longer relied on S-LTR.1.6.  However, reliance was placed on S-LTR.4.2.

Mr Clarke made the following submissions.  It was not until 2018 that the
Appellant's full immigration history came to light and his real identity
([SRK]).  It is asserted that the Appellant made false representations or
failed to disclose a material fact in a previous application in 2001.
There was no evidence that the Secretary of State was aware of the
Appellant's adverse immigration history when the matter came before Judge
Crawford in 2014 which explains why at that time the SSHD did not rely on
it.

The Appellant made an application in 2009 using a false identity in order
to cover up his poor immigration history, so much has already been found by
the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Clarke said that there was no oral evidence
from the Appellant and no up-to-date medical evidence.

In relation to the burden of proof, Mr Clarke referred me to AY (Article 8
- Family life - Proportionality) Ivory Coast [2004] UKIAT 00205,
specifically paragraph 22:-

"22. If however the foregoing were wrong and the Appellant's removal would
of itself constitute some interference with his Article 8.1 rights, then
the question of proportionality arises.  The Tribunal is guided by [2004]
UKIAT 00024 M (Croatia)* especially at paragraph 28 and by Razgar [2004]
UKHL27, especially at paragraph 20.  In these circumstances also, however,
the Tribunal concludes that the burden is on the Appellant to establish any
particular difficulties for himself and his wife in each returning to the
other's country.  The Tribunal rejects the contention that, once it is
established that there will be some interference with a Claimant's Article
8.1 rights, then it must be assumed that every potential course of action
for that Claimant in re-establishing family life would necessarily meet
with insuperable difficulties unless such difficulties are expressly
disproved by the Respondent.  The Respondent has a burden upon him to prove
that the removal would be proportionate, but the Respondent provisionally
discharges that burden of proof by relying upon the substantial weight to
be accorded to a firm and fair immigration policy.  If a Claimant wishes to
contend that the facts of his particular case mean that his removal from
the United Kingdom will cause for him particularly severe difficulties then
it is for him to establish on evidence the prospect that these difficulties
may in fact emerge.  It is not for the Respondent to disprove every
possible difficulty.  Accordingly upon this analysis (i.e. supposing that
the question of proportionality falls to be considered, contrary to
paragraph 21 above) the Tribunal concludes that the Respondent's decision
to remove the Appellant to the Ivory Coast is a decision within the range
of reasonable responses open to the Respondent.  The Tribunal is not
satisfied (and on the evidence before it cannot be satisfied) that there
would be any significant difficulties either for the Appellant to join his
wife and children in the Cameroon and enjoy family life there or for the
Appellant's wife and children to join the Appellant in the Ivory Coast and
to enjoy family life there.  The Tribunal has not overlooked the
Appellant's mental condition but is not satisfied that, even taking this
into account, the Appellant's removal would give rise to any
disproportionate interference with his family life or indeed his private
life.  As regards a return to the Cameroon for the Appellant's wife, she
has not established any well-founded fear of persecution or Article 3
infringing treatment there.  The fact that the Appellant's wife has many
(if not all) of her members of her family in the United Kingdom is not a
matter of any significant weight bearing in mind her own evidence that she
is substantially estranged from them.  So far as concerns a return to the
Ivory Coast, the Adjudicator has found the Appellant has no well-founded
fear of ill-treatment there."

It was open to the Appellant to make an application under the domestic
violence provisions of Appendix FM, however, he has not done so.  There
were no very significant obstacles to integration.  Mr Clarke referred to
the preserved findings.

In respect of the decision letter, S-LTR.4.2 was pleaded.  The provision is
set out in its entirety therein.  The Appellant accepts in his witness
statement that he made an application using a false identity in 2009.  Mr
Clarke relied on the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, specifically
those at paragraphs 57 and 58 in respect of the application made in 2001.
In any event, there was no challenge to Judge Jhirad's findings.  The
Appellant made an application in 2001 on the basis that he was a Hong Kong
resident business person.  The fact that he pretended to be a business
person from Hong Kong speaks directly to the wording of the relevant
paragraph.  It is clear that the Appellant would not be in the UK, had the
Secretary of State been aware of the fraud in 2001 he would not have been
granted leave in 2009.

The case of Mahmood can be distinguished.  The Appellant in that case
relied on false ID in order to work.  He did not rely on a false ID when
making an application to the SSHD.  He drew my attention to the Appellant's
immigration history, specifically that there were directions for him to be
removed in 2005. However, he did not turn up for the flight.  He then made
an application for settlement.

Mr Clarke said it is not apparent from the evidence what, if any, medical
treatment is needed by the Appellant because the medical evidence is out of
date. The Appellant has family in Pakistan.  There is no evidence he would
not be able to access medical treatment.  It is clear that the Appellant
cannot meet the IRs.  There are no very significant obstacles.  He drew my
attention to 2020 CPIN, specifically at para 4.12 and the availability of
private rooms and the availability of medication.

The Appellant has sought to circumvent the law and significant weight
should be attached to this.  He cannot meet the IRs.   The fact that he may
be able to speak English and that he is supported by others whilst here in
the UK are neutral factors.  Whilst there is a margin of appreciation as
regards private life and the factors under s.117B of the 2002 Act, the
Appellant's immigration history must carry weight in this case.  There are
no properly identified exceptional circumstances.

Mr Jafferji made full submissions.  He specifically referred me to the
decision of the Upper Tribunal in Mahmood, drawing my attention to
similarities in the case.  According to Mr Jafferji the submission made by
Mr Clarke that the Appellant would not have been granted entry in 2009 had
he used his own identity was not accepted.  He was genuinely a spouse of a
British citizen and came within the IRs.  Had he used his real identity he
might have faced a hurdle because of the previous application but he still
nevertheless satisfies the IRs.  He asked me to bear in mind that the
Appellant left the UK voluntarily.  He submitted that the false identity
was a peripheral issue.  Even if that was not accepted, his marriage was
genuine and subsisting.

He submitted that it was curious that there were no documents available in
relation to the application made in 2001.  He was concerned that no-one had
a copy of Judge Jhirad's decision and how it fits into S-LTR.4.2.

He drew my attention to the restrictive scope of the provision and urged me
to be cautious.  He submitted that there was nothing that clearly
establishes that the SSHD was not aware of the Appellant's alternative
identity in 2014 and that there was a possibility that they knew at this
time or before 2018.  It was difficult to see how the Secretary of State
would not be aware of because of it came about from biometric data.

In relation to the exercise of discretion, this is not considered in the
refusal letter.  He drew my attention to paragraph 78 of the decision in
Mahmood.  The SSHD is obliged to explain why the applicable discretion has
or has not been exercised.

There has been nothing about the Appellant's conduct since arriving in the
UK with his spouse that would result in a refusal on suitability grounds.
Judge Aziz accepted the consequences of domestic violence on the Appellant.
 I was referred to his mental health and the evidence of Dr Hashmi.  Mr
Jafferji drew my attention to the absence of psychiatrists in Pakistan and
section 4 of the CPIN 2020.  The Appellant has now been in the UK for
eleven and a half years.  He meets the IRs.  He has spent a longer period
outside Pakistan than in Pakistan.  He lives predominantly in the UK.  He
has serious mental health problems.  There is no pressing public interest
to outweigh the Appellant's rights under Article 8.

Findings and Reasons

The First-tier Tribunal found that there are no very significant obstacles
to integration, having rejected his evidence about having spent many years
away from Pakistan.  That finding is preserved.  In any event, there was no
further evidence from the Appellant.

The Appellant used a false representation in respect of a claim he made in
2001.  He pretended to be a business man from Hong Kong.  He has
continuously denied he was responsible for the application; however, does
not dispute the biometric date match.  There is a judicial finding that he
exercised deception (in 2004 by Judge Jhirad).  The decision was before the
First-tier Tribunal which found that there was no reason to go behind it,
properly applying Devaseelan.  There has been no cross challenge by the
Appellant.  For completeness, I would have liked to have seen Judge
Jhirad's decision, but its absence does not cause me concern and there is
no support for Mr Jafferji's describing the position as "curious."  The
false representation was made in support of an application for entry
clearance.  It falls squarely into the first limb of para S-LTR.4.2,
properly applying the correct narrow interpretation urged in Mahmmod.  The
matter is clearly pleaded in the decision letter.

Para S-LTR 4.2 is discretionary.  This is not made clear in the decision,
but this is likely to be because the SSHD at that time was relying on
mandatory grounds of refusal.

There are preserved adverse findings made against the Appellant.  He is an
unreliable witness.  He used a false name to apply for a spousal visa in
2009.  His evidence that he was under coercion was rejected.  I also take
into account that he communicated with the SSHD on 24 January 2010 using
his real identity stating that he had left the country stating that he had
left the country in 2008.  However, at the date of the communication, he
was residing in the United Kingdom under a different name.  I have no doubt
that the Appellant adopted a false identity to distance himself from the
application in 2001.

The fact that it took some years for the SSHD to discover the truth does
not mitigate the Appellant's deception.  The letters from the SSHD to the
Appellant establish that the deception came to light in 2017.  I am
satisfied that Judge Crawford was not aware of it because it was not a
matter which was at the time in the SSHD's knowledge.

The Appellant has a poor immigration history which does not assist him.  I
accept that he has been found to be a victim of domestic violence.  I
accept he has mental health problems.  However, none of this accounts for
his behaviour.

The Appellant has a family support network in Pakistan.  Although the
Appellant has no partner or child here he has extended family here. He has
been here for over eleven years.  Article 8 (1) is engaged.  He has health
problems.  I have taken into account Dr Hashmi's evidence.  The First-tier
Tribunal accepted the diagnosis.  However, like the social worker, his
evidence (prognosis) is based on the Appellant being on his own in Pakistan
and without family support.  However, this is not the case as found by the
First-tier Tribunal.  I accept that it is reasonably likely that the
Appellant's health has not materially changed since February 2020.  The
Appellant was on medication and is likely to still be on medication.  There
was no up to date evidence that he was receiving treatment in addition to
this.

The CPIN 2020 discloses that treatment is available, albeit it not widely.
I have taken into account the part of the CPIN 2020 specifically relied on
by Mr Jafferji.  I note that there are only 400 psychiatrists, widespread
mental health problems and there is stigma attached to mental health
problems.  There is , however, no evidence that the Appellant would not be
able to access medication.  He will have not only the physical and
emotional support of his family in Pakistan, but the continued support from
his family here including financial support.  It was found by the First-
tier Tribunal that the United Kingdom family would continue to support the
Appellant.

Section 117(B) of the 2002 Act does not assist the Appellant.  His stay has
been precarious.  He has been here under a false identity (created in order
to distance himself from the 2001 application) since 2009.  His immigration
history is poor.  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
the public interest.  The Appellant cannot meet the IRs.  There are no very
significant obstacles to integration.  If there were, in this case, he
would have to persuade the UT to exercise discretion in his favour, and
this, depending on the facts, could face him with a significant hurdle
considering his poor immigration history and that he cannot meet the
immigration rules in respect of family life.  Taking into account all
matters and carrying out an evaluative assessment, a fair balance lies in
favour of the SSHD in this case.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                           Joanna                            McWilliam
 Date 22 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


