
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19058/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Papers                            |On 29 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     CI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. After a hearing before me on 5 December 2019, I set aside a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") which dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    against a decision dated 7 September 2018 to refuse leave to remain  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 2. In further directions sent on 19 February 2020, I said as follows:

         "1.  In the light of the  email  dated  28  January  2020  from  Ms
             Isherwood  for  the  respondent  (copied  to  the  appellant's
             solicitors), the Upper Tribunal's provisional view is that the
             decision in the appeal should be re-made, allowing the  appeal
             under Article 8 with reference to paragraph  GEN  3.2  of  the
             Immigration  Rules   and   s.117B(6)   of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  decision  may  be  made
             under rule 40(3)(a) or (b) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
             Tribunal) Rules 2008 (decision by consent).


         2.   Unless within 7 days of this decision being sent, either party
             notifies the  Upper  Tribunal  that  it  objects  to  what  is
             provisionally  proposed  in  paragraph  1  above,  the   Upper
             Tribunal will proceed to  re-make  the  decision  as  set  out
             above."


 3. Neither party has expressed any dissent from  the  course  proposed  in
    those directions.

 4. Accordingly, the decision is re-made and the appeal is allowed  in  the
    terms set out in the directions quoted above. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, no  reasons  (or
    further reasons) are required, the decision being made with the consent
    of the parties.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]

Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek                             Date  16  April
    2020


           ______________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email





