
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/19919/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Determination and reasons promulgated|
|from George House                    |on                                   |
|on 11 August 2021                    |08 September 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              SARASWATI DAWADI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     no legal representative; sponsor attending
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born  on  13  October  1994.   The
    "sponsor" is Daniel John Colgan, a  UK  citizen.   They  married  in  a
    cultural ceremony on 12 December 2018 and in civil form on  1  February
    2019, in Kathmandu.  On 24 September 2019  the  appellant  applied  for
    entry clearance, based on their relationship.

 2. The respondent  refused  her  application  on  7  November  2019.   The
    appellant had to show  the  sponsor's  earnings  up  to  the  financial
    threshold of �18,600.  He had income  from  employment  of  �14,520.72.
    The balance of income required was �4079.28.  It was said that  he  had
    self-employed income to make up the balance,  but  the  documents  were
    found not to meet the requirements specified in the rules.  Outside the
    rules, the ECO found no exceptional circumstances, resulting in  unduly
    harsh consequences, to  justify  a  grant  of  leave  (the  formula  in
    paragraph EX.1 of appendix FM of the rules).

 3. In grounds of appeal to the FtT, the sponsor says that after submitting
    the visa application further information was asked for, and he supplied
    firstly an accountant's letter, and secondly  unaudited  accounts;  and
    that the ECO's decision is mistaken, because his  employed  income  was
    shown to be �14839.46, not �14520.72, and so the requirement was met.

 4. FtT Judge  Landes  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 26 January 2021.

 5. The case came before the judge initially as "a case  management  review
    hearing to consider costs".  From [5] - [29] of her decision she  dealt
    with difficulties  which  had  arisen  over  procedure,  documents  not
    produced and directions  not  complied  with  by  the  respondent,  and
    penalised the respondent in costs.  At that stage, the sponsor said  he
    was "happy to proceed" with a video hearing of the substantiative case.



 6. The judge at [50] found that in terms of the rules the evidence  showed
    income from the sponsor's employment of �14,520.72 and  not  �14,893.47
    as shown on his payslip.  I was not taken at the hearing before  me  to
    the  underlying  evidence,  which  was  incompletely  produced  by  the
    respondent; but the point appears to be either that as some payment was
    made in cash, there was not complete congruity  with  payments  into  a
    bank account, or that one payslip was  missing,  see  also  [49].   The
    rules on specified evidence require there to be no missing documents in
    a series, and  for  payments  into  the  bank  and  payslips  to  match
    perfectly.

 7. The judge at [52-53] found the evidence to show self-employed income of
    �3840.00,  and  a  total  in  terms  of  evidential   requirements   of
    "�18,360.72 ... not quite ... �18,600".

 8. The judge therefore turned at [54-55] turned  to  paragraph  EX.1,  but
    that test was not met.  From [56] she considered proportionality  "more
    widely", and at [57] found earnings for the period on which  the  ECO's
    decision was based to be just over the threshold.  However, as this was
    a human rights appeal, she turned to circumstances as they then  stood,
    and having "no details" of the sponsor's income, was not satisfied that
    the �18,600 requirement was met.  Weighing up  various  factors  up  to
    [61], the appeal was dismissed.

 9. The appellant (whose case  has  been  conducted  through  the  sponsor,
    without legal representation, since the application was made) asked the
    FtT for permission to appeal to the  UT.   FtT  Judge  Osborne  refused
    permission on 10 March 2021, on the view that the sponsor had agreed to
    the appeal proceeding, and that if financial circumstances had changed,
    that should be the subject of  a  new  application  to  the  ECO,  with
    evidence in the form required.

10. The appellant sought permission from the UT, stating these grounds:

      FtT ignored that the Home Office lost or deleted the evidence used  to
      make the original decision ... I was  asked  to  provide  evidence  on
      current finances ... not relating to the 2019 decision.

      I was not granted flexibility to show I still met the  minimum  income
      as I said I lost my main [salaried] income due to Covid 19.

      I was told I had no choice but to move to Nepal if I wanted to be with
      my wife full-time.  Ignoring the great difficulty and poverty we would
      be forced into as I provide for both of us.

      This whole thing began as an  application  for  human  rights  access.
      Please someone see the evidence from the start.  All met the  criteria
      and at no point [has there] been a reasonable or lawful reason to deny
      settlement.

11. UT Judge Sheridan granted permission on 20 April 2021:

      It is arguable that the judge  erred  by  treating  the  threshold  in
      appendix FM as the test  whether  the  public  interest  in  financial
      independence - section 117B(3) - weighed against  the  appellant  when
      the relevant question was whether the appellant would  be  financially
      dependent on the state, not whether the sponsor's income [met] ... the
      requirements under appendix FM; see Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 ...

      A further arguable error arises from failure to adjourn ... Given that
      the hearing was originally listed as a case management review and that
      the appellant was not represented, it was arguably procedurally unfair
      to proceed ... once it became apparent that evidence  not  before  her
      about the sponsor's income would be material ...

12. Mr Colgan took part in the  hearing  by  telephone  only,  as  computer
    difficulties prevented him from establishing a video link.  He  did  so
    patiently and courteously.  Allowing for lack of legal  representation,
    I asked him a number of questions, to  which  he  gave  clear  answers.
    Having also heard the submissions of Ms Cunha, and from  Mr  Colgan  in
    reply, I reserved my decision.

13. The FtT did not doubt the credibility of Mr Colgan as a witness  (apart
    from declining to find that his income was as claimed,  in  absence  of
    "details").  Ms Cunha did not suggest that he was in  any  respect  not
    credible.

14. Information taken from Mr Colgan goes both  to  setting  aside  and  to
    remaking the decision.  I found no reason to  doubt  his  evidence.   I
    found it straightforward, credible, and reliable.

15. Mr Colgan said that when  he  agreed  to  the  hearing  proceeding,  he
    expected the decision to be based on his earnings up  to  the  date  of
    application.  That had been the focus of the  case  and  the  cause  of
    delay up to that point.  He and his wife had not  sought  delay,  which
    was due to the FtT and the respondent.  They were keen to have the case
    resolved.  It  was  not  his  fault,  and  he  found  it  difficult  to
    comprehend, that the  respondent  could  not  produce  documents  which
    should have been preserved in digital form.  He had not understood that
    his wife might be expected to prove his income again, by the  standards
    of specified documents, for the period up to the date of  the  hearing.
    If he had been asked to supply further details, he could have done so.

16. Ms Cunha said that the appellant, through the sponsor,  had  not  asked
    for an adjournment; the sponsor, who had conducted the application  and
    appeal competently, must have  been  aware  that  the  relevant  period
    shifted, and that he was being asked at the hearing not about the prior
    but about the more recent period; even after the  hearing,  no  further
    evidence was tendered; an adjournment would not have  helped;  and  the
    judge could not have done any more.

17. Procedural fairness is a highly contextual issue.  Bearing in mind  how
    this case had developed, what the appellant and the  sponsor  might  be
    expected to make of that, and the nature of the hearing  fixed,  it  is
    not surprising that the sponsor thought the case was about  his  income
    as evidenced in  the  application.   I  think  it  took  the  appellant
    unfairly by surprise that the judge founded on the absence of  evidence
    (other than the sponsor's oral evidence) to show income over the period
    up to the date of the hearing.  That requires the decision  to  be  set
    aside.

18. The alternatives are to fix a fresh hearing (in the FtT or in  the  UT)
    or to substitute a fresh decision, based on all evidence  available  to
    date.  The presumption is in favour of the latter, so I look firstly at
    what is yielded by the evidence as it stands.

19. Mr Colgan said that his income  for  the  period  up  to  the  original
    application and up to the present has  always  been  over  the  minimum
    threshold.  The pandemic led to a decline in wages  but  he  more  than
    made up for that through self-employment  as  a  gardening  contractor.
    Such documentary evidence as there is, although not  up-to-date,  tends
    to confirm what he says. As explained above, I found him a satisfactory
    witness.

20. I find that, more likely than not, the  minimum  financial  requirement
    specified in the rules was met when the application was made,  and  has
    been met continuously until the date of the hearing before me.

21. Mr Colgan said that his wife is able and willing to work in the UK,  he
    has never claimed benefits, and there is no risk of them  falling  back
    on benefits.  I see no reason not to accept that.

22. The appellant (implicitly, and as suggested in the grant of permission)
    relies on the generality in section 117B(3) of part 5A of the 2002  Act
    that it is in the  public  interest  for  entrants  to  the  UK  to  be
    financially independent, and not a burden on taxpayers.

23. I find that, more likely than not, the appellant would  be  financially
    independent and would not be a burden on public funds.

24. That is not conclusive in the appellant's favour.  The rules remain the
    starting point in the article  8  balancing  exercise.  The  evidential
    requirements are deliberately specific, going far beyond the generality
    of part 5A of the 2002 Act, as part of public policy and of the  scheme
    of immigration control.

25. The evidential requirements were not quite satisfied at the time of the
    ECO's  decision;  and  despite  my  findings  above,  those   technical
    requirements are not satisfied for any period since.

26. It is well established in case law that a near miss  in  terms  of  the
    rules is usually of little help in the case outside the rules.

27. In terms of paragraph  EX.1,  it  is  readily  understandable  why  the
    appellant and the sponsor prefer to carry on their family life  in  the
    UK, but  there  is  no  evidence  reaching  the  high  tests  of  "very
    significant difficulties ... which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship".

28. Rather than the sponsor moving to live in Nepal, the more likely result
    of a negative outcome in these proceedings is that the appellant  would
    try  to  show  compliance  with   the   rules,   including   evidential
    requirements, in a fresh application.  Such an application  would  have
    to be decided on its own merits, but, on my  findings,  looks  to  have
    good prospects of success.  If someone can succeed  by  complying  with
    the rules, it would often be proportionate to expect her to do so.

29. Notwithstanding those general observations on near misses, the need  to
    apply the rules, and the alternative of a fresh  application,  it  goes
    into the balance that the original failure of the application was by  a
    tiny  margin  and  was  only  technical.   The  broad  public  interest
    considerations in part 5A of the 2002  Act  tend  towards  the  balance
    being struck in favour of the appellant and the sponsor.    While  they
    might have opted for another course, they have been subject to delay in
    procedure, obscurity of issues, and loss of documentation,  through the
    fault of the respondent, in course of the appeal, and  they  have  been
    unable to pursue their family life in the UK for almost two years.   On
    those facts, and at this time, I find that the rights to family life of
    the appellant and sponsor outweigh the  public  interest  in  requiring
    strict compliance with the rules.

30. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The decision substituted is that
    the appeal, as first brought to the FtT, is allowed.

31. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      12 August 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

