
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19009/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2020                           |On 2 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Afsheen Yasin
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Nath, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant", against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  her
leave to remain on human rights grounds on 5 November 2019.

2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She was born in 1976 and  entered
the United Kingdom in 2011 with entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
Student.  Her leave was extended until 20 April 2014.  On 17 April 2014 she
applied for further leave but the application was  refused  and  subsequent
appeal dismissed on 20 October 2017 by the First-tier  Tribunal.   She  was
refused permission to appeal further.

3. The claimant remained in the United Kingdom and on 20 June  2019  made  a
further application leading to the decision complained of.

4. I turn immediately to the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

5. The first point is that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  apply  properly
the principles set out in the case of Devaseelan (Second Appeals -  ECHR  -
Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka* [2002] UKIAT 00702.

6. This, as will be well understood by anyone familiar with  judicial  fact-
finding, determined  authoritatively  that  findings  made  in  an  earlier
decision on the same facts are a necessary starting point in any subsequent
application based on the same evidence.

7. The second ground, beginning at paragraph 2, is, I find, a refinement  of
this point. It complains that the judge reached conclusions  without  being
fully appraised with the facts.

8. The third ground, beginning at paragraph 4, raises the  additional  point
that the decision is wrong on its own  terms  because  the  judge  did  not
consider properly the law set out in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence -  Burden
of Proof); [2016] UKUT 229.

9. There is a  regrettable  impertinence  about  the  Secretary  of  State's
grounds.  First, whilst it is  clearly  settled  law  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge should have had regard to the earlier decision, the  grounds
do not acknowledge the fact that the Secretary of State failed to provide a
copy of that decision and a soupï¿½on of humility would not  have  diminished
the point being made.  Second, the Secretary of State did not attend before
the First-tier Tribunal and so did not give the judge the help to which she
was entitled.  Third, the grounds assign the judge to the male gender.   No
doubt if the Secretary of State had attended she would have  realised  that
too was wrong.

10. However absent litigants are entitled to a fair hearing  and  Mr  Kotas,
who is in no way to be blamed for any  deficiencies  of  any  kind  in  the
grounds of appeal, argued that there was not a fair hearing.

11. Mr Nath referred me to the decision of this Tribunal in MM  (unfairness;
E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC).

12. I have considered that and his submissions but with  respect  that  case
is dealing with a rather different point.  In MM a document  had  not  been
considered that ought to have been considered and the case determined  that
a procedural failure leading to a document being ignored could be an  error
of law but that case concerned evidence.  The problem here, at least as far
as grounds 1 and 2, are concerned is a matter of law.   I  have  summarised
the point made in Devaseelan above.  No doubt a  better  summary  could  be
drawn but it is sufficient for present purposes.  The rule in Devaseelan is
not a matter of evidence.  It is a matter of  law  that  obliges  a  second
decision maker to begin by looking at the earlier decision when it  is,  or
appears to be, based on similar facts.  Paragraph 39(1) leave no  room  for
doubt:

    "The first Adjudicator's determination should always be  the  starting-
    point".

13. It was not the starting point here because it was not produced.

14. Having  reflected  on  this  matter  I  have  concluded  the  First-tier
Tribunal plainly erred in law by going ahead and  making  findings  without
obtaining first a copy of the First-tier Tribunal's decision that was  said
to be relevant.  Whilst some criticism must fall on the Secretary of  State
for not providing a copy, the  obligation  was  the  judge's  and  on  this
occasion she did not do what she ought to have done although, as  indicated
she was not getting the help that she was entitled to expect.

15. I make the point that the primary obligation is on the party  who  seeks
to rely on the document.  I say this  for  essentially  pragmatic  reasons.
The party who wishes to rely on an earlier decision must  know  about  that
earlier decision and know about its  contents,  else  it  has  no  business
seeking to rely upon it.  It can be assumed therefore that in this case the
Secretary of State was fully aware of the earlier decision.  The  Secretary
of State should have made sure it was in front of the judge.  Failing to do
that however does not change the law and it is the  judge's  responsibility
to apply the law and therefore it was a matter for the judge to  insist  on
the earlier decision being found.

16. I  fall  shy  of  saying  that  an  appellant's  representative  in  the
circumstances had a duty to disclose the earlier decision.  Obviously there
is a duty not to pretend there was not an earlier decision and, as it is  a
requirement  in  law  to  look  at  the  decision,  the  appellant's  legal
representatives could not in any way  be  criticised  for  breaching  their
obligations to their client by assisting the Tribunal by providing a  copy.
However the party that may prefer the earlier decision to be ignored, which
will usually be a claimant, may not be particularly organised or  concerned
about the reasons for an earlier decision failing.  Such a party  genuinely
might not have a copy of an earlier decision and genuinely might  not  have
the ability to trace it.

17. The Tribunal's records are, generally, fairly  reliable  in  matters  of
this kind and in the absence of direct help from  the  parties,  the  judge
should at least have adjourned the hearing for the Tribunal to find a  copy
of the decision.

18. It follows that I am satisfied the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law
because it went ahead without insisting on a copy of the  earlier  decision
being found.  I doubt if it would have  been  too  difficult  to  find  one
because there is one in my file that was produced for the  hearing  at  the
Upper Tribunal.

19. In stating this I am aware of the matters set out in paragraph 9 of  the
Decision and Reasons where the judge recorded Mr  Nath's  objection  before
her to adjourning the matter, pointing  out  there  could  be  no  adequate
compensation in  costs  and  there  had  been  two  previous  adjournments.
However this is not a case where the Secretary of State had said  that  she
could not provide the necessary documents.   The  documents  had  not  been
provided.  As far as I can see there was  no  explanation  put  before  the
judge to explain why the claimant had not produced  the  earlier  decision,
although there may be a perfectly good explanation, I do not know.  Neither
is there any suggestion that the Tribunal's library services had failed.

20. I am very aware of the  difficulty  the  judge  perceived.   As  I  have
indicated, I consider it to be the primary responsibility of the party that
relies on an earlier decision, in this case the Secretary of State, to  get
before the Tribunal the decisions on which she seeks to rely, but that does
not change the Tribunal's obligation to apply the law and the law  requires
consideration of the earlier decision.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in IA/01356/2016 promulgated  on
20 October 2017 ought to have been considered.  If it had  been  considered
it may be that the other findings would not have been made.

22. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

23. This is a case that needs to be heard again.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
has not considered the case properly and I have decided to remit it to  the
First-tier Tribunal where it can be determined.

Notice of Decision

24. This appeal is allowed.  The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.  I  set
aside its decision and I direct the case be heard again in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 January 2021                |


