
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20756/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2019                           |On 14 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE LORD HUGH MATTHEWS
                 (sitting as a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Emmanuel Kanu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Camila Besso of Counsel, Paragon Law
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. We see no need for and do not make an anonymity order. An order was  made
by the First-tier Tribunal. We doubt that it was  necessary.  We  have  set
aside the Decision and Reasons and have ordered the First-tier Tribunal  to
hear the appeal again. It  may  be  that  there  will  be  evidence  and/or
findings that justify anonymity and the need for an  anonymity  order  will
have to be reconsidered.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant", against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  him
leave to remain on human rights grounds on 26 September 2018 following  his
being made the subject of a deportation order.  The short point is that the
claimant is a citizen of Nigeria who has a long history of offending in the
United Kingdom.

3. The First-tier Tribunal, we are satisfied,  clearly  misdirected  itself;
it did not apply the contemporary  tests  and  mangled  tests  that  are  a
mixture of pre 2014 tests and current tests.  That is a poor start  and  is
not redeemed by anything that followed.

4. In broad terms we can see how the appeal could, conceivably, be  allowed.
 We are not, in saying this, doing anything to encourage  the  claimant  to
think that he has a strong case but if Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  is  applied  properly  the  appellant  can
succeed if he can establish Exception 1 or Exception 2 or  very  compelling
circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2.

5. Exception 2 relates to his having a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
with a qualifying partner or  parental  relationship  and  the  effects  of
removal being unduly harsh.  It  may  be  difficult  for  the  claimant  to
establish any of those things but he said  things  which  could,  possibly,
support such a conclusion and no clear, and certainly no reasoned, findings
have been made about them.

6. Exception 1 might be more promising for the claimant  but  that  too  has
been dealt with unsatisfactorily.   It  is,  I  think,  accepted  that  the
claimant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of  his
life but that only helps him under Exception 1 if he can also  show  he  is
socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom and there  would
be very significant obstacles to his integration into life in Nigeria.

7. The claim that he is socially and  culturally  integrated  again  may  be
very hard to sustain because of his long history of offending  but  he  has
had a period of being without offences since 2017  and  there  is  evidence
that he has had some legitimate  work  as  well  as  engaging  in  criminal
activities.  There may be points to be made and they may have been made but
any findings on them have not been explained in the decision in a way  that
is satisfactory.

8. In order to succeed it would still be necessary for the claimant to  show
very significant obstacles to integration into life in Nigeria. He might be
able to do that. He has indicated that he has significant  health  problems
with his physical health because his spleen has been removed. That it makes
him more susceptible to infection and  particularly  malaria  but  we  find
nothing in the decision that indicates just how serious the increased  risk
might be or what if anything the claimant can do about it.  There  is  also
an indication that he has mental health problems  and  suffers  from  post-
traumatic stress disorder.  It is not beyond all possibility that this is a
real problem but if it is it has not explained in the Decision and  Reasons
in a way which begins to justify the conclusion that has been reached.

9. It is because of these lurking concerns that we set  aside  the  decision
and direct that the appeal be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal. It may be
that there are good points to be made but if they have been made they  have
not been reflected in the decision.

10. Ms Besso is to be commended for her tenacity but she  is  struggling  to
defend a decision that is completely inadequate.


Notice of Decision

11. For these reasons we set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
and direct that the appeal be determined again in the First-tier.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2020                |
|                                     |(extempore judgement given at        |
|                                     |hearing)                             |

