
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20907/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2019                    |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    O A O
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ogundero of Chris Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He appealed to a Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 28
September 2018 refusing his application for leave to remain in the United
Kingdom on human rights grounds.

2.   The judge helpfully summarised at paragraph 6 of her decision the
respondent's reasons for refusal.  These were in sum that the appellant did
not have direct access to his children and could not meet the requirements
of the Immigration Rules and also did not meet the eligibility requirements
because his previous leave to remain had expired on 30 September 2009.
EX.1(a) did not apply because he did not have a genuine and subsisting
parental relationship with his children and the requirements of paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) applied and there were not very significant obstacles to his
integration on return to Nigeria.  Exceptional circumstances outside the
Rules were considered as was section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
Immigration Act 2009.

3.   The judge noted that while the case was pursued on the basis of
pending Family Court proceedings, no application was made for an
adjournment nor was she invited to invoke the Protocol on communication
between judges of the Family Court and the IAC.

4.   The appellant's relationship with his former partner ended in 2012
when she left the family home.  There had been arguments prior to her
departure.  The couple have two children, a son aged 10 who is a British
citizen and a daughter aged 7 who is Nigerian with leave to remain in the
United Kingdom.

5.   The judge noted that after the appellant's partner and children left
the family home they had an informal arrangement that he would see the
children but in the event, he only saw them about three or four times a
year between 2012 and 2016 and had not seen them since, although he had
recently had indirect contact with them by email, text and letter.

6.   The judge had before her a Cafcass report, the contents of which the
appellant did not accept.  He denied having been violent to his wife or
children though he accepted that his children had witnessed arguments
between him and his wife and that this was not "proper".  He had started on
the Domestic Abuse Perpetrator ("DAP") programme.  He denied having
physically disciplined his children.  He accepted that he could continue to
correspond and speak to his children by telephone from Nigeria.  His
children had told him they wanted to know where he lived and wanted to see
him and did not want him to go anywhere apart from being in the United
Kingdom.

7.   The Cafcass case analysis is dated 30 January 2018.  In the
professional judgment of the Family Court adviser who wrote this report,
there is evidence to support the allegations of the appellant's former
partner that he was violent towards her.  The adviser described the
relationship of the appellant with his children as "somewhat tenuous"
especially in respect of his daughter, who "has spent very little time with
him".  His son's wishes were that he might want to see his father "but not
till he was older, maybe 12".  The adviser noted that that if the appellant
could contribute positively to the lives of his children without placing
them or their mother at risk this would allow them to have some sense of
paternal family and their own identity.  The adviser was unable to support
the making of an order for the appellant to spend time with his children,
given the clear views of his son and potential to undermine the mother as
primary carer, in the event that the domestic abuse had occurred as
reported.  She supported the exchange of letters between the appellant and
his children through a trusted third party and this was now taking place.
There were a few brief text messages between the appellant and his son and
there were copies of monthly letters from the appellant to each of his
children dating back to January 2019.  Each child had written one (undated)
letter to the appellant.  The son's letter thanked his father for his
advice but said it had been a long time since he had seen him but not to
worry, he would be coming in two years' time and was glad to be writing to
him and could not wait to see him again.  His daughter said she was so
excited to go to his house and asked where he lived.  She did not know he
was her father until her mother told her.

8.   The judge noted the appellant's denial of violence to his former
partner.  The judge gave weight to the fact with regard to the claim that
the appellant had hit the appellant's son and that it was the son who
reported this and not the mother.  The appellant said he was attending the
DAP programme because he had argued in front of the children and that was
not "proper", but the judge commented that if that were the reason for the
referral his former partner would also have been referred to attend the
programme and she found the appellant's evidence on this issue to be wholly
incredible.  She considered the appellant's manner of giving evidence
before her, seeking to blame his former partner for the breakdown of the
relationship, suggested that he was in denial about his former behaviour in
the relationship and towards his son.

9.   She had concerns about the reliability of his evidence that his
children wanted to see his house where he was living and did not want him
to leave the United Kingdom.  She did not consider that to be evident from
the limited correspondence which had been disclosed.  She found him to be
an unreliable witness.  His versions of events were not borne out by the
Cafcass report.  She considered that while it was an issue yet to be
decided by the Family Court for the purpose of the ongoing family
proceedings, for the purpose of the immigration proceedings she was
satisfied that the appellant was physically abusive to his son in 2012 and
relied on the Cafcass report recommendations as regards what is best for
the children.  She found that their best interests were for them to remain
living with their sole carer, their mother, and with indirect access to
their father.  That access appeared to have begun in about January 2019
when there had been a gap of about three years since the appellant's last
contact with the children.

10.  The judge found that the appellant had not shown that he had a family
life with his children.  There was no evidence that he contributed to their
upkeep, he did not have access to their school reports, he wrote to them
once a month and had very limited text contact.  She was told he spoke to
them on the telephone but not the content of the conversations.

11.  As regards the prospect of family life in the future, the judge
considered that on the evidence, bearing in mind the appellant's denial
that he had been abusive, his attendance on the DAP course was unlikely to
be fruitful.  She considered he was a man who did not perceive he had an
issue with aggressive behaviour and that he had little if any insight into
the impact of his behaviour on his children.  She had regard to the Family
Court adviser's recommendation that indirect contact might offer the
appellant a chance to build a relationship with his children without
presenting a risk to their future safety and stability, but she considered
the evidence before her did not suggest that this was a realistic prospect.
 She did not accept the appellant's evidence that his former partner had
lied about his behaviour for her own purposes.  The evidence in the Cafcass
report was significant, and she accepted that the appellant had caused harm
in the past to his children by hitting his son and by abusing his former
partner in front of the children.  She considered that the totality of the
evidence did not suggest there was any prospect of the appellant
establishing family life with his children in the foreseeable future and
that were it not for the prospect of his imminent removal he would not have
enrolled on the course or indeed initiated the contact proceedings.  She
did not accept that he had initiated the Family Court proceedings for the
wellbeing of his children; the very limited nature and extent of his
contact with the children after his separation from their mother suggested
otherwise.  He did not apply to the Family Court until 2017, the year he
made his application for leave to remain after ten years as an overstayer
and five years after his former partner and the children had left the
family home.  She bore in mind that it would be in the children's interest
to have a relationship with their father if it was safe for them to do so
but was unable to find that family life existed between the appellant and
the children currently or that there was a realistic prospect of it being
established in the future.

12.  She went on to consider his private life and considered there was very
little evidence of this though she found that Article 8 was engaged in this
respect.

13.  She noted relevant case law such as MH [2010] UKUT 439 (IAC), Nimako-
Boateng [2012] UKUT 00216 (IAC), GD (Ghana) [2017] EWCA Civ 1126, RS [2012]
UKUT 00218, Mohammed [2014] UKUT 419 (IAC) and Makhlouf [2016] UKSC 59.

14.  She said that though she had found that there was no family life at
the moment, in the alternative, even if the Family Court were to decide
that personal contact with his children were appropriate, such contact,
whilst perhaps regular, would amount to limited family life in the absence
of any reliable indication that the appellant intends to support his
children financially, that they would stay with him for any or extended
periods or that he would be involved in their upbringing.  She found
therefore that family life at best would be very limited between the
appellant and his children.  She gave consideration to the best interests
of the children, giving considerable weight to the son's evidence that he
did not wish to see his father until he was aged 12, two years hence.  The
children were settled in the United Kingdom with their mother and their
current contact with their father was insubstantial and their main focus
was their mother and their day-to-day lives with her, their friends and
their local community.  She considered that as matters stand at the moment,
with indirect contact between the appellant and his children, the degree of
interference with his protected rights was justified and proportionate to
the public interest.  Even if he were, as a result of the Family Court
proceedings, to be given greater access to his children such as to amount
to the establishment of family life with him, she would find that the
degree of interference with his and their protected rights would be
justified and proportionate, given that family life had only just been
established and there was no indication on the evidence before her that the
children would suffer any detriment from being unable to have personal
contact with their father in the future.

15.  With regard to the argument in respect of MH and Article 6, she
concluded that the result of the pending Family Court proceedings could
have no material impact on the outcome of this appeal and as a consequence,
there was no breach of Article 6.  The appeal was dismissed.

16.  The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal on the
basis that the judge's decision conflicted with what had been said in MH,
had erred in finding that Article 8 was not engaged with regard to family
life, had further erred in finding that his evidence that his children
wanted to see his house was unreliable in light of his daughter saying that
she was so excited to go to his house and that it was selective as to which
parts of the Family Court adviser's report in the Cafcass report she was
willing to accept.  It was also argued that the judge had erred by failing
to consider and adequately factor in the rights of the children to have
direct in person access and contact.

17.  In his submissions Mr Ogundero relied on and developed the points in
the grounds of appeal.  He argued that the judge had failed to follow the
guidance in MH and the implication was that not permitting the appellant to
have a meaningful involvement in the family proceedings breached his
Article 6 rights.  The judge had had concerns about the appellant's
credibility with regard to the Family Court proceedings and the Protocol on
communications with the Family Court should have been applied to obtain
information about the family proceedings.  What the judge had said at
paragraph 59 of her decision, that the result of the pending Family Court
proceedings could have no material impact on the outcome of the appeal, was
erroneous as being purely based on speculation.  It was for the Family
Court to decide whether there should be direct contact.

18.  There was also reference in MH to the respondent's practice not to
remove or deport parents or parties when family or other court proceedings
were current and to grant short periods of discretionary leave pending the
outcome of such proceedings.  It was not within the judge's remit, given
the pending family proceedings, and was likely to prejudice those
proceedings.

19.  The judge had erred in finding that there was not family life.  The
appellant had shown a parental relationship with his children via the
documentation in the appeal bundle.  There was a failure to take the
guidance in SR [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC) into account with regard to section
117B(6).  The judge had not considered whether it was reasonable to require
the children to leave the United Kingdom.  There was a failure to assess
whether section 117B(6) applied.  The appellant needed to stay in the
United Kingdom while the family proceedings were ongoing.  The decision
should be set aside.

20.  In her submissions Ms Everett argued that there was no error of law in
the judge's decision.  The issue of whether or not there was family life
could be highly nuanced where there were difficult circumstances.  The
judge had had the Cafcass report and had to decide whether there was family
life.  There was perhaps a presumption of family life as he was the
biological parent, but the judge was entitled to find that there was not
family life, having given cogent reasons for this.  A wish to create family
life was not determinative.  The judge had properly considered the Cafcass
report and there were concerns about the surrounding evidence concerning
violence and domestic abuse.  The appellant clearly had no direct contact
with his children.  The evidence of the complete breakdown rebutted the
presumption.

21.  The judge looked at all the case law on the issue of how to treat the
appellant's pending proceedings.  There was no misdirection.  If the
findings with regard to family life stood and the conclusion about the
relationship then it was not a genuine and subsisting relationship so the
section 117B(6) issue went away.  Article 8 should not generally be used as
an opportunity to create family life.  Expressing a desire to establish
family life was not enough.  The judge was concerned about the appellant's
reasons but in any event, no error of law had been shown.  A further
application could be made if there were fresh evidence but the judge's
findings were coherent.

22.  By way of reply, Mr Ogundero referred to AB (Jamaica) on the basis
that indirect contact was a genuine and subsisting relationship.

23.  I reserved my decision.

24.  As regards ground 1 and the point raised with respect to MH, it is
clear from paragraph 1 of the headnote to that case that a decision to
remove an applicant in the process of seeking a contact order may violate
Article 8.  That does not mean that that would automatically be the case.
This is in any event not a case of removal but a case of refusal of a human
rights claim.  If a removal decision is made then MH may have more
relevance, also as regards the point at paragraph 3 of the headnote that it
is the respondent's practice not to remove or deport parents when family or
other court proceedings are current and to grant short periods of leave
depending on the outcome of family proceedings.  Again, there the context
is one of removal rather than refusal of a human rights claim.

25.  I consider that it was, contrary to what is argued in the grounds and
by Mr Ogundero, open to the judge to find that the result of the pending
Family Court proceedings could have no material impact on the outcome of
this appeal.  The judge gave very careful consideration to the evidence and
clearly bore in mind the guidance in the authorities as the context to her
consideration of the law.  She was clearly concerned at the very limited
contact that the appellant had had for a number of years which had just
been increased recently at the time when he was seeking leave to remain in
the United Kingdom outside the Rules.  She was concerned that the appellant
had little, if any, insight into the impact of his behaviour on his
children and though she noted the recommendation of the adviser that
indirect contact might offer the appellant a change to build a relationship
with his children without presenting a risk to their future safety and
stability, it was open to her to find that the evidence before her did not
suggest that this was a realistic prospect.  It was open to her to find
that the totality of the evidence did not suggest that there was any
prospect of the appellant establishing a family life with his children in
the foreseeable future.  She had not been asked to invoke the Protocol on
communications between judges of the Family Court and the IAC and there was
no application for an adjournment on the basis of pending Family Court
proceedings.  There was nothing in the authorities to which her attention
or my attention has been drawn to show that it is not open to a judge, if
the evidence so dictates, to conclude that on the one hand there was no
family life between a father and his children as the judge found in this
case or that if there were, as she noted at paragraph 53,  it would be very
limited.  As a consequence, it was open to her to find that the result of
the pending Family Court proceedings could have no material impact on the
outcome of the appeal.  There is no automatic rule that where contact
proceedings are forthcoming an Immigration Judge has to stand back and
await the outcome of the Family Court proceedings.  It was open to the
judge in this case, as she did, to consider the evidence carefully, bearing
in mind the relevant legal tests, and conclude as she did.  It has not been
shown that she erred in law in any of the respects adverted to in the
grounds.

26.  I have already in effect addressed grounds 1 and 2.  The point at
ground 3 with regard to the contrast between her concerns about the
reliability of the appellant's evidence that his children want to see his
house and where he is living and they do not want him to leave the United
Kingdom was open to her.  All that is argued in contrast to that is that
his daughter wrote she was so excited to go to his house but that does not
deal with the totality of the concerns the judge had about the reliability
of the appellant's evidence and her conclusion that what he had to say was
not evidenced from the limited correspondence which had been disclosed.
The fact that there were requests from the children for items such as
trains and bikes in that limited correspondence does not materially weaken
her conclusion that he had not demonstrated that he had a family life with
the children.  She was not selective with regard to the parts of the Family
Court adviser's evidence she was willing to accept.  It was open to her to
accept the references to physical abuse but to conclude, as she did, on the
evidence before her that the possibility that indirect contact could lead
to the building of a relationship was not realistic.  Proper consideration
was given to the rights of the children.  It cannot properly be argued that
the judge erred with regard to section 117B(6), in light of her sustainable
conclusion that there was not family life.  No error of law in the decision
has been identified and that decision is accordingly maintained.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 10 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
