
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21713/2018 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, Video Hearing by Skype  |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 9th October 2020                           |On 2nd November 2020         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr P N
                          (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Daykin, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
                    Solicitors (Merton High Street)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State appealed against the First-tier Tribunal decision of
Judge S L Farmer dated 5th December 2019 whereby she allowed this Albanian
national's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his
human rights claim against deportation.  Hereinafter I shall refer to the
parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal. The
appellant previously claimed to be a Kosovan national with a different date
of birth and a different name.  His date of birth was corrected from 19th
February 1983 to 19th February 1980 at the commencement of the hearing
before Judge Farmer.

The appellant illegally entered the United Kingdom on 18th January 2000 and
his asylum claim was refused on 8th March 2000 as was his appeal against
that refusal.  He became appeal rights exhausted on 18th December 2001 and
in June 2005 was removed to Albania but re-entered the UK clandestinely on
5th July 2005.  In February 2009 he applied for leave to remain in line
with that of his partner and child.

The appellant has a history of criminal offending and on 27th October 2011
was convicted of the use/possession of a false instrument (false passport)
at Blackfriars Crown Court and sentenced to six months' imprisonment.  On
6th February 2015 he was convicted at Southwark Crown Court of money
laundering for which he pleaded guilty and was sentenced to eighteen
months' imprisonment.  At this point his appeal against the refusal of his
human rights claim was refused on 6th October 2015 and his appeal dismissed
on 31st March 2017.

On 12th October 2017 he was convicted of handling stolen property, driving
otherwise than with a licence and driving whilst uninsured and was again
sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment suspended for eighteen months
subject to a rehabilitation requirement.

On 19th May 2017 he submitted representations that he was not from Kosovo
but an Albanian national and was notified on 19th February 2018 of a
decision to deport him.  His representations were refused on 30th May 2019,
which the appellant appealed, and which challenge is the subject of the
appeal before me.

The judge found that the appellant's partner, who was also Albanian and had
been granted refugee status,  and had lied at the hearing because she
denied she had visited her mother when the appellant confirmed she had in
fact visited her mother in October 2019 in Albania.  Nonetheless the judge
accepted the partner's evidence in relation to the family, particularly
stating at paragraph 38:

"It is clear that the appellant is a loving and involved father who plays a
significant caring role in the family dynamic.  I accept her evidence about
who (sic) the school reported noticeable changes in her daughter's
behaviour.  I also accept that as the appellant cannot work she has taken
on the role of provider and he the caring role although no doubt should he
be given permission to work, the emphasis might shift back."

It was accepted by the Secretary of State that the appellant had a genuine
relationship with both children and as the partner was stated to be a
refugee it would be unduly harsh for her to live in Albania under paragraph
399(b) of the immigration rules.

The judge then turned to the question of whether it was unduly harsh for
the children and his partner to remain in the UK without the appellant and
cited RA (s117C "unduly harsh"; offence; seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT
00123, which held that one was looking for a degree of harshness going
beyond what would necessarily be involved with any child faced with the
deportation of a parent, and MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 233, which held
unduly harsh did not equate with uncomfortable inconvenient or merely
difficult.  The judge noted the considerable public interest in deporting
foreign criminals and then proceeded to state as follows:

"41. When considering whether the separation of the appellant and his
family and in particular his children is unduly harsh I find as a fact that
they would be able to visit him.  I find this because it is accepted that
the appellant's partner took the children in October 2019 for a few days to
visit her mother.  I accept that this was only for a few days and I also
find that given her refugee status it is not realistic for her to be
expected to spend prolonged periods of time there.  The reality therefore
is that the children would be brought up without their father.

42.  I find that this would have a very negative impact on the well being
and best interests of AT (dob 30/11/2009).  I find this because of the
difficulties that she went through when she was separated from him aged 2
years and 5 years.  I accept Ms Daykin's submission that the reality would
be that although there could be some limited visits to him, the result of
the deportation would be a severance of that relationship.  I respect of
the younger child, A (dob 27/11/2017), I find that she would not fully
understand the separation.  However although I do not doubt that she looks
to the appellant for her daily are needs, these could be met by her mother.
 In her case however I find that the effect of the separation would be to
severe the relationship completely as she could not be expected to
participate in any meaningful way on telephone or video calls.  For
different reasons therefore I find that the effect of the appellant's
deportation would be to sever the children's relationship with their
father.

43.  Based on these findings, I accept that under paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b)
it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without their
father.  Although the respondent relies on the fact that the family lived
independently whilst the appellant was in prison, this ignores the impact
that this had on the eldest child when this happened and I find that his
absence would be unduly harsh, even when considering the high elevated test
that I must apply."

At the hearing before me Mr Jarvis specifically submitted that he did not
rely on three out of the four written grounds of appeal made by the
Secretary of State.  He did not rely on ground 1 that the judge had not
provided adequate reasons on the appellant's separation from his children
being unduly harsh upon them as per paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) of the
Immigration Rules.

Nor did Mr Jarvis rely on ground 2, a failure to resolve conflict or
inadequate reasoning.  It had been asserted in the grounds of challenge
that the finding "the reality therefore is that the children will be
brought up without their father" was wholly unjustified and that there was
nothing in the behaviour or emotional welfare of the older child that was
unusual given the circumstances of the appellant's imprisonment.  Ground 2
elaborated that the judge did not afford the requisite anxious scrutiny to
the partner's claims in the context of her poor credibility, and given the
partner's deception, which the judge accepted, the judge failed to consider
that the partner may have been exaggerating the effect on the children, in
respect of the youngest child. Further, the judge, it was said, made the
woefully inadequately reasoned finding that she would not fully understand
the separation and despite the fact that her mother could meet her daily
needs, the effect of the separation would be to sever the relationship with
the father completely.  That was entirely speculative.

Ground 4 maintained a misdirection in law in relation to the very
compelling circumstances test.

These challenges to the decision were specifically abandoned by Mr Jarvis
and he relied on ground 3 such that the judge had misdirected
himself/herself in relation to Secretary of State for the Home Department v
PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA, where the Court of Appeal, at paragraph 39, found
that consequences of deporting a foreign criminal were commonplace and said
to be expected and certainly could not meet the unduly harsh threshold.

"39. Formulating the issue in that way, there is in my view only one answer
to the question.  I recognise of course the human realities of the
situation, and I do not doubt that SAT and the three children will suffer
great distress if PG is deported.  Nor do I doubt that their lives will in
a number of ways be made more difficult than they are at present.  But
those, sadly, are the likely consequences of the deportation of any foreign
criminal who has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
and/or children in this country.  I accept Mr Lewis's submission that if PG
is deported, the effect on SAT and/or their three children will not go
beyond the degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for the
partner or child of a foreign criminal who is deported.  That is so,
notwithstanding that the passage of time has provided an opportunity for
the family ties between PG, SAT and their three children to become stronger
than they were at an earlier stage.  Although no detail was provided to
this court of the circumstances of what I have referred to as the knife
incident, there seems no reason to doubt that it was both a comfort and an
advantage for SAT and the children, in particular R, that PG was available
to intervene when his son was a victim of crime.  I agree, however, with Mr
Lewis's submission that the knife incident, serious though it may have
been, cannot of itself elevate this case above the norm.  Many parents of
teenage children are confronted with difficulties and upsetting events of
one sort or another, and have to face one or more of their children going
through 'a difficult period' for one reason or another, and the fact that a
parent who is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a position to assist
in such circumstances cannot of itself mean that the effects of his
deportation are unduly harsh for his partner and/or children.  Nor can the
difficulties which SAT will inevitably face, increased as they are by her
laudable ongoing efforts to further her education and so to improve her
earning capacity, elevate the case above the commonplace so far as the
effects of PG's deportation on her are concerned.  In this regard, I think
it significant that Judge Griffith at paragraph 67 of her judgment referred
to the 'emotional and behavioural fallout' with which SAT would have to
deal: a phrase which, to my mind, accurately summarises the effect on SAT
of PG's deportation, but at the same time reflects its commonplace nature."
[my underlining]

Subsequent to the decision in PG (Jamaica) Underhill LJ, however, stated at
paragraph 44 of HA (Iraq) & Ors v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ 1176
with reference to KO (Nigeria):

 "It is true that he refers to a degree of harshness 'going beyond what
would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
parent', but that cannot be read entirely literally: it is hard to see how
one would define the level of harshness that would 'necessarily' be
suffered by 'any' child."

Underhill LJ acknowledges that there is an enhanced degree of harshness
sufficient to outweigh the public interest in the deportation of foreign
criminals in the medium offender category but warned of the dangers of
references to the word "ordinary" as being capable of being understood as
meaning anything which is not exceptional, or in any event rare and
particularly:

         "There is no reason in principle why cases of 'undue' harshness may
         not occur quite commonly."

     It was not the correct approach to ask whether the level of harshness
    was out of the ordinary.  Just because it fitted into the commonly
    encountered pattern did not mean to say that it was not unduly harsh.
    How a child would be affected by a parent's deportation would depend on
    an almost infinitely variable range of circumstances and it was "not
    possible to identify a baseline of 'ordinariness'."

There was an importance in maintaining the focus on the child. Factors such
as the child's age, whether the child lives with the parent, the degree of
the child's emotional dependence on the parent, the financial consequences
of his deportation, the availability of emotional and financial support
from a remaining parent and other family members, the practicability of
maintaining a relationship with a deported parent and of course all the
individual characteristics of the child were all relevant factors
identified in the assessment pertaining to whether the separation would be
'unduly harsh'.

The observation that the authorities of PG (Jamaica), on which the
Secretary of State relied in this challenge, and HA (Iraq) are
inconsistent, was dismissed by Underhill LJ in HA (Iraq) at paragraph 61 on
the following reasoning

         "61. I should say, finally, that Mr Pilgerstorfer referred us to a
         number of decisions of this Court in which KO has been applied -
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v JG (Jamaica) [2019]
         EWCA Civ 982; Secretary of State for the Home Department v PF
         (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139; Secretary of State for the Home
         Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213; CI (Nigeria)
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 2027;
         and Secretary of State for the Home Department v KF (Nigeria)
         [2019] EWCA Civ 2051. These have mostly turned on issues peculiar
         to the particular case and none has called for the kind of analysis
         required by the grounds of appeal argued before us. I have found
         nothing in any of them inconsistent with what I have said above".

Both PG (Jamaica) and HA (Iraq) accept that the best interests of any child
must be analysed. The relevant and various factors pertaining to harshness
and particularly undue harshness should be factored into any assessment.
In AA (Nigeria) [2020] EWCA Civ 1296, Popplewell LJ (who also was on the
panel in HA (Iraq)) described the gamut of authorities relating to
deportation as follows:

         "It should usually be unnecessary to refer to anything outside the
         four authorities identified below, namely KO (Nigeria) v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2018] 1 WLR 5273; R (on the
         application of Byndloss) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2017] 1 WLR 2380; NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2017] 1WLR 207; HA (Iraq) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 117. It will usually
         be unhelpful to refer first instance judges to other examples of
         their application to the particular facts of other cases and seek
         to draw factual comparisons by way of similarities or differences.
         Decisions in this area will involve an examination of the many
         circumstances making up private or family life, which are
         infinitely variable, and will require a close focus on the
         particular individual private and family lives in question, judged
         cumulatively on their own terms".

The gamut did not include PG (Jamaica).

The Secretary of State, having abandoned three of the grounds of appeal,
particularly that of the resolution of the effect as to the severing of the
relationship with the parent and the lack of maintenance of the
relationship with the deported parent, is left with the factual findings of
the judge which must stand.

In this instance the judge accepted (despite the credibility concerns of
the mother) that there was a close parental bond between the father and the
children and that the father played a significant caring role in the family
dynamic. The judge at [38] specifically accepted the mother's evidence in
relation to the children such that the appellant was the one taking the
older child to and from school.  The mother's evidence was that the effect
of the appellant's absence whilst in prison was that the older child was
'always on her own instead of with friends' and it 'impacted on the family
as it was hard to manage continuing to work and the school drop offs' [20].
 Additionally, the second child was closer to her father than her mother
[20].

There was a sparsity by way of analysis of the individual characteristics
of the children and in relation to the impact of the previous imprisonment
of the father after the older child had been born but the reasoning was
adequate. Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the
conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those
reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense,
having regard to the material accepted by the judge, Shizad (sufficiency of
reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

The judge recorded the difficulties the older child had when she was
separated from him aged 2 - 5 years and the judge did not 'doubt that the
younger child looks to the appellant for her daily needs'.  The father was
found to play a significant caring role in the family dynamic and the
school had reported noticeable changed in the elder daughter's behaviour
when he was in prison.  The judge accepted that 'as the appellant cannot
work she [the wife] has taken on the role of provider and he [the
appellant] the caring role'.  The separation would have a 'very negative
impact on the well-being and best interests of AT (the older daughter)".
Overall the judge concluded that the effect would be to sever the
relationship completely which would be unduly harsh on the children even
with the 'elevated test' in mind [43].

The First-tier Tribunal decision was generous, but the Upper Tribunal
should be cautious about setting aside decisions of the First-tier Tribunal
and guard against remaking a decision merely because on those facts there
might have been a different decision.  I did not hear oral evidence from
the various witnesses, nor did I assess their evidence live.  UT (Sri
Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1095, at paragraph 26 cited R (Jones) v First Tier
Tribunal and Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority [2013] UKSC 19
whereby Lord Hope stated:

"It is well-established, as an aspect of Tribunal law and practice, that
judicial restraint should be exercised when the reasons that a Tribunal
gives for its decision are being examined.  The Appellate Court should not
assume too readily that the Tribunal misdirected itself just because not
every step in its reasoning is fully set out in it."

The decision may have been generous and was bordering on meagre in
reasoning but against the backdrop of the extant authorities in the Court
of Appeal in relation to undue harshness it must stand.

    Notice of Decision

For the above reasons I find no material error of law and the First-tier
Tribunal decision will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.  This  is
because minors are involved.


Signed    Helen  Rimington                               Date  26th  October
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
