
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23297/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SWIFT
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                              Temitayo Akinola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Record, Counsel instructed by Direct Public
Access
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS
The  decision  was  given  by  extempore  judgments  by  both  judges  after
deliberating. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins gave the  first  judgment  at  Mr
Justice Swift's request:

UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS:

1. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent to
refuse him leave to remain on human rights grounds.  Permission to appeal
was given, somewhat hesitatingly, by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt who found it
arguable that the Decision and Reasons did not show proper analysis of the
relevant legal tests.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He was born in 1994 and he has
lived in the United Kingdom lawfully since he was only 4 years old.  In
August 2015, when he was 21 years old, he was sentenced to six years'
imprisonment for an offence of causing grievous bodily harm with intent.
He was 19 when he committed the offence.

3. Parliament has decided that the deportation of foreign criminals is in
the public interest.  There is no doubt that the appellant is a foreign
criminal.  Parliament has prescribed a regime where persons who have been
sentenced to less than four years' imprisonment but to one year or more can
rely on certain exceptions to resist on human rights grounds the
consequences of deportation.  Parliament has also decided that where a
person has been sentenced to four years or more the public interest
requires deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances over
and above those exceptions.  This is set out in Part 5A of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in very similar provisions under the
Immigration Rules, which, as far as we are concerned, are not materially
different for the purposes of this case.

4. It follows therefore that the First-tier Tribunal judge dealing with the
appeal had to apply the law and therefore was unable to allow the appeal
properly unless there were very compelling circumstances over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  Exception 2 relates to parental or
life partnerships, which do not exist here.  Exception 1 relates to a
person who is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom and
for whom there would be very significant obstacles to integration into the
country to which he would be deported, in this case Nigeria.

5. A considerable amount of work had been done before the First-tier
Tribunal and about the consequences of removal. It is appropriate for us to
look at the appellant's circumstances and to indicate how deportation might
affect them.  Ms Record gave a short list of the matters that she
considered to be important and particularly matters that were significant
factors.  They were the appellant's long lawful residence in the United
Kingdom; the fact that he would be returned to Nigeria on his own, because
there was no suggestion that there was anyone in Nigeria who would offer
him any kind of support; and the fact that he had apparently learnt from
his experiences in prison. Certainly he had taken advantage of the limited
opportunities there by conducting himself responsibly, not getting into any
trouble, and attending appropriate courses that are offered. We accept as
well that the appellant has learnt a trade and is employable in the
construction industry.

6. These things are relevant and have only been touched upon in the most
cursory way by the First-tier Tribunal Judge but they have been touched
upon.  These pertinent facts are set out in paragraph 10, and particularly,
the judge there was concerned about how the appellant could establish
himself in Nigeria and noted that he could not speak Yoruba, which is the
most commonly spoken language, but that also that English, which, clearly,
he does speak and speak well, is widely spoken.  The appellant would not be
returning to a country where he had no language in which to communicate.

7. Ms Record invited us to look carefully at the sentencing remarks but I
do not accept that that is an appropriate approach.  As I have already
indicated, the regime of deportation and human rights is governed by
statute and this identifies two regimes relating to particular periods of
imprisonment.  Once the person is subject to one of these "qualifying
sentences", if I can so describe them, the details of the sentence and the
attempts of rehabilitation and indeed the nature of the crime are of
limited importance.  We do not state for a moment that they are irrelevant
in all cases but they are not matters of focus.  Proper matters of focus
are the length of sentence and the statutory criteria.

8. I find that the First-tier Tribunal clearly had in mind all the points
that could be of relevance.  I am also clearly of the view that even if
that is wrong the points raised by Ms Record are not sufficient, either on
their own or cumulatively, to displace the very clear requirement that
deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest and in the case
of someone subject to a sentence of more than four years' imprisonment
there is a need for very compelling circumstances over and above those
described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  Such circumstances are quite simply not
present in the evidence in this appellant's case.  On the evidence before
us, this is an appeal that cannot succeed.

9. We put on record that it would not have been inappropriate if the First-
tier Tribunal had a little more to say and showed a little more
consideration for the points that were raised but we are satisfied that
there is not a material error here.  The judge reached the only conclusion
properly open to him in the light of the statutory obligations.

10. Before concluding my judgment I have reflected for a moment upon the
significance of this decision for the appellant and his family, who, I
assume, are the people at the back of the hearing room.  It is not a
decision which I make with any pleasure.  It is not nice.  Deportation is
often a serious and life changing step but it is what Parliament requires
and, for the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the First-tier
Tribunal considered what had to be considered and reached the only
conclusion available on the evidence before it.  Therefore, we dismiss this
appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

MR JUSTICE SWIFT:

11. I agree. I particularly associate myself with the matters Judge Perkins
has mentioned at the end of his judgment.

12. I also mention one other matter. As Judge Perkins has indicated, there
was some discussion in the course of this hearing as to the relevance of
sentencing reports in cases where the decision falls to be taken under
Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
Apparently, it is common practice to refer to sentencing remarks in First-
tier Tribunal cases such as this.  It is not clear to me for what purpose
that reference is had.  I accept that by reason of Section 117C(2) of the
Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the Tribunal is required to
have regard to the fact that "the more serious the offence committed by a
foreign criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
criminal" but I question whether that obligation either requires
consideration of sentencing reports, or whether compliance with that
obligation is assisted by looking at the sentencing remarks. What is
important for the purposes of section 117C(2) is the offence committed and
the sentence imposed by the Court. The sentencing remarks will explain the
reasons for the sentence passed, and will explain the circumstances of the
offending, but any Tribunal looking at sentencing remarks needs to be
careful not to risk either (a) double-counting against the person who is
the subject of a deportation order by relying on the sentencing remarks as
reinforcement of the severity of the offending which will in all cases have
been appropriately reflected in the sentence passed by the court; or (b)
double-counting against the public interest in the deportation of foreign
criminals by placing weight on mitigating matters which (again) will have
already been taken into account by the trial judge when determining the
sentence to be passed. In all cases Tribunals should consider with great
care whether it is relevant for the purposes of applying section 117C(2),
to look at sentencing remarks. In my view, absent anything special arising
on the facts of a particular case, it would be preferable for Tribunals not
have regard to them.


|                                     |                                     |
|Sealed                               |Dated 4 February 2019                |







