
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23081/2016 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business at Field House   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2021                          |On 4th March 2021             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Ms Saovanee Kulthum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lawrence Youssefian, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Thailand born on 1st January 1982, appeals
with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hoffman
promulgated on 31st December 2019.

The appellant had appealed against the respondent's decision dated 20th
September 2016 refusing her application for leave to remain in the United
Kingdom as the spouse of a settled person.  She argued that the decision
breached her family and private life in the UK in accordance with Article 8
of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The contested issue centres on the Test of English and International
Communication ("TOEIC") from Education Testing Services ("ETS") said to be
taken by the appellant on 29th August 2012 for speaking and writing, (she
took a further test in different components on 31st August 2012).  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Flynn allowed the appeal on 2nd March 2018 but that
determination, challenged by the Secretary of State, was set aside and the
matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  A further decision of
First-tier Tribunal Cohen dismissed the appeal on 26th April 2019 and this
time was challenged by the appellant.  Again, and error of law was found,
and the matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and heard by First-
tier Tribunal Hoffman who produced the determination now under challenge.
The First-tier Tribunal has now considered this appeal three times.

By way of immigration history, the appellant arrived in the UK on 12th
January 2010 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student and her
visa was valid until 20th July 2011.

The appellant explained in her statements dated 22nd January 2018, 1st
April 2019, and 15th December 2019, the background to her applications at
that time. She came to the United Kingdom to learn English. She entered an
English course at Malvern House College where she studied a 'pre-
intermediate English course' from January 2010 to December 2010 and an
'intermediate course' from December 2010 to March 2011.

On 10th April 2011 she submitted an application for leave to remain as a
Tier 4 (General) Student which was granted until 24th September 2013.   She
was accepted into a 2-year programme consisting of a 'pre-sessional English
Preparation Programme' followed by an MBA at Cavendish College.  After the
second term the college closed unexpectedly, and she was transferred to St
Patrick's College. By 18th September 2012 she had completed a Diploma in
Strategic Management and Leadership but St Patrick's College no longer
offered the MBA programme and so she was forced to find an MBA top up
programme at a different college.

She stated in her witness statements that despite having a year left on her
visa, she was advised by a student agency that she had to find a new
college (and a new college meant a new application and an English test),
that offered an MBA as soon as possible as her visa could be cancelled
because

         'if I did not have an attendance record to show my study as there
         was still another year until my visa expires.  The agency has then
         (sic) found me a college that would offer an MBA programme I was
         looking for British Institute of Technology and E-Commerce (BITE)
         starting in January 2013 which requires an English test result of
         no less than 6.5 grade'.

Having taken the TOIEC test in August 2012, she submitted an application to
extend her leave on 22nd January 2013 and that was granted and extended to
29th December 2014.

In September 2013 she met her wife to be.

On 4th December 2014 she was awarded an MBA from the University of Wales
and prior to the expiry of her visa she returned to Thailand.

She then returned to the UK on 16th April 2016 with leave to enter as a
fianc�e valid until 16th October 2016.  On 9th July 2016 she married her
fianc�e, a British national, and following her marriage, on 20th September
2016, applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person.

The respondent refused that application because, it was stated, that in
support of the appellant's application for further leave to remain as a
student dated 22nd January 2013, she had submitted a TOEIC certificate from
ETS.  The respondent asserted that she had used a proxy test taker to sit a
test at Synergy Business College on 29th August 2012 and as a result her
ETS certificate had been fraudulently obtained.  ETS had therefore
cancelled the certificate and although she had not sought to rely on that
certificate for her current application for leave to remain, it was
asserted that,

         "the fraud nonetheless contributed to an extremely serious attack
         on the maintenance of effective immigration controls and the public
         interest more generally".

    It was considered that her presence in the United Kingdom was not
    conducive to the public good and her application refused under
    paragraph 276D with reference to paragraph 322(2) of the Rules.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hoffman noted that the 276D reference must have
    been a mistake as that referred to refusal on grounds of long
    residence.  The respondent also refused the application on suitability
    grounds in accordance with paragraphs R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i) with reference
    to paragraphs S-LTR.1.1 and S-LTR.1.6 of the Immigration Rules (family
    life) and paragraphs 276ADE(1)(i) with reference to paragraphs S-
    LTR.1.1 and S-LTR.1.6 (private life).

First-tier Tribunal Judge Hoffman set out the various provisions referred
to above and also set out the documents that the appellant relied on at the
hearing which included the appellant's bundle ("AB"), an undated
supplementary bundle ("ASB") which included a recent witness statement and
additional documents, the respondent's bundle dated 14th September and the
respondent's supplementary bundle.  He proceeded to dismiss the appeal.

The grounds for permission to appeal submitted the following.

After the Secretary of State had satisfied the initial evidential burden
the judge considered the appellant's evidence, and it was arguable that he
had applied an incorrect test and therefore misunderstood both the weight
to be attached to such a finding and the nature of the exercise.  SM and
Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) made clear at
paragraph 88, that it was not a question of whether a plausible explanation
has been put forward to show her character and qualifications cast doubt on
her motive but whether there was a "satisfactory explanation for the
various matters which are advanced by the Secretary of State as
constituting dishonesty on his part".  The judge had plainly misunderstood
at paragraph 36 that this was his task.

In any event the approach to the evidence and the judge's findings were
unreasonable.  The appellant gave a detailed account of the examinations
she took, and the Home Office did not challenge her evidence on this by way
of cross-examination.  Indeed, the judge accepted that the Home Office
Presenting Officer gave him "no reason to doubt the appellant's version of
events".  In such circumstances it was difficult to see how the judge did
not accept she had taken the exam.  The judge noted that the appellant's
claim that she took two TOEIC tests on different days which was contrary to
the evidence before him, i.e., he stated that all were taken on 29th August
2012.  That was simply not the case from the TOEIC test, the evidence
clearly showed there were two test dates, one on 29th August and the other
on 31st August.  This fatally flawed his findings because of the adverse
inference drawn.

Secondly, the judge found the appellant did not notice anything strange or
abnormal going on that her failure to notice was incredible if 92% were
using a proxy.  Indeed, it was clear at paragraph 45 that this was one of
the two central reasons the judge gave for dismissing the appeal.  This
observation was manifestly unreasonable.  There was not a shred of evidence
to support the contention that anything out of the ordinary should have
been noted and the grounds advanced that "a person attends an exam, shows
their ID and gets placed in a hall.  They are then set a test.  Why on
earth should they have any idea that the other people in the room are
anything other than genuine" (sic).  The judge's observation was
unsupported by evidence of any sort and this had never been part of the
Secretary of State's case and was not part of the Home Office cross-
examination and not relied on in the refusal letter.  There was no
indication from the judge as to how this strange and abnormal behaviour
manifested itself.

In any event, at paragraph 45 the judge stated that he found the
appellant's claims of not noting anything out of the ordinary as
unconvincing and that indicated a wrong application of the standard of
proof.

The other principal point taken against the appellant at paragraph 45 was
that her failure to "more doggedly pursue ETS" for a copy of the audio
recording.  The appellant did pursue ETS as evidence for the emails and
letters in 2016.  The question was not whether she had doggedly pursued and
the fact that this was not chased up in the years that followed was not the
central/important point.  Tribunals have often found someone had not
cheated despite the audio being of someone else and it was reasonable for
the appellant to rely on the ETS letter which was in reply to her letter
requesting any relevant information.  The appellant had asked for evidence
three years ago and ETS had failed to provide it.

The above errors taken with the positive findings made by the judge about
the appellant's English qualifications, good character and lack of motive
to cheat could have well led to a different conclusion and the judge
himself acknowledged this was a finely balanced case.

In assessing proportionality, the judge failed reasonably and fairly to
consider that at the time, the appellant entered the UK for the purpose of
marriage that the Secretary of State had already had evidence in respect of
the claim that she had cheated, and it was unfair and disproportionate to
now not only rely on this assertion but to require the appellant's removal
after she had entered, got married and settled down.  The judge's
observation appeared to show bias in favour of the Secretary of State.  It
was pure speculation on the part of the judge that he did not and could not
have reasonably been aware of the evidence from ETS.

    Submissions

At the hearing before me Mr Youssefian relied on the written grounds and
expanded upon them.  He submitted that the judge's approach was flawed and
that the judge accepted that the appellant had discharged an innocent
explanation, there were no adverse credibility findings made against her,
through the cross examination or lack of it, and there was no basis for the
First-tier Tribunal to doubt the appellant's version of events.  That
should be an end to the matter. The judge had also erred in fact.  The
listening and reading were taken on 31st August 2012 whilst the speaking
and writing was taken on 29th August 2012.  That is what the appellant had
stated, and the judge erred in finding contrary to the appellant's
evidence.  There was no evidence to suggest the test was taken on the same
day.  The judge proceeded on a mistaken basis.

Moreover, the judge stated that she had not identified anything strange at
the test centre.  That finding was manifestly wrong and there was no
evidential basis to draw that conclusion. The appellant was focussed on her
own examinations and even if there was something odd the fact of her
knowledge would be entirely circumstantial.  That was a material error.

Further the finding that she had not doggedly pursued the voice recording
was flawed.  She wrote to ETS and ETS responded and informed her of the
cancellation.  Her conduct of contacting ETS was consistent with someone
aggrieved by the allegation of deception.  The judge, where the burden was
on the Secretary of State, relied on two circumstantial matters and the
approach was fundamentally wrong.  The appellant sent an email on 16th
November 2016 stating that she took the tests on 29th and 31st August 2012
and there was a reply from ETS dated 1st December 2016. There was an email
chain of correspondence.

Additionally, the approach to paragraph 322, which was discretionary, and
in relation to article 8, was flawed.  There was no evidence that she had
breached the rules since 2012 and that should not be a permanent bar.  She
had left in 2014 and made an entry clearance application.   The Secretary
of State had been aware of the deception since 2014 but that had not been
taken into account. The judge should properly consider relevant matters.
Even if the allegation was proved, it happened in 2012, some time ago, and
the Secretary of State was aware in 2014.  She made a voluntary departure
before her visa expired, got engaged, and applied for a visa as a fianc�e
and in that application, there were no issues made regarding an allegation
of deception.

Even if she did cheat, she had not benefitted from that deception.  The
departure would have cleaned the slate.  The judge considered that at
paragraph 47, but there was no evidential basis for the judge to refer to
the Secretary of State reviewing many cases.  This was a case where it was
all the more compelling to consider the exercise of discretion and the
judge failed to meaningfully engage with this and based his findings on
speculation and conjecture that the Secretary of State was overwhelmed.

The Project Fa�ade report was published on 5th May 2015 by which time the
Secretary of State would have been aware of the problem when the fianc�e
visa was granted.

By way of response Mr Avery submitted that the point on taking exams on
different days did not take the matter further.  The contact with ETS was
reflected in the email chain but the content did assist in view of the
judge's findings. Virtually all the tests taken at that centre were false
and it was entirely reasonable for the judge, with fraud on this scale, to
conclude that it would be obvious, and the judge was entitled to take that
into account.  There was a failure to pursue the audio evidence which could
have conclusively proved it was the appellant and the judge was entitled to
make that point.

The contentions by the appellant were a disagreement with the findings and
not in effect a legal challenge.

The judge adequately considered the matter of the exercise of the Secretary
of State's discretion with regards paragraph 322.  In view of the massive
attempt to defraud and undermine the immigration system of the United
Kingdom, which was a very significant factor, it was hard to see how the
Secretary of State could exercise discretion in the appellant's favour. If
the appellant did engage in deception that was a very serious matter.  In
view of the bureaucratic nature of the system it was entirely appropriate
and reasonable inference for the judge to make. It was inconceivable, had
the Entry Clearance Officer been aware of deception that the visa would
have been grated and it should be borne in mind that it was at that stage
an application for limited leave to remain.

    Analysis

The first ground criticises the test applied by the judge and the weight
attached to the evidence.

 1. The approach to be adopted in such cases is set out in SM and Qadir  at
    paragraph 57:


         "57.     Both the applicable principles and the jurisprudence  were
             reviewed  by  this  Tribunal  in  its   recent   decision   in
             Muhandiramge (Section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675  (IAC),  at
             [9] - [11]:


             '9. Burdens and standard  of  proof  have  progressively,  and
                   almost with stealth, become  an  established  feature  of
                   decision making in the field of  immigration  and  asylum
                   law.  Their  emergence  may  properly  be  described   as
                   organic. They have featured particularly in  cases  where
                   it  is  alleged  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
                   applicant has engaged in deception or dishonesty with the
                   result  that  the  application  in  question  should   be
                   refused. This discrete line of authority is  not  recent,
                   being traceable to the decision of the Immigration Appeal
                   Tribunal in Olufosoye [1992]  IMM  AR  141.  In  tribunal
                   jurisprudence, the origins of this particular lineage can
                   be traced to the decision of the House of Lords  in  R  v
                   Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department,  ex  parte
                   Khawaja [1984] AC 74, which concerned  the  inter-related
                   issues of  procuring  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  by
                   deception and precedent fact in the Secretary of  State's
                   ensuing decision making process. It is  well  established
                   that in such cases the  burden  of  proof  rests  on  the
                   Secretary of State and the standard of proof  belongs  to
                   the higher end of the balance of probabilities spectrum.


             10.            One  of  the  more  recent   reported decisions
                   belonging to this stable is that of Shen (Paper  Appeals:
                   Proving Dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC). This  decision
                   is  illustrative  of  the  moderately  complex   exercise
                   required of tribunals from time to time. Here  the  Upper
                   Tribunal held, in  harmony  with  established  principle,
                   that in certain contexts the evidential  pendulum  swings
                   three times and in three different directions:


                   (a)              First,  where  the  Secretary   of State
                         alleges that an applicant has practised  dishonesty
                         or deception in an application for leave to remain,
                         there is an evidential burden on the  Secretary  of
                         State. This requires that  sufficient  evidence  be
                         adduced to raise an issue as to  the  existence  or
                         non-existence of a fact in issue: for  example,  by
                         producing the completed application which is  prima
                         facie deceitful in some material fashion.


                   (b)             The  spotlight  thereby  switches  to the
                         applicant. If he discharges the burden - again,  an
                         evidential   one   -   of   raising   an   innocent
                         explanation, namely an account which satisfies  the
                         minimum level of plausibility, a  further  transfer
                         of the burden of proof occurs.


                   (c)             Where (b) is satisfied, the  burden rests
                         on the Secretary of  State  to  establish,  on  the
                         balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  Appellant's
                         prima facie innocent explanation is to be rejected.


The citation from Muhandiramge at paragraph 10 (b) above, shows that if the
applicant discharges the burden of raising an innocent explanation 'a
further transfer of the burden of proof occurs'.  The explanation by the
appellant is not necessarily the end of the matter.

At paragraph 17 the judge directed himself entirely properly as follows:

         'where an allegation is made that an appellant has acted
         dishonestly, the evidential burden is on the respondent.  If met,
         the evidential burden then switches to the appellant, who must
         raise an innocent explanation which satisfies the minimum level of
         plausibility.  If the appellant achieves that, the, finally the
         burden rests on the respondent to establish on balance of
         probabilities, that the appellant's prima facie innocent
         explanation is to be rejected: see Muhandiramge (Section S-LTR.1.7)
         [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC'

The judge manifestly directed himself appropriately as to the correct test,
both with regards the shifting burden of proof and further the standard of
proof.  From a careful reading of the determination it can be seen that the
judge also applied the relevant test.   At paragraph 20, he cited SM and
Qadir.  At paragraphs 23-26 the judge considered the evidence that the
Secretary of State provided, and which included the statements of Collins,
Millington and Professor French,  a Home Office Project Fa�ade report and
data showing how many tests were said to be invalid on the date the
appellant took the test on 29th August 2012.  Also included was a witness
statement of Kelvin Hibbs with an excerpt from a spreadsheet showing that
the Home Office was notified by ETS that the appellant's test result had
been obtained through the use of a proxy test taker.

 2. When considering the nature of the task of  assessing  the  appellant's
    case, Majumder v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1167 at paragraphs 18 sets  out  the  relevant  factors  which
    include

         'what the person accused had to gain from being dishonest; what  he
         had to lose; what  is  known  about  his  character;  the  cultural
         environment in which he operated; how  the  individual  accused  of
         dishonesty  performed  under  cross-examination,  and  whether  the
         Tribunal's assessment of that person's English language proficiency
         is commensurate with his or her TOEIC scores; and  whether  his  or
         her academic achievements are  such  that  it  was  unnecessary  or
         illogical for them to have cheated'.

The judge considered those relevant factors throughout and specifically
from paragraph 28 onwards. He considered inter alia, the appellant's
account of the test day, her English, what was said during cross
examination and her wife's evidence. He referred to the submissions made on
her behalf, considered her character and identified her immigration history
and noted there was nothing in her background 'that suggests she is a
dishonest person'.   He also considered her educational achievements.

At paragraph 36 the judge accepted that the appellant had discharged the
evidential burden of providing a plausible innocent explanation, but he
then turned to the question of whether the respondent had established on
the balance of probabilities whether the appellant's explanation should be
rejected.  Nothing in the findings of the judge at paragraph 36 indicates
that the judge did not understand the relevant process and indeed his
findings show a balanced approach and understanding of the factors he
needed to take into account.  He proceeded to consider the legal burden
placed on the respondent as he was required to do.

He stated at paragraph 37

         'the evidential boomerang therefore returns to the respondent to
         establish, on [the] balance of probabilities, whether the
         appellant's explanation should be rejected'.

 3. At paragraph 44, the judge referred to the fact sensitive nature of the
    exercise, and that he had carefully considered  the  evidence  and  the
    submissions of each party and  specifically  stated  at  paragraph  45,
    towards the close of his findings on deception, that the respondent had
    succeeded in explaining why the appellant's innocent explanation should
    be rejected. The determination did not reflect  a  misunderstanding  or
    misapplication of the standard or burden of proof.  The  judge  adopted
    the relevant staged approach.

It was asserted that the judge's approach was also unreasonable. As the
Court of Appeal said at paragraph 18 of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412,
it is necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise as errors
of law what are in reality no more than disagreements about the weight to
be given to different factors.   The weight to be given to the various
factors is a matter for the judge.

The judge was criticised for not finding in the appellant's favour because,
it was asserted, the cross-examination gave no basis to doubt her version
of events.  The judge merely recorded at paragraph 38 that the Home Office
Presenting Officer

         'did not cross examine the appellant about the detail of her
         recollection of the exam as set out in paragraph 12 of her witness
         statement and he did not raise the issue during his closing
         submissions.  He therefore gave me no basis to doubt the
         appellant's version of events'.

    The judge was obliged to consider the point in relation to cross
    examination, as highlighted above [28] and was referring to the
    Presenting Officer's own submissions on cross-examination.  It does not
    mean that the judge could not form his own views or had to make the
    determination on the basis of that fact alone as suggested by the
    grounds.  He clearly took the matter into account when making his
    assessment.

Turning to the criticism of the judge's finding in relation to the two
TOEIC tests, it is correct to state that the appellant took tests on 29th
August and 31st August in relation to the various components of the TOEIC
test.   Amongst the myriad of findings, however, the judge merely 'noted'
that 'in cross examination, the appellant claimed that she had taken the
two TOEIC tests on different days while the evidence from ETS says that
both were taken on 29 August 2012'.  Notwithstanding this finding, I
consider the tribunal's decision would have been the same on the basis of
the reasons which have survived scrutiny and are set out below. Further, to
illustrate that the 'two exam' point was merely an observation, rather than
a central tenet to his findings, the judge stated in the next sentence
'Moreover, I also take into account that during cross-examination the
appellant 'denied that she saw anything 'strange or abnormal' during her
exams'' [my underlining].  That approach was also criticised.

The judge specifically stated that during cross-examination the Home Office
Presenting Officer did not ask the appellant any questions regarding the
details of the test although he, the judge, did ask her, as he was entitled
to do, whether she noticed anything strange or abnormal, when she took the
test, to which she replied, "no".  The judge ultimately did not accept that
she would not have witnessed anything out of the ordinary on the day of the
test.   The grounds advanced that there was not a 'shred of evidence' to
support that contention.

 4. Placing that in context, the judge identified that the  Project  Fa�ade
    report on Synergy College,  which had been adduced in evidence  by  the
    Secretary of State and clearly part of the  respondent's  case,  stated
    that between 24th November 2011 and  15th  January  2013,  the  college
    undertook 4,894 TOEIC speaking and writing tests  of  which  2,410  (or
    49%)  were  found  by  ETS  to  be  invalid  and  2,484  found  to   be
    questionable.  He found at paragraph 38:

         "There is  no  dispute  that  certain  colleges  including  Synergy
         Business College were carrying out large-scale  fraud  and,  in  my
         view, the respondent has provided sufficient evidence  in  the  SRB
         (sic) [respondent's bundle] that  fraud  did  take  place  on  29th
         August 2012."

 5. More tellingly, the judge also noted at paragraph 39 that,

         "the respondent has provided convincing evidence in the  RSB  (sic)
         that, at the very least, 92% of exams  on  29th  August  2012  were
         taken by proxy test  takers  with  the  rest  being  deemed  to  be
         questionable".

    and critically at [39]:

         "On balance, I find it unlikely that the appellant would have been
         the sole, or one of the few, [genuine] students in a room in which
         large-scale cheating was taking place.  The only other explanation
         therefore would be that all of the students sitting the exam on
         that day have been erroneously flagged up by ETS as having used a
         proxy test taker.  However, I reject that hypothesis because that
         it would require a significantly higher rate of false positives
         than Professor French says is likely, and the appellant has
         provided no expert evidence of her own to rebut his conclusion."

 6. In the instant case, the tests were  either  invalid  or  questionable,
    which means there were no validated tests at that test  centre  on  the
    day the appellant was said to have legitimately taken the test, and  as
    stated in The Queen (On the application of) Abbas v  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWHC 78 at paragraph 14

         'it is of evidential significance that  there  were  no  apparently
         genuine candidates on the day in question'.

 7. The judge considered the various options as to the cheating but stated:

         "Finally,  if  the  appellant  was  not  cheating  herself,  it  is
         incredible that she would not  have  noticed  anything  strange  or
         abnormal going on if at least 92% of those  present  were  using  a
         proxy and that her denial about  witnessing  anything  out  of  the
         ordinary undermines her credibility."

 8. The determination demonstrates after careful reasoning that  the  judge
    considered but rejected counsel's submission on the unlikelihood of  no
    genuine students on the day of the test and noted there was no evidence
    which undermined  Dr  French's  report  of  the  false  positive  rate.
    Bearing in mind the extent of the invalid results determined by ETS  on
    that day, as evidenced by the Project Fa�ade report, and  Annex  AA  in
    the respondent's bundle showing the extent of the results from  Synergy
    Business College on the day, it was open  to  the  judge  to  find  the
    conditions would have led the appellant to have noticed  something  out
    of place when she took the test;  she  states  that  she  attended  the
    centre.

 9. Turning to the point that there was not a shred of evidence to  support
    the contention that there was anything out of the ordinary,  the  judge
    thus found that 'largescale cheating was  taking  place'  and  accepted
    that there were no valid tests on the day.  The Project  Fa�ade  report
    on Synergy Business College itself records at paragraph 13 that  during
    an audit 'the ETS auditors observed  'pilots'  (imposters)  taking  the
    test on behalf of candidates who were  located  in  a  separate  room'.
    This was evidence from an observation. Further when two candidates were
    interviewed under caution, they admitted that 'pilots' sat the test  on
    their behalf'.  The judge clearly  took  into  account  Annex  AA  (the
    results on the day) and the Project Fa�ade report dated May 2015,  and,
    on the evidence, it was open to him to make the findings he did.

10. As stated in Abbas at paragraph 16

         'Overall I conclude that Mr Sewell's evidence provides  significant
         circumstantial  support  for  the  proposition  that   anyone   who
         supposedly took the TOEIC test at Thames Education Centre on 21 and
         26 March 2012 was party to a fraud. As Mr Thomann put it, it  would
         be an odd state of affairs  if  the  Claimant  had  been  the  only
         genuine candidate on those days'.

11. The judge was also criticised for his approach to the attempts  by  the
    appellant to obtain information from ETS.  Notably,  it  was  asserted,
    the judge erred when  taking  against  the  appellant  her  failure  to
    'doggedly' pursue the ETS recording and her attempts  to  contact  ETS:
    which she had done.  Mr Avery submitted it was open  to  the  judge  to
    find, in the particular circumstances, of her very strong Thai  accent,
    that this issue was determinative.

At paragraph 29 of the determination, the judge recorded that the appellant
advanced in her statement she had "done everything in her power and more to
prove [that she] took the test that day".

12. In Abbas Mr Justice Davis observed at paragraph 23 that

         'No steps were taken by the Claimant to obtain the recording'

      and at paragraph 24 held

         "The Claimant had no sensible explanation for his failure to obtain
         the voice recording. Mr Malik made the point that it is not for the
         Claimant to prove his case and that the Secretary  of  State  could
         also have obtained the recording. That would not have got her  very
         far in the absence of a sample of the Claimant's voice  with  which
         to compare it".

At paragraph 40 the judge noted that despite three years having elapsed
since the refusal decision the appellant had not sought a copy of the exam
audio recording from ETS and had failed to provide sufficient evidence to
rebut the allegations made against her.  This was raised before Counsel,
who submitted that the appellant had contacted ETS to obtain a voice
recording and had provided an email she sent on 14th November 2016.  The
judge at paragraph 41 acknowledged that "it does therefore appear that the
appellant did take some steps to obtain information from ETS although she
did not expressly ask for the audio recording".  That is correct.

Nonetheless the judge continued with his findings.  Despite the reference
to ETS only retaining information on tests for two years, the judge
referenced paragraph 25 of the judgment in Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
2009, which held that,

         "ETS has retained copies of the individual voice recordings which
         it has identified as showing the use of a proxy, and that a copy
         can be obtained (without charge) on application".

Further, the appellant confirmed in her oral evidence (as can be seen from
the record of proceedings), that she had not taken any steps to contact ETS
since 2016 and as found by the judge.  That is the critical point. This
issue was a live issue and had been raised to the appellant previously and
at least in April 2019; the judge also noted that the appellant had been
legally represented throughout the entire statutory appeal process and he
found it weighed against the appellant that no further steps were taken to
obtain the audio recording.   The judge was entitled to take that approach.


In summary, the judge acknowledged the steps taken, noted she did not ask
for the recording and noted she was cross examined.  It was clear there was
no indication that she had specifically requested the recording or that
there had been further emails since 2016. She herself confirmed she had
taken no steps since 2016 even though she was legally represented.

As explained by the judge, in the light of her very strong Thai accent, it
would prove determinative of the appeal and if ETS no longer held the audio
recording the judge would have expected to see clear evidence from them
confirming that.  Thus, the judge did not accept, as the appellant claimed,
at paragraph 20 for sound reasons that she had done "everything in her
power to obtain the evidence from ETS".  That finding was indeed open to
him on the evidence.  In other words, the appellant had had ample time to
secure evidence to demonstrate her innocence and she had failed to do so.
That is not mere circumstantial evidence.

13. That other appeals may have been allowed without ETS  evidence,  in  my
    view does not assist.  It  is  the  fact  sensitive  analysis  in  this
    particular case which is relevant.

At paragraph 43, the judge considered the point that the appellant had
obtained an MBA from a British university and observed that it was obvious
that a student did need to have a good understanding of English but that
her overall award was only 49%, which suggested that she struggled with the
course and that it served to weaken any "motive the appellant might have to
cheat on the TOEIC exam on the basis that she could not speak English".

However, the judge found:

         "That is only one possible motive.  For example, the appellant
         could have lacked confidence of her own abilities (as possibly
         evidenced by the low scores on her MBA course and her own admission
         to speaking with a thick accent); or perhaps wanted to take an easy
         route to obtaining the certificate.  Therefore, whilst I found this
         point does weigh in the appellant's favour it is not determinative
         of the appeal and it must be taken in the round with the rest of
         the evidence."

The judge noted that two decisions beforehand had been set aside by the
Upper Tribunal and he carefully considered the evidence before him and the
submissions of the parties, reminding himself that the question of whether
a person has engaged in fraud was fact-sensitive and that he needed to take
into account relevant factors including what the person had to gain from
being dishonest, what was known about their character and the culture and
environment in which they operated. The judge noted that the appellant
spoke with a very strong Thai accent but accepted that her English may have
deteriorated since she had taken the test (albeit she was in the UK she and
her wife spoke in Thai), and he factored in the educational certificates
and her studies. The judge also took into account her impeccable
immigration history and that there was nothing in the background to suggest
she was a dishonest person. The wife was found to be an honest witness.
They had met, however, at the close of 2013 and after the test in 2012.

The judge summed up at paragraph 45 that on the one hand the respondent had
provided strong evidence that widespread cheating was taking place at
Synergy Business College on the date the appellant took her TOEIC exams but
on the other hand the appellant had provided evidence about her character
generally but especially in relation to her past studies which undermined
the suggestion that she was unable to speak English at the time in
question.  He took into account relevant factors and although the grounds
stated that he 'could have well led to a different conclusion', that is not
the test.  Weighing all the evidence the judge found against the appellant.
There was no assertion of perversity and even if a different conclusion
could have been made on the facts that does not indicate a legal error or
mean another decision should be substituted.

As the judge stated:

         "But taking all of the above-mentioned evidence and points in the
         round, I find that the respondent has succeeded in explaining why
         the appellant's innocent explanation should be rejected.
         Ultimately, I was swayed by (i) the unlikelihood of the appellant
         being permitted by Synergy Business College to take the English
         speaking test in a room full of people using proxies along with her
         unconvincing claim not to have witnessed anything out of the
         ordinary and (ii) the appellant's failure to more doggedly pursue
         ETS for a copy of the audio recording of her test."

The reference to 'unconvincing' at paragraph 45 towards the conclusion was
merely a shorthand could have been more elegantly phrased, but I am not
persuaded this is material because the judge gave himself a clear direction
at paragraph 17, at the outset, that the burden of proof was the civil
standard of the balance of probabilities.

The weight to be attached to the evidence is a matter for the judge and in
this instance, it was open to the judge to make the findings he did.  Bias
was also attributed to the judge, but the judge took a careful and balanced
approach to the evidence and acknowledged that it was finely balanced but
gave reasoned findings.  The ultimate question is whether the fair-minded
and informed observer, having considered the facts, would conclude that
there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased  Porter v Magill
[2002] 2 AC 357, [2001] UKHL 67.  The decision does not reflect bias and
that the judge found against the appellant on the evidence does not
indicate bias.

14. The Court of Appel in Lowe v  SSHD  [2021]  EWCA  62  referred  to  and
    repeated the judgment of Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani  UK  Ltd.
    [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at paragraph 114 as follows:

         "Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned, by recent  cases  at
         the highest level, not to interfere with findings of fact by  trial
         judges, unless compelled  to  do  so.  This  applies  not  only  to
         findings of primary fact, but also to the evaluation of those facts
         and to inferences to be drawn from them. The best  known  of  these
         cases are: Biogen  Inc  v  Medeva  plc  [1977]  RPC1;  Piglowska  v
         Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR  1360;  Datec  Electronics  Holdings  Ltd  v
         United Parcels Service Ltd [2007] UKHL 23 [2007] 1 WLR 1325;  Re  B
         (A Child) (Care Proceedings: Threshold  Criteria)  [2013]  UKSC  33
         [2013] 1 WLR 1911 and most recently and comprehensively McGraddie v
         McGraddie [2013] UKSC 58 [2013] 1 WLR 2477. These are all decisions
         either of the House of Lords or of the Supreme Court.  The  reasons
         for this approach are many. They include.

         i) The expertise of a trial judge is in determining what facts  are
         relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and  what  those  facts
         are if they are disputed.

         ii)      The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is  the  first  and
         last night of the show.

         iii)     Duplication of the trial  judge's  role  on  appeal  is  a
         disproportionate use of the limited resources of an appellate court
         and will seldom lead to a different outcome in an individual case.

         iv)      In making his decisions the trial judge will  have  regard
         to the whole of the sea of evidence presented to  him,  whereas  an
         appellate court will only be island hopping.

         v) The atmosphere  of  the  courtroom  cannot,  in  any  event,  be
         recreated by  reference  to  documents  (including  transcripts  of
         evidence).

         vi)      Thus even if it were possible to duplicate the role of the
         trial judge, it cannot in practice be done".

The judge had the benefit of hearing live evidence from the appellant and
her wife and being able to clarify issues as they arose. He heard all the
submissions on the evidence and weighed the evidence.  Ultimately, for
sound reasoning the judge found the respondent had discharged the legal
burden of proof.

It was against that background that the judge found that the appellant's
Article 8 claim should be dismissed.  The grounds submitted that even if
deception was found, the discretion of the Secretary of State should have
been made in favour of the appellant and that paragraph 322 was not
mandatory.  The judge did not accept that the departure of the appellant
from the UK should 'wipe the slate clean' and as Mr Avery pointed out, had
the Entry Clearance Officer known of deception the visa would not have been
granted.

The judge made a careful assessment on proportionality and it was entirely
open to him to conclude that there had been no abuse of process albeit the
respondent did not raise the issue of deception with the appellant until
2016. It is for the Secretary of State to determine how she will exercise
her discretion under the Rules, the ETS deception having come to her
attention; the appeal was on human rights grounds.  It was open to the
judge to conclude the exercise had been undertaken correctly because

         'if the appellant had sought to deceive the Home Office, the public
         interest in maintaining an effective immigration control entitled
         the respondent to hold this against her in 2016'.

A further point was taken that as the Secretary of State had evidence in
respect of the claim that she had cheated before the grant of the fianc�e
visa, it was now unfair and disproportionate to rely on the assertion and
require her removal after she had entered, married, and was settled. It was
asserted the judge's observation showed bias.

As the judge, however, came to a reasoned finding that the appellant had
been involved in TOEIC deception and noted the widespread scale of that
fraud and the potential to undermine the immigration system, using that
finding with respect to the appellant, that can hardly be described as
evincing a bias.  The judge considered the submissions from counsel that
there was a belated allegation of deception and the subsequent entry
clearance visa but at paragraph 48, reasoned cogently that the deception
was brought to the respondent's attention on 30th May 2014, a matter of
months before she returned to Thailand and that 'given the tens of
thousands of cases of potential deception that ETS had alerted the Home
Office to , it is likely that it would have taken the respondent some time
to review her records'.  As the judge recorded, he did not have the
application before him and thus would not have identified the
representations therein.  The inference as to the bureaucratic burden
placed on the Secretary of State was appreciable, reasonable and
appropriate bearing in mind the evidence of widespread fraud cited in the
Project Fa�ade report at paragraph 4; overall 33,725 test scores were found
to be invalid and 22,694 questionable as at 5th May 2015.

Finally, the judge noted at [48] that

         'the respondent would in any event have been compelled to refuse
         the appellant's application for leave to remain as a spouse given
         that paragraphs S-LTR.1.1 and 1.6 are mandatory.  The appellant's
         application was therefore bound to be refused under the Rules'.

The judge approached the evidence without bias and made findings which were
reasoned and open to him having directed himself legally appropriately.  I
find there was no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal and the decision will stand.



Notice of Decision

The appeal remains dismissed.


Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 26th February 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



