
                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/23471/2018 ('V')
                                                       & HU/23472/2018 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th November 2020                |On 7th December 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                             LAWRENCE WIREKO (1)
                                     and
                              REAGAN WIREKO (2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms H Gore, Counsel, instructed by Regina Spio-Aidoo
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were given
orally at the end of the hearing on 19th November 2020.

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to the
hearing being via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

This is an appeal by the appellants against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge A M Black (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 2nd January 2020, by
which she dismissed their appeals against the respondent's refusal of their
applications for entry clearance to settle with their mother.  The appeal
was on the basis of the right to respect for their family life under
article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

The respondent had originally refused their applications in decisions dated
23rd October 2018.  She did not accept that the appellants' mother (the
'sponsor'), who lived in the UK, had sole responsibility for the
appellants.  While she accepted that there had been financial support, this
was only one aspect of parental responsibility and the sponsor had moved to
the UK in 2008.  Despite the separation of 12 years, the appellants had
only provided telephone call logs for a single month in October 2016, and
there was an absence of evidence about prolonged contact.  The respondent
also did not accept that the appellants had demonstrated any serious or
compelling circumstances which would make their exclusion from the UK
undesirable.  The respondent further concluded, for the purposes of
paragraph GEN.3.1 and .3.2 of Appendix FM, that the refusal of entry
clearance would not result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

An entry clearance manager review decision of 1st May 2019 confirmed the
original refusals, noting a single month's worth call logs; limited
photographs and an absence of further evidence of claimed sole parental
responsibility.

In essence, the appellants' claims involved the following issues:

   1. whether the appellants met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
      and in particular, whether the sponsor had sole responsibility for
      the appellants, noting her assertion that the appellants' father's
      whereabouts in Ghana were unknown;

   2. whether there were serious and compelling circumstances or other
      circumstances making the exclusion of the appellants undesirable, in
      particular, what were said to be the terrible circumstances of the
      appellants' current arrangements;

   3. whether the refusal of leave to enter was, in any event,
      disproportionate, noting the appellants' family life with their
      mother and the delay in the respondent reaching her decision when the
      applications for entry clearance had been made in 2016.

The FtT's decision

At �19 of her decision, the FtT noted the limited documentary evidence of
contact maintained between the sponsor and the appellants, after the
sponsor left Ghana in 2008, including any visits.  At the time of her
departure, the appellants were under the age of 10.  The FtT found that
emotional and practical support would have been provided by the children's
grandparents and the children's legal guardian (�23).  At �24, the FtT
noted that the sponsor had remitted funds; there were limited visits, and
she found that there was shared, as opposed to sole, responsibility.  The
FtT drew adverse inferences from the legal guardian's failure to refer to
his status as the appellant's guardian in his witness statement, which she
saw as an attempt by him to minimise his involvement.  At �26, she noted
there was no suggestion that the appellants were not living in suitable
appropriate accommodation; rather that they had moved from one place of
accommodation to another (�28).

The FtT at �31 considered the appellant's appeals under article 8 outside
the Immigration Rules and at �35, concluded there was no reason why they
could not be housed in permanent accommodation (they were currently living
in temporary accommodation) with the support of the sponsor.  At �37, the
FtT noted that the appellants had never lived with their British half-
sibling and there was not a particularly close relationship between the
appellants and the sponsor.  At �38, the FtT considered the appellants'
best interests but noted the stability of the arrangements for them until
the recent death of their grandparents and that any temporary difficulties
in accommodation could be resolved.  At �39, the FtT went on to consider
section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and
assessed the quality of any family life between the sponsor and appellants
as being very limited.  At �42, the FtT concluded that the refusal of entry
clearance would not result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

The FtT accordingly rejected the appellants' appeals.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellants lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially as follows:

   4. the FTT had failed to consider and apply the well-known authority of
      TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT
      00049 and in particular, whether the sponsor had continuing control
      and direction over the appellants' upbringing, including making all
      of the important decisions in the appellants' lives.  The whole of
      the FtT's decision was perverse and the FtT had erred at �25 of the
      decision when she had stated that the sponsor had shared parental
      responsibility with others in Ghana.

   5. The FtT had wrongly considered, in the proportionality assessment,
      the fact that the appellants were now 18 years or over rather than,
      at the date of the application, that the appellants were still
      minors.  Their best interests still needed to be considered and any
      delay in the respondent reaching her decision could not defeat the
      obligation under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
      Immigration act 2009.  The FtT had wrongly considered the appellants
      as adults in considering the circumstances.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies initially refused permission on 7th April
2020, but renewed permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on
3rd September 2020, who granted permission on all grounds.

The hearing before me

The appellants' submissions

Ms Gore began by referring to �19 of the FtT's decision and asserting that
the FtT had failed to make findings of fact as to who decided on the
appellants' living arrangements.   The absence of findings on material
facts continued at �20 and in particular there should have been a finding
on who had decided the appellants' schooling arrangements.  I was referred
in that regard to paragraph 52(vii) of TD:

         "In the circumstances likely to arise, day-to-day responsibility
         (or decision-making) for the child's welfare may necessarily be
         shared with others (such as relatives or friends) because of the
         geographical separation between the parent and child."

At �22, the FtT had failed to make findings about who had decided where the
appellants would live. Ms Gore also asserted that when read together, �22
to 25 of the FtT's decision were contradictory as to whether the
appellants' legal guardian in Ghana shared responsibility with the sponsor.


I canvassed with Ms Gore at the beginning of her submissions regarding the
FtT's omission to make findings, referred to above, about whether any these
criticisms had been included in the grounds on which permission had been
granted.  For completeness, I set out ground (1) in its entirety below:

"That the judge erred in law to the extent that the whole decision is
perverse.  That despite the substantial evidence proving that their sponsor
has sole responsibility for the appellants the judge erred in law in
stating in paragraph 25 of the determination that sole responsibility for
the appellants has been shared with others in Ghana.  That the judge
completely failed to apply the test for sole responsibility as set out in
TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049
which clearly states that the test is whether the parent has continuing
control and direction over the child's upbringing including making all the
important decisions in the child's life.  The judge totally failed to
direct himself on this case."

I explored with Ms Gore whether in fact she was substantially seeking to
amend the grounds, noting the well-known authority of Latayan v SSHD [2020]
EWCA Civ 191.  I was concerned Ms Gore was making specific references to
omissions in fact-finding, which had not been referred to in the grounds.
In response, Ms Gore indicated that she was able to rely upon these
specific omissions because first, there had been a reference to the "whole"
of the decision being perverse and second, the ground had referred to a
failure to apply TD and therefore there had been a failure to apply
material findings.

Ms Gore further submitted that the FtT erred in her assessment of article
8, because of the lack of findings referred to already and because of her
failure to analyse the role of the legal guardian in the appellants' lives.

    The respondent's submissions

In response, Mr Walker submitted that the FtT had been clear at �23 that a
legal guardian had been identified, who had parental responsibility for the
appellant.  The FtT had been entitled to make the findings that she had
done on the basis of the evidence before her.  The evidence clearly
indicated that when the appellants' grandparents had died that there had
been the transfer of their parental responsibility to the guardian.

In the context of criticisms about the FtT's analysis of the role of the
guardian, the FtT had been entitled to rely upon the lack of transparency
and the guardian's attempt to downplay his role and to fail to refer to it
in his witness statement (guardianship had been referred to in another
document).  Whilst it was accepted that it would have been preferable had
the FtT not to have referred to the appellants now being adults, this was
not material to the FtT's decision.

Discussion and conclusions

First, I do not accept that it is permissible for the scope of grounds to
be expanded upon in the way that Ms Gore seeks to do.  While a Counsel may,
as noted by the Court of Appeal at �32 of Latayan, seek to refresh the
arguments so as to present them in the most persuasive way; and grounds may
be concise; the specific arguments raised by Ms Gore had simply not been
pleaded. The generality of the challenge of perversity had been pinned back
to the FtT's conclusion at �25 that the sponsor shared parental
responsibility with others.   This was quite distinct from the challenge
now being put by Ms Gore that fact-finding on specific issues (choice of
schooling and accommodation) had been omitted, or that there was internal
inconsistency in paragraphs �22 to 26.  It was also distinct from the
challenge of a failure to consider and apply the authority of TD.

As the Court of Appeal did in Latayan, I nevertheless went on to consider
the additional arguments, as well as those raised in the grounds, and I do
not accept that they disclose any error of law by the FtT, for the reasons
I will come on to.

In relation to the additional grounds, in particular, the FtT cannot be
criticised for failing to make specific findings that she was never invited
to make.  For example, when I queried with Ms Gore, whether there was
specific evidence before the FtT as to who had made decisions on the
appellants' schooling, Ms Gore said that she did not have notes of the oral
evidence given to the FtT (I was not directed to any written evidence on
the issue). I would expect an assertion that there had been oral evidence
which the FtT had failed to consider, to have been referred to expressly in
the grounds, with details of that evidence.   Ms Gore in fact moved away
from the suggestion that there had been evidence which had been ignored,
suggesting that where there were gaps in evidence, the FtT ought to have
adopted an inquisitorial approach, seeking to establish evidence that would
otherwise meet the requirements of TD. That is not a role or a submission
that I accept can be sustained, particularly when the appellants were
legally represented at the FtT hearing, by Ms Gore.

Instead, what the FtT was entitled to consider, was that there was "very
little documentary evidence", particularly in relation to contact
maintained, (at �19).  Any challenge to the FtT's analysis of the role of
the appellant's guardian, Mr Paul, can be explained, in reality, at �24, by
the failure of the sponsor and Mr Paul to refer to his status as the
appellants' legal guardian, suggesting a lack of transparency and an
attempt to minimise his involvement in their upbringing.  Put in another
way, the FtT cannot be criticised for failing to analyse, in a more
detailed way, the precise legal consequences of guardianship when Mr Paul,
as the guardian, was unwilling to volunteer any such details.  The FtT was
unarguably entitled to conclude that this role included an element of
parental responsibility, based on the appellant's own oral evidence on re-
examination at �23:

         "Under re-examination the sponsor told me she had 'transferred
         custody...to him, so he has full responsibility".

I do not accept Ms Gore's additional submission that there was an
inconsistency, or as her argument later developed, a lack of clarity in the
FtT's findings on whether Mr Paul had sole or shared responsibility.  When
I asked Ms Gore to identify which parts of the findings were inconsistent,
she then submitted that there was a lack of clarity, in particular, in the
references in �23 to evidence being consistent "with others, such as the
appellant's grandparents, having had sole responsibility prior to that year
[2016];" and at �24, where there was reference to responsibility being
"shared throughout the appellants' lives since 2008".

However, both references are clearly to evidence "suggesting" or being
"consistent" with scenarios, which the FtT was analysing. The FtT's
findings (as opposed to recitations of evidence) were clear, in the
preceding part of �24:

         "I accept the [sponsor] has remitted funds to the appellants in
         recent years, particularly for their education, but I am unable to
         find [my emphasis] that the evidence is sufficient for a finding
         that the sponsor "has had and continues to have sole responsibility
         for the children's upbringing".  The length of her absence from
         Ghana, the ages of the children throughout, the limited visits to
         that country to see her children in the circumstances described by
         the various witnesses, including the sponsor's oral evidence of the
         role of Mr Forjour Paul, is not sufficient for a finding of sole
         responsibility.  Rather, the evidence suggests that responsibility
         has been shared throughout the appellants' lives since 2008 when
         the sponsor left Ghana. In particular, the existence of a legal
         guardian to the children indicates significant responsibility for
         the care of the children had been ceded to Mr Forjour Paul in
         2016."

In summary, I do not accept that there is merit in the additional ground
that there is a lack of clarity in the FtT's findings concerning shared
parental responsibility.

In relation to the original pleaded ground (1), on the one hand, ideally,
the FtT could have expressly referred to the authority of TD in her
decision, and in particular the helpful summary at �52 of that case which
considers the approach to be adopted when analysing parental
responsibility.  The approach is intensely fact-specific and distinguishes
day-to-day caring roles, on the one hand, and ultimate parental
responsibility on the other.  I nevertheless conclude that when reviewed as
a whole, the FtT's decision engaged fully, in a way consistent with TD,
with the evidence before her, particularly in distinguishing day-to-day
caring roles from parental responsibility.  The FtT specifically considered
the latter in connection with the appellants' guardian.  The FtT had
specifically considered (and was entitled to consider) the emotional and
practical support given by the appellants' grandparents and in contrast,
and the limited contact between the appellants and the sponsor; and the
sponsor's limited role and the limited evidence of that role presented to
the FtT.  I do not accept that in reaching her decision, the FtT failed to
apply the principles of TD, even if she did not expressly cite it.

In relation to ground (2), Mr Walker fairly accepts that it would have been
preferable had the FtT not referred to the appellants as being adults, as
she did at �41.  However, I do not regard that as amounting to an error of
law such that the FtT's decision is unsafe and should be set aside.  It is
clear that these comments have to be read in context, and in particular
where the FtT stated at �38:

         "The appellants are no longer children but are barely adults so I
         consider their best interests.  I also have regard to the best
         interests of the sponsor's British child."

At �38, the FtT analysed the proportionality the refusal of entry clearance
in the context of difficulties over the temporary nature of accommodation
for the appellants in Ghana, and the FtT found that it was in the immediate
best interests of the appellants to live with the sponsor. The FtT was
clearly considering "best interests" in the context of the best interests
of children. This was reiterated at �41, where the FtT had referred to the
"the appellants who are now adults albeit only just so." It was not the
case that the FtT drew a bright line between on the one hand those who are
children and those who had become adults.  I am satisfied that the FtT
expressly considered the appellants' best interests as she ought to have
done, namely in the context of the best interests of children.  To the
extent that the FtT referred to the appellants as "barely adults", this did
not, in my view, amount to an error of law in the ultimate reasoning, in
what was a succinct, but satisfactory analysis of the proportionality of
the respondent's refusal of entry clearance.  Ground (2) is also without
merit.

Decision on error of law

I conclude that there are no errors of law in the FtT's decision, such that
it is unsafe and should be set aside.  The appellants' appeals fail, and
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law, such that it is unsafe and should be set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   J Keith  Date: 27th November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
