

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/24562/2018 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 1 October 2020            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DENZEL MAPOSA
                                                                  Respondent

                                DETERMINATION


1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to  them
   as they were in the FtT.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born  on  1  October  1998.   FtT
   Judge  Page  allowed  his  appeal  against  deportation  by  a   decision
   promulgated on 30 December 2019.




3. This determination is to be read as incorporating my decision  issued  on
   7 July 2020, setting aside  the  decision  of  Judge  Page,  and  seeking
   submissions about the further procedure which should be adopted.

4. In a response dated 20 July 2020,  the  SSHD  suggests  that  the  appeal
   might be resolved by a remote hearing  in  the  UT  "in  absence  of  any
   further submissions for the appellant or any request  to  submit  further
   evidence".

5. In a response dated 21  July  2020,  the  appellant  says  that  a  fresh
   assessment is required, based on further evidence to  be  led,  including
   evidence from the appellant, his family and his  partner;  and  that  the
   extent of fact-finding required is such that it is appropriate  to  remit
   to the FtT.

6. Taking account of both submissions, I accept  that  the  nature  of  this
   case is such that it is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and
   under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for an  entirely  fresh
   hearing.

7.  While  I  make  no  further  direction,  parties  may   wish   to   make
   representations to the FtT on the format of that hearing.

8. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not  to  include
   Judge Page.


9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      UT Judge Macleman
      28 September 2020

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.


