
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25144/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2021                   |On 26 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     VP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by JJ Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of India.  Her date of birth is 24 June 1987.

 In October 2008 the Appellant came to the UK as a student.  She was
granted periods of leave until 23 November 2011.  She left the United
Kingdom in December 2011. She was granted leave to enter the UK from 21
November 2012 to 30 March 2014 as the partner of a Tier 1 (General)
Migrant, her husband, RG.

The Appellant made an application for leave to remain on private and family
life grounds on 29 March 2014.  This application was refused on 7 May 2015.
 The decision of 7 May 2015 was certified as clearly unfounded under
Section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
Act").  The Appellant made further submissions under paragraph 353 of the
Immigration Rules.  However, these were refused by the Secretary of State
on 4 November 2016.  The Appellant was removed from the UK on 4 November
2016.She appealed against the decision dated 7 May 2015. On 15 August 2017,
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lebasci allowed the Appellant's appeal under
Article 8 ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the decision to refuse
the Appellant leave was a disproportionate interference with her family
life she shares with her husband, RG.

On 19 September 2014, RG was sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment
following a conviction for an offence of dishonesty involving money
laundering.  His appeal against deportation on Article 8 ECHR grounds, was
dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett on 8 October 2018. His
application for permission to appeal was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge
Hanson on 31 January 2019. However, he remains in the United Kingdom. He
made an application to the High Court for permission to judicially review
Judge Hanson's decision on 17 April 2019.[1]  On 17 June 2019 the Court of
Appeal stayed RG's application for permission pending the Supreme Court's
decision in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD 2020 UKSC 17.  He was granted a stay on
removal by the UT on 27 August 2019. On 18 November 2020 the Court of
Appeal refused the application. The decision of the Court of Appeal reads
as follows:-

RG then made an application to the Secretary of State for leave claiming
that his"The applicant seeks permission to appeal against the decision of
Sir Wyn Williams sitting as a High Court Judge dated 17 April 2019 refusing
permission to judicially review the decision of the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) (Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson) dated 30
January 2019 refusing permission to appeal against the determination of the
First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) (First-tier Tribunal
Judge Burnett) promulgated on 8 October 2018 refusing his appeal against
the decision of the Secretary of State dated 23 August 2017 to refuse his
application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

Before Judge Burnett, the applicant only pursued a human rights appeal
under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  He only
appealed to the Upper Tribunal on Article 8 grounds.  However, the judicial
review was based on the proposition that the removal of the applicant would
breach his Article 3 rights because of his medical conditions, as set out
in Paposhvili v Belgium [2016] ECHR 1113 and subsequently confirmed by the
Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department[2020] UKSC 17.

I understand that this appeal was stayed pending the ultimate outcome of AM
(Zimbabwe): but this is an appeal against the refusal of permission to
proceed with the judicial review of the refusal of permission to appeal
against Judge Burnett's determination.  As Sir Wyn Williams said when
refusing permission to proceed, there can be no doubt that Judge Hanson was
correct to refuse permission to appeal.  In those circumstances, Sir Wyn
Williams was unquestionably right to refuse permission to proceed.  The
refusal of the appeal by Judge Burnett on Article 8 grounds is now
uncontroversial; and that was the only ground upon which the appeal was
pursued before him.

Permission to appeal is therefore refused.

Of course, that is not necessarily the end of matters; because, if the
applicant considers he now has an Article 3 claim, he may apply for leave
to remain on that basis.  The Secretary of State would have to consider
such an application on the evidence relied upon and the law as it now
stands."

Following this decision, RG made a claim that his removal would breach the
United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3.  He is in poor health. He has
tuberculosis, depression, microcytic anaemia, degenerative disc disease,
undifferentiated inflammatory polyarthritis and ankylosing spondylitis.

The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal against the
decision of Judge Lebasci allowing the Appellant's appeal.  The decision
was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch following a hearing on 19 April
2018.  Judge Finch's decision (the" Error of Law" decision) reads as
follows:

"9.  The Home Office Presenting Officer did not seek to rely on evidence
which related to the ability of the Respondent's husband to resume a family
or private life in India.  The issue between the parties was whether the
findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lebasci in relation to the
Appellant's right to leave to remain was sustainable.

10.  It was accepted by the Respondent's Counsel that the Respondent was
not entitled to leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.  Therefore,
the appeal was restricted to the question of whether the First-tier
Tribunal Judge was correct to find that refusal to grant her leave to
remain amounted to a breach of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

11.  It was accepted that the Respondent was in a genuine and existing
relationship with her husband and that, as he was still living in the
United Kingdom, pending a decision on his own legal challenges, a breach of
their right to enjoy a family life for the purposes of Article 8(1) of the
European Convention on Human Rights was made out.  But, as the First-tier
Tribunal Judge correctly noted in paragraph 25 of the decision, the crucial
issue was that of proportionality.

12.  In that same paragraph the First-tier Tribunal purports to go through
the factors contained in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002.  It is said that 'a fair balance must be struck between
the public interest and the right and interests of the Appellant and her
husband'.  However, Section 117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002, states, in particular, that 'the maintenance of effective
immigration controls is in the public interest' but nowhere in the decision
does the First-tier Tribunal Judge place any weight on the fact that the
Appellant herself had no leave to remain when her application was refused
and that at the time, her husband had no leave to remain and was subject to
a deportation order.  It appears to be (sic) that this is a Robinson
obvious point to which I have to have regard.

13.  In ground 2 of her grounds of appeal the Appellant submitted that 'in
allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 the FtT has misdirected
herself in law as to the appropriate weight to be attached to the
Appellant's relationship'.  In paragraph 26 of the decision, the First-tier
Tribunal Judge found that

'the effect of being apart is very difficult for both the Appellant' and
her husband and that 'a significant additional feature is the complexity of
[RG's] health and [that] he finds it difficult to manage without the
Appellant.  He describes having missed important medical appointments due
to not having the assistance he needs'.

14.  This put the Appellant's case at its highest [and the passage of time
since 4 November 2016 rather puts in question her husband's inability to
manage without her and missing medical appointments due to not having her
assistance].  As a consequence, I find that it is arguable that the First-
tier Tribunal Judge did not give appropriate weight to the relationship
between the Respondent and her husband.

15.  In her second ground of appeal the Appellant also submitted that the
First-tier Tribunal Judge had made findings contrary to the statutory
provisions of Section 117B(4)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002.  This subSection states that:

'Little weight should be given to -

(b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is established
by a person at a time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.'

16.  However, the Appellant's husband was not a qualifying partner as he is
not a British citizen or settled in the United Kingdom.  In addition, the
First-tier Tribunal Judge did not seek to rely on this subSection.

17.  However, when considering whether the Appellant was entitled to leave
to remain outside the Immigration Rules the fact that the Appellant's
status in the United Kingdom had been precarious was a factor that had to
be taken into account.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did address this
issue to some extent in paragraph 25 of her decision when she found that
the Appellant had had lawful status in the United Kingdom when she had
leave to remain as a student and then a dependant.  However, she did not
address the fact that throughout her time in the United Kingdom her status
had been precarious.

18.  This was an error which was picked up in ground 2 by the Appellant.
Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the Appellant had erred in law by
stating that 'the Appellant's immigration status had always been precarious
and that, as a consequence, that public interest is significant'.  He
explained that this could not be the case as it could not be said that her
immigration status had been precarious during the time since she had been
removed from the United Kingdom.  However, the appeal that the Respondent
is pursuing is an out of country appeal against a decision taken when she
was in the United Kingdom and, therefore, at the date of decision her
status had always been precarious.

19.  It is clear from case law in the European Court of Human Rights and R
(on the application of Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2017] UKSC 11 that whether or not a person's immigration status
had been precarious was a relevant factor when considering whether they
were entitled to leave on Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules.
In particular, it was found in Agyarkothat:

'In cases concerned with precarious family life, it is 'likely' only to be
in exceptional circumstances that the removal of the non-national family
member will constitute a violation of Article 8. That reflects the weight
attached to the contracting states' right to control their borders, as an
attribute of their sovereignty, and the limited weight which is generally
attached to family life established in the full knowledge that its
continuation in the contracting state is unlawful or precarious ...'

20.  There was no decision as to there being any exceptional circumstances
in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision."

Judge Finch retained the matter in the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing.  She
made a number of directions.  These included that the parties submit
skeleton arguments within 28 days of receipt of her decision.  It was
directed that the skeleton arguments would address the following:-

      0. The extent to which previous precarious immigration status is a
         factor which should be taken into account when an individual is
         exercising an out of country appeal;

      0. the proper weight to give to a genuine relationship in an out of
         country appeal when the other partner is in the United Kingdom
         without any immigration status but awaiting a statutory appeal;

      0. the extent to which it may be an abuse of process to consider the
         circumstances of a partner awaiting an appeal in the United
         Kingdom.

Further directions were issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 16 November
2018.  The Appellant was directed to inform the Upper Tribunal within
fourteen days of receipt of the directions as to any outcome of her
husband's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge directed the
parties to submit skeleton arguments.

The matter came before Judge Finch on 28 February 2019 when she adjourned
the hearing until after the High Court had determined RG's Cart JR
following the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson to refuse him
permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The
directions included the following:-

"The Appellant do make an appropriate application to the High Court for
their Cart JR to be expedited and within that application do identify the
Upper Tribunal's observation that it would be in the interests of justice
for the Cart JR to be expedited with a view to possibly linking the JR to
these statutory proceedings, if permission were to be given."

On 31 March 2020 further directions were issued to the parties in the light
of the spread of COVID-19. On 9 December 2020 the parties were issued with
a notice of hearing.

On 8 January 2021 the Appellant's solicitors communicated with the
Tribunal.  They enclosed a decision of the Court of Appeal of 18 November
2020 relating to RG.

The decision of Judge Lebasci - August 2017

The First-tier Tribunal made a number of findings which are sustainable
having heard evidence from RG, and submissions from the Appellant's
representative, Mr Chelvan.  The judge noted that much of the evidence was
not challenged by the Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Rawlings.  The
judge said that "many, if not most, of the facts in this appeal are not in
dispute".

The judge found that the Appellant and her husband's evidence regarding
their relationship "should be regarded as credible".  The judge found that
they gave a "coherent account of how they met and how their relationship.
The judge was satisfied that the relationship was genuine and subsisting".


The judge found as follows at [24]: "For as long as [RG] remains in the UK
I find that if the Appellant is unable to return to the UK to be with her
husband this amounts to an interference with the exercise of their right to
respect for their family life."

The judge at [25] identified the crucial issue as that of proportionality.
The judge noted that the Appellant speaks English and would not be reliant
on public funds, given her academic qualifications.  The judge said:

"I find that little weight should be given to the Appellant's private life
established during those times when her immigration status was unlawful or
precarious.  However, I also take into account of the fact that the
Appellant has spent several years in the UK lawfully."

The judge found that being apart was very difficult for the Appellant and
her husband and that her husband's poor health was "a significant
additional feature".  The judge found that he found it difficult to manage
without the Appellant.

The decision of Judge Burnett - October 2018

RG's appeal was heard on 27 July 2018.  The Appellant appealed against the
decision to deport him under Article 8 of ECHR at a time when his wife had
already returned to India.  The judge had before him medical evidence
relating to RG's poor health.  The judge stated at paragraph 61 the
following:

"Mr Bazini did not pursue an Article 3 claim before me.  It is clear that
it cannot be said that the Appellant will be at risk of a serious and rapid
decline in his health in the near future if he is removed to India.  A
breach of Article 3 does not occur because the same high standard of care
is not available in the receiving state.  Article 3 does not impose an
obligation on a removing state to ensure an absence of disparities between
the health service provisions of the two countries."

The judge found that the Appellant would be able to engage in family life
with his wife in India, something that he has been unable to do in the UK,
and that she also had other family members there.

The judge found that should the Appellant return to India his wife could
provide support for him and assist with his mobility and mood.

There was no witness statement from the Appellant's wife before Judge
Burnett. I will return to the findings of Judge Burnett later.

The Appellant's skeleton argument

There is a skeleton argument of 18 May 2020 drafted by Mr Nicholson of
Counsel on behalf of the Appellant.The submissions can be summarised.

There is no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact in
relation to the Appellant.  The following findings should be maintained.

      i) The Appellant and RG are in a genuine and subsisting relationship
         and they share family life.

     ii) RG suffers from a range of medical and psychiatric conditions
         including TB and agonising and debilitating pain due to ankylosing
         spondylitis.  He is immobile and depends upon the Appellant for his
         care.

    iii) The Appellant spent several years living with her husband in the UK
         with lawful leave as his spouse following her entry in that
         capacity in December of 2012.

     iv) With regard to Section 117B(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act, she speaks
         English and is unlikely to be reliant on public funds, given her
         qualifications.

The issue before the Upper Tribunal is proportionality.  RG cannot be
removed from the UK unless and until his removal could be said to be
lawful, proper consideration having been given to his human rights
following the Supreme Court's judgment in AM.  There is no issue as to
whether the Appellant and RG can enjoy their family life together otherwise
than in the UK.In any event, RG's condition prevents family life continuing
in India.  TB is a public health risk and there are no facilities to treat
RG.

The Appellant and her husband were living lawfully in the UK and had been
doing for four years prior to the Appellant's removal.  The Appellant was
removed in 2016.  The couple have been deprived of four years of their life
together and they need to be reunited urgently.  The couple have been
attempting, so far without success, to have children.  This is a
fundamental element of family life which has been denied to them.  The
difficulties are exacerbated by RG's dependence upon the Appellant for his
care and to ensure his mental health.The couple are unable to live together
anywhere other than in the UK and this is a matter of significant weight.
The Appellant does not have a history of failing to comply with conditions
of immigration control.The issue of precariousness is not relevant to the
Appellant's case.  The couple married in India and the Appellant entered
the UK as a spouse.  Their marriage was not entered into when either of
their immigration statuses was precarious.

The Appellant relies on CL v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2019] EWCA Civ 1925where the Court of Appeal decided that subSection
117B(4) of the 2002 Act does not require little weight to be given to a
relationship with a qualifying partner when the person's immigration status
is precarious as opposed to unlawful.

The Appellant relies on GM Sri Lanka v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 [29] to support that the Appellant does not
need to demonstrate that her case is exceptional.  The decision granting
permission to the Secretary of State is flawed because there is no
requirement to find exceptional circumstances.

The Secretary of State has a positive obligation to facilitate family life
and to desist from doing otherwise than is proportionate is no less
pressing than the negative obligation not to interfere with family life. Mr
Nicholson relied on Quila &another[2011]UKSC 45 specifically at [40] and
Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 to support the argument that the question in
an entry clearance case as opposed to an expulsion case is not whether
there is an interference but instead whether a positive duty to facilitate
family life has been observed. The Supreme Court drew attention to Tuquabo-
Tekle v The Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798. At [40] Wilson JSC stated:

         "...Third, Tuquabo-Tekle v The Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798,a
         mother, father and their three sons were of Eritrean ethnicity but
         lived in the Netherlands and had acquired Dutch citizenship. When
         leaving Eritrea in 1989, the mother had left behind a daughter,
         then aged eight. When she was aged 15, an application was made for
         her to be allowed to enter the Netherlands in order to live with
         the family; but it was refused. The court held that, by the
         refusal, the state had violated the rights under article 8 of all
         six of its members. The court observed, at para 41 and para 42,
         that the asserted obligation of the state was positive, that "the
         boundaries between the state's positive and negative obligations
         under this provision do not lend themselves to precise definition"
         and that "the applicable principles are, nonetheless, similar". The
         minority view in G�l had become that of the majority. The court did
         not tarry to consider interference: it moved straight to
         justification."

RG and the Appellant were living lawfully together and had been doing for
nearly four years before the Appellant was removed. They have been deprived
of four years of life together. They have been attempting to have children
which is a fundamental element of family life denied to them. The need to
be reunited is urgent and exacerbated by RG's dependence upon the Appellant
for his care and to ensure his mental health. The inability of the family
to live together anywhere other than the United Kingdom is axiomatically a
matter of significant weight.

The Appellant has no history of failure to comply with conditions of
immigration control.  Should her husband's human rights eventually be
deemed not to be breached by hisremoval there is no basis for any concern
that she would not simply leave the UK with him.

Section 117B of the 2002 Act

Section 117B of the 2002 Act states as follows:

"117B    Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

(1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.

(2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because
persons who can speak English -

(a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because
such persons -

(a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(4)  Little weight should be given to -

(a)  a private life, or

(b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
Kingdom unlawfully.

(5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

(6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where -

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom."

Oral submissions

Mrs Aboni relied on the refusal letter. The Appellant cannot succeed under
the Immigration Rules. She has been separated from her husband since 4
December 2016. Her previous precarious immigration is relevant to the
assessment of proportionality. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom as
a dependant. Her application for leave to remain was refused because of her
husband's criminality.

The Appellant came here as a student in 2008. She returned to India in
2011. She married RG in India on 26 June 2012.  She returned to the United
Kingdom on 3 December 2012 as a dependant on her husband who had leave to
remain as a Tier 1 Migrant.  They were here lawfully, but their leave was
at all times precarious which is relevant when attaching weight to their
relationship. RG became subject to a deportation order on 1 December 2014.
The First-tier Tribunal found that deportation of RG did not breach his
rights under Article 8. The First-tier Tribunal found at RG's hearing that
there were no obstacles to him returning to India where he has family.  The
Respondent's case is that RG can leave the United Kingdom as a matter of
choice.  He is a foreign criminal.  He did not rely on Article 3 health
grounds at his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,  but Ms Aboni drew my
attention to the judge's findings; namely that it was speculation that he
would be at risk of contracting TB, that there would be health care
available to him and that there was no evidence that his health would
deteriorate on return.  If RG is successful in his application (or appeal),
the Appellant can make an application. The application is an abuse of
process because RG does not have status on which it is legitimate to grant
the Appellant leave. There are no sufficiently compelling circumstances to
grant leave outside of the Rules.

Mr Nicholson relied on his skeleton argument. Although section 117B applies
to all Article 8 appeals, it has not relevant here because the issue is not
private life and RG is not a qualifying partner. The Appellant relies on
family life.They did not meet when they were here unlawfully. They entered
the United Kingdom lawfully. There is nothing in the statute to undermine
their relationship.

Mr Nicholson said that he was bewildered about how the appeal could be
described as an abuse of process. The Appellant was entitled to appeal.
There is no possibility of family life in India. RG has a pending
application on Article 3 grounds. He relied on the findings of the First-
tier Tribunal at [24] - [27].  There has been no change in the position
because the Appellant and RG are still separated. The Tribunal cannot
prejudge the outcome of RG's application.

This is an unusual case where the spouse of a person subject to a
deportation order had been removed.  The Appellant and her husband who are
trying to have a child are effectively being kept apart. It is a major
hurdle for the Secretary of State to establish that keeping the Appellant
and his wife separated is proportionate.




Findings and reasons

Neither party had addressed the issues identified by Judge Finch in a
skeleton argument.  The Secretary of State has not to my knowledge
submitted a skeleton argument. Ms Aboni did not draw my attention to one.
When I raised the issues identified by Judge Finch the parties seemed to be
taken by surprise. There was no application to adjourn to address the
issues. Considering the considerable delay to date in determining the
Appellant's appeal, it was not in the interests of justice to adjourn to
enable the parties to properly address the issues identified by Judge
Finch. The Appellant had not submitted further evidence. RG did not attend
the resumed hearing. The matter proceeded by way of submissions only.

The Secretary of State of State accepted that the issue is proportionality.
There was no challenge to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal. Thus,
the following findings are maintained: -

          1.  The  Appellant  and  RG  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship and they share a family life.


          2. RG suffers from a range of medical and psychiatric  conditions
             including TB  and  agonising  and  debilitating  pain  due  to
             ankylosing spondylitis.


          3. The Appellant spent several years (nearly four  years)  living
             with her husband in the UK with lawful leave  as  RG's  spouse
             following her entry into the UK in that capacity  in  December
             of 2012.


          4. The Appellant speaks English and is unlikely to be reliant  on
             public funds given her educational qualifications.


In Quila the Supreme Court declined to follow Abdulaziz and United Kingdom
(1985) 7 EHRR 471(where the court found that there was not even an
interference with the rights under Article 8 of the three women in refusing
to allow their husbands to join them or remain with them) in the light of
more recent decisions. At [43] the Supreme Court explained; -

         ... [T]he court in Abdulaziz was in particular exercised by the
         fact that the asserted obligation was positive. Since then,
         however, the ECtHR has recognised that the often elusive
         distinction between positive and negative obligations should not,
         in this context, generate a different outcome. The area of
         engagement of article 8 - in this limited context - is, or should
         be, wider now. In that in Tuquabo-Tekle the state's refusal to
         admit the 15-year-old daughter of the mother, in circumstances in
         which they had not seen each other for seven years, represented an
         interference with respect for their family life, the refusals of
         the Secretary of State in the present case to allow the foreign
         spouses to reside in the UK with the British citizens with whom
         they had so recently entered into a consensual marriage must a
         fortiori represent such an interference. The only sensible enquiry
         can be into whether the refusals were justified.

The engagement of Article 8 depends upon an affirmative answer to the first
two Razgar questions (R (Razgar) v Home Secretary [2004] UKHL), namely
whether there had been or would be an interference by a public authority
with the exercise of a person's right to respect for his private or family
life and, if so, whether it had had, or would have, consequences of such
gravity as potentially to engage the operation of the Article.[2]This is
not an entry clearance case where it is the Secretary of State's position
that there is no interference with family life.  Whether the obligation is
positive or negative is not material. The first two Razgar questions are
not in issue.  It is not the Appellant's case that questions 3 and 4 should
be answered in the negative. The parties are agreed that the determinative
issue is proportionality, questions 5.  What was said in Quila by Wilson
JSC does not add anything to this Appellant's case.

It is accepted that this Appellant cannot succeed under Article 8 as
informed by the Rules. In assessing proportionality I have taken into
account that the policy of the Secretary of State as expressed in the Rules
is not to be ignored when a decision about Article 8 is to be made outside
the Rules:  TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109. The Court of Appeal in GM (Sri Lanka)
[2019] EWCA Civ 1630 said that the test to be applied outside the Rules is
whether a "fair balance" is struck between competing public and private
interests (and not one of exceptionality).   The decisions of GM and CL
(India) [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 clarify that the little weight provisions in
s117B do not apply to precarious family life.  In CL, the Court of Appeal
agreed with the Secretary of State of State that there is no rule of law
which requires that little weight should not be given to a relationship
formed with a British citizen at a time when and Applicant's immigration
status is precarious and that  what weight it is appropriate to give to
such a relationship in the proportionality assessment depends on the
particular circumstances, "which include the duration of the relationship
and the details of the applicant's immigration history and particular
immigration status when the relationship was formed (and when the
application was made)" ( see [64]).

I have no hesitation in concluding that any interference with this
Appellant's Article 8 rights is justified and proportionate. Her appeal
relies wholly on family life with RG.  RG is not settled here and he is not
a British citizen.  While he has a pending application with the Home
Office, he does not have status here. The Court of Appeal refused his
application noting that the grounds advanced are "significantly different"
to those before the UT and First-tier Tribunal. RG raised health grounds as
a ground of appeal before Judge Burnett in the context of Article 8 only.
FTTJ Burnett accepted that RG has a number of health problems. He found
that it was speculative that the RG would contract Tuberculosis which he
found to be the only potentially life-threatening illness (see [55]). He
said that Ankylosing Spondylitis is not life threatening but debilitating
and affects his mobility. If it is not treated it causes severe pain and
stiffness.  The judge found that there was no evidence that treatment was
not available in India. There was no evidence that he could not get
analgesia in India.  Judge Burnett noted at [56] that the Appellant was in
India and said that it appeared that she has family members there and that
she could provide support for RG and assist with his mobility and mood. The
judge concluded that the decision to deport RG does not breach his rights
under Article 8.

Both parties agreed that s117B factors apply equally to in-country and out
of country appeals. This Appellant relies solely on family life with RG and
not private life.  Since the error of law decision, the Court of Appeal in
CL has clarified the proper approach to s117B (4) of the 2002 Act.
However, RG is neither a British citizen nor is he settled here, therefore
s117B (4) has no application in any event.  The Appellant has not formed a
relationship with a qualified person when she was here in any capacity. The
Appellant came to the United Kingdom as RG's partner, when his stay was
precarious.  The Appellant and RG's family life here was at all times
before her removal precarious in the sense that neither has ever had
permanent status here. I appreciate that the Appellant has not been in the
United Kingdom unlawfully. However, taking into account all the
circumstances, I attach little weight to the family life enjoyed here by
the Appellant with RG before her removal. The Appellant does not rely on
private life.

RG was imprisoned in 2014. I am told that the couple lived together on his
release and before the Appellant was removed in November 2016. The
Appellant and RG have not lived together since this time. The First-tier
Tribunal hearing the Appellant's case in 2017 heard evidence from RG.
There was no up to date evidence before the Upper Tribunal. RG did not
attend the hearing before me. There was no evidence from the Appellant or
RG about their relationship since the hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal in 2017.  There was no evidence drawn to my attention of
communication between the couple since the Appellant's appeal over three
years ago.

The Appellant and RG are represented by the same firm of solicitors. It is
odd that while the Appellant claims that  RG is dependent on her, there is
no mention of this or the impact of separation on RG in the up to date
medical report on which he relies to support his application on Article 3
grounds.  The letter of instruction from the solicitors of 4 December 2020
does not ask the expert to comment this.  While the First-tier Tribunal
made positive findings about their relationship which have not been
challenged, I must assess the relationship at the date of the hearing. The
evidence before me points to a diminished family life.

This case concerns the Appellant's family life.  It does not concern the
United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 as regards RG.  I do not wish
to speculate on the outcome of the pending application before the Secretary
of State. However, the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett about
RG's health in 2018 are lawful. In respect of the up to date medical report
which was not before the First-tier Tribunal in 2018, RG now relies on
having been diagnosed as having moderate to severe depression and recurrent
suicidal ideation. The author of the report says that without treatment his
prognosis is poor.  Making a very broad evaluative assessment of the
evidence before me, in order to assist with the proportionality assessment
as regards the Appellant, I conclude that there is nothing before me that
suggests that RG has a particularly strong case. In any event, the
Secretary of State will in due course consider whether to send RG to India
would breach the UK's obligations under Article 3.

Despite the directions of UTJ Finch there was no evidence before me that
the Appellant's solicitors made efforts to ensure a speedy decision in
respect of the Cart JR. In any event, as far as that matter is concerned,
RG has now reached the end of the road. He does not have a pending appeal
in the United Kingdom. His situation is even more tenuous than it was when
the Appellant's appeal was heard in 2017.  He has a recently made
application before the Secretary of State. The outcome is far from certain.
He may or may not have a right of appeal against a negative decision.

The Appellant did not advance an argument that there are insurmountable
obstacles to family life in India which is the test when applying the Rules
in the case of an Appellant who has a relationship with a settled person or
British citizen. On the evidence before me, this is not made out, in any
event.  I do not seek to go behind the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.
At that time, RG's appeal was pending and the judge found that it was not
reasonable to expect family life to continue in India.  As I understand
this was not a challenged finding. There is no longer a pending appeal
before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is insufficient evidence before me
to conclude that it is unreasonable to expect RG to return to India to
resume family life with his wife.  If I were to consider proportionality on
the basis that family life could not reasonably continue in India, this
appeal cannot succeed. I have taken into account what Lord Reed said in
Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 paragraphs 59 and 60.[3]    When assessing
proportionality, I have taken into account that once RG's application is
resolved, the parties can resume family life in India (if the application
is unsuccessful) or the Appellant can make another application on much
stronger grounds (should RG be granted leave).  A pending application in
the circumstances of this case, does not amount to insurmountable obstacles
to family life.   One must not lose sight of the fact that this Appellant
does not rely on family life in the UK with a British citizen or a settled
person.

There are additional factors in this case that weigh heavily against the
Appellant.  The initial separation of this couple followed RG's criminality
which resulted in a 15- month sentence of imprisonment and a deportation
order. RG is still subject to a deportation order. He is a foreign
criminal. It is in the public interest that he is deported. While the
Appellant had been living with her husband lawfully in the United Kingdom
before she was removed, to suggest that the decision of the Secretary of
State to refuse her application on human rights grounds is at the root of
the separation of this family wholly misrepresents the situation. The
couple's separation came about as a result of RG's criminality and
imprisonment that followed.The Appellant is not to blame for this. However,
her case relies wholly on family life with RG who is a foreign criminal.
She has no claim to be in the United Kingdom independently of that
relationship. While the Appellant had lawful leave here, she was a
dependant on RG. She did not have leave in her own right. Mr Nicholson was
clear that her case rested on family life with her husband and not private
life.

The maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
Taking into account all the circumstances, the balance of the scales in
this case weighs heavily in favour of the Secretary of State.  The decision
to refuse the Appellant's application on Article 8 grounds is
proportionate.

Neither party was properly prepared to engage with the issues identified by
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch. They had not complied with directions. I am
able to properly address the first question (the extent to which previous
precarious immigration status is a factor which should be taken into
account when an individual is exercising an out of country appeal). S117B
applies to in-country and out of country appeals under Article 8. What is
always necessary is a fact sensitive assessment taking onto account all
material matters.  In respect of the second question (the proper weight to
be given to a genuine relationship in an out of country appeal when the
other person in in the United Kingdom without any immigration status but
awaiting a statutory appeal), it is obvious that it would be preferable for
the appeals to be heard together, if possible.  The issue is not relevant
in this appeal because RG's appeal has already been determined and
dismissed. However, whether there is a pending appeal or merely an
application, the weight to attach to the relationship depends on all the
circumstances.

In respect of the fourth question which is the extent to which it may be an
abuse of process to consider the circumstances of a partner awaiting an
appeal in the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State has not made out that
there has been an abuse of process in this case. The Secretary of State has
not advanced a coherent case establishing that the Appellant's application
is frivolous. I accept that there are unanswered questions concerning the
conduct of RG's appeal, such as why he did not rely on Article 3 before
Judge Burnett and why my attention has not been drawn to evidence that the
solicitors made any attempt to expedite RG's Cart JR in response to Judge
Finch's directions. Furthermore the Cart JR application raises questions
considering Shah ('Cart' judicial review: nature and consequences) [2018]
UKUT 00051. (However, I am not aware of the evidence that was before the
Court of Appeal which resulted in the staying of RG's case.) In addition,
RG did not make an application under Article 3 until the decision of the
Court of Appeal, whereas it has been open to him to make further
representations under AM asking for expedition so that he and his wife can
resume family life. Despite these potential avenues of discussion, there
was no properly articulated argument developed by the Secretary of State on
the issue.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 of ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date10 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
-----------------------
[1] R (on the application of Cart) v The Upper Tribunal [2011] UKSC 28 ("a
Cart JR")
[2] Lord Bingham's speech, which had the assent of Lord Steyn and Lord
Carswell, and in large part too of Lord Walker and Baroness Hale
notwithstanding their dissent as to the outcome, proposed at �17 the
following questions as those which were likely to have to be answered by an
adjudicator on an art. 8 appeal:
(1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with
the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private or (as the
case may be) family life?
(2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
(3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
(4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of
health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of
others?
(5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public end
sought to be achieved?
[3] In Agyarko, Lord Reed stated:

    59. As was explained in para 8 above, the case of Huang was decided at
    a time when the Rules had not been revised to reflect the  requirements
    of article 8. Instead, the Secretary  of  State  operated  arrangements
    under which effect was given to  article  8  outside  the  Rules.  Lord
    Bingham, giving  the  opinion  of  the  Committee,  observed  that  the
    ultimate question for the appellate immigration authority  was  whether
    the refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
    life of the family could not  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
    elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations weighing in favour
    of the refusal, prejudiced the family life of the applicant in a manner
    sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of article 8. If the  answer
    to that question was affirmative, then the  refusal  was  unlawful.  He
    added:


         "It is not necessary  that  the  appellate  immigration  authority,
         directing itself along the lines indicated in  this  opinion,  need
         ask in addition whether the case meets a  test  of  exceptionality.
         The suggestion that it should is based on an  observation  of  Lord
         Bingham in Razgar [ R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368] , para 20. He was there
         expressing an  expectation,  shared  with  the  Immigration  Appeal
         Tribunal, that the number of claimants not covered by the rules and
         supplementary directions but entitled to succeed  under  article  8
         would be a very small minority. That is still his expectation.  But
         he was not purporting to lay down a legal test." (para 20)


    60. It remains the position that the ultimate question is  how  a  fair
    balance should be struck between the competing  public  and  individual
    interests involved, applying a  proportionality  test.  The  Rules  and
    Instructions in issue in the present  case  do  not  depart  from  that
    position.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  imposed   a   test   of
    exceptionality, in the sense which Lord Bingham had in mind: that is to
    say, a requirement that the case should  exhibit  some  highly  unusual
    feature, over and above the application of the test of proportionality.
    On the contrary, she has defined the  word  "exceptional",  as  already
    explained, as meaning "circumstances in which refusal would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  the
    refusal of the application would not be proportionate". So  understood,
    the provision in the Instructions that leave can be granted outside the
    Rules where exceptional circumstances apply involves the application of
    the test of proportionality to  the  circumstances  of  the  individual
    case, and cannot be regarded  as  incompatible  with  article  8.  That
    conclusion is fortified by the express statement  in  the  Instructions
    that "exceptional" does not mean "unusual" or  "unique":  see  para  19
    above.



