
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/25205/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business                   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 20 January 2021                            |on 15 February 2021          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               BAKHSHISH SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Gray & Co,
Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born  on  25  April  1975.   On  7
    September 2018, he applied for entry clearance  as  the  husband  of  a
    British citizen.  The ECO refused his application on 6  September  2018
    on "suitability" grounds, because he had  "previously  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the immigration rules by
    overstaying,  illegally  working  and  submitting  multiple   frivolous
    applications for leave to remain in the UK".  It is common ground  that
    the application met the other requirements of the rules.

 2. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  Judge O'Hagan dismissed his  appeal
    by a decision promulgated on 12 November 2019.

 3. On 21 May 2020 UT Judge McWilliam granted permission to appeal  to  the
    UT, on the view that arguably the judge had not reasoned why discretion
    should be exercised against the appellant.

 4. The SSHD, on behalf of the ECO, responded on 23 July 2020 to directions
    of the UT by conceding error of law:

         Judge O'Hagan ... erred ... at [17] ... failing to provide  reasons
         why  earlier  applications  and  in  particular  the  3  "Zambrano"
         applications  between  25  October  2021  and  14  May  2012   were
         "frivolous".  The judge notes that the number  of  applications  in
         and of themselves does not  make  them  frivolous  and  accordingly
         consideration of the frailties of the earlier 5 applications  would
         need to have been undertaken..."

 5. In a decision issued on 29 July 2020 UT  Judge  McWilliam  quoted  that
    concession, set aside the decision of the FtT, and gave directions with
    a view to a fresh hearing in the UT.

 6. A transfer order was made to  enable  another  judge  to  complete  the
    decision-making of the UT.  The technology enabled an effective  remote
    hearing. I was asked to make a  fresh  decision  without  hearing  oral
    evidence, based on the materials placed before  the  tribunal  by  both
    parties, and on submissions.

 7. The main points which I noted from the submissions  for  the  appellant
    were:

      i) The case should  be  approached  in  terms  of  whether  there  are
         exceptional circumstances which render refusal of entry clearance a
         breach of ECHR Article 8 because it would result  in  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for the sponsor.

     ii) It was not argued that there would be  such  consequences  for  the
         appellant.

    iii) The accepted material facts were that the appellant was  unlawfully
         in the UK for most, although not all, of the years he  spent  here;
         he left voluntarily almost 3 years ago; a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship exists between him and his wife; and she suffers  from
         a range of quite serious  medical  conditions,  both  physical  and
         mental, for which she takes multiple daily medications.

     iv) The consequences of the decision for her were plainly harsh; but it
         was accepted they had to be shown to  be  so  to  an  unjustifiable
         extent.

      v) The degree of harshness for the sponsor was shown by her statements
         and  the  medical  evidence,  from  her  GP,  rheumatologist,   and
         psychiatrist.

     vi) The sponsor needs considerable support, provided at  present  by  a
         neighbour and from public sources.  That provision is  much  poorer
         during the pandemic, and would be  enhanced  significantly  by  the
         presence of the appellant.

    vii) The public interest in excluding the appellant, after his voluntary
         departure, is not as strong as it was in refusing his  claims  made
         in  the  UK.   His  overstaying,   and   unsuccessful   immigration
         proceedings should not now weigh significantly against him.

   viii) On the other side, the adverse consequences for his wife had become
         more acute.

     ix) This was not (as the FtT had thought), a classic "Devaseelan" case,
         not being  the  last  in  a  series  of  repeated  claims,  but  an
         application for entry clearance, raising a different issue, and not
         turning on whether to  depart  from  previous  adverse  credibility
         findings.

      x) The stage  had  now  been  reached  where  there  were  exceptional
         circumstances because refusal of entry  clearance  interfered  with
         family life to the  extent  of  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,
         breaching article 8.

 8. The main points which I noted from the submissions for  the  respondent
    were:

      i) The finding by the ECO that the appellant  contrived  to  frustrate
         the intentions of the rules was justified.  That was  relevant  not
         only to whether the primary requirements of the rules were met  but
         went to the public interest in the further balancing exercise.

     ii) The appellant claimed to have entered the UK as a visitor in  2006,
         but there was no record.  At best, he was an  overstayer  for  many
         years  before  making  his  first  application   in   2010.    That
         application,  and  two  applications  in  2011,  had  no   apparent
         substance and were plainly frivolous.

    iii) Further proceedings were unsuccessful.   Judges  in  prior  appeals
         accepted the  marriage  was  subsisting  but  made  rather  adverse
         findings  on  the  appellant's  motivation  in  his   relationship.
         "Devaseelan" principles did apply.  There was no reason  to  depart
         from those findings.  They were relevant in the balancing exercise.

     iv) There was no dispute with the medical  evidence.   Separation  from
         the appellant has an adverse effect on the sponsor, particularly on
         her mental health.  However, it had previously not been shown  that
         she could not access health care in India and  could  not  relocate
         there.  There was no reason to depart from that finding either.

      v) The appellant had worked illegally.  That also weighed against him.

     vi) Both parties to the relationship had been aware that the  appellant
         was not here lawfully.  Statute required their family  life  to  be
         given little weight.

    vii) The medical circumstances  were  compelling,  but  insufficient  to
         outweigh the public interest in immigration control or to  disclose
         unduly harsh consequences.

 9. Mr Forrest replied:

      i) Section 117B of the 2002 Act does not apply in an  out  of  country
         appeal.  He accepted this was "a bold submission".

     ii) The appellant's conduct of proceedings from 2014  -  2018  was  not
         frivolous.  He established on judicial review that he  should  have
         had a decision carrying a right of appeal from within the UK.   The
         decision showed that he had a case worth making.  It  was  not  his
         fault those proceedings were so protracted.  When  they  ultimately
         failed, he left the UK shortly thereafter, which was to his credit.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The appellant's wife suffers from serious health problems and is highly
    dependent on the assistance she receives.  Her situation here was  much
    better when the appellant was with her and would be so if he were to be
    with her again.  Although she has visited India in the  past,  she  has
    lived in the UK all her life.  It has not  been  established  that  she
    could not live in India and could not obtain health care; but it is now
    patent  that  she  will  never  elect  to  move.   I  accept  that  her
    unwillingness to do so  cannot  decide  the  case  in  the  appellant's
    favour, but it is the reality against which a decision must be reached.

12. There is something in what both sides said about previous decisions and
    about "Devaseelan" principles.  Previous judges  were  sceptical  about
    the appellant's motivation in his relationship.  It may  well  be  that
    immigration  advantage  plays  a   large   part.    Nevertheless,   the
    relationship has not been found previously to be other than genuine and
    subsisting, even if it has mixed motives.  That is the  starting  point
    for consideration in terms of the rest of the immigration rules.

13. Section 117B of the 2002 Act is headed,  "Article  8:  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases".  It applies both to those  who
    wish to remain in the UK and to those who wish to enter.


14. Section 117 B(4) provides that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    relationship established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully.


15. At first sight, that is strongly against the appellant's case.

16. The immigration rules are now designed, as far as possible, to  reflect
    all relevant article 8 considerations.  The ECO's decision is expressly
    on the basis that the requirements of the rules  are  satisfied,  apart
    from suitability,  based  on  the  immigration  history.   The  primary
    provisions of the rules are  the  starting  point,  before  enquiry  is
    required into  exceptional  circumstances  resulting  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences (which is  practically  indistinguishable  from  any
    test "outside" the rules).

17. The grant of permission, and the respondent's concession  on  error  of
    law, point to a consideration firstly of whether discretion  should  be
    exercised against the appellant.  If not, he meets the primary terms of
    the  rules,   short   of   exceptional   circumstances   resulting   in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences; and as  the  rules  are  designed  to
    comply with article 8, that should lead  to  success  on  human  rights
    grounds.

18. In other words, the rules strike the  proportionality  balance  at  the
    point where, unless excluded on suitability grounds, the appellant  has
    a right to enter the UK to live with his wife.

19. In terms of previous contrivance to frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
    rules, the ECO founded on (i) overstaying, (ii) illegally  working  and
    (iii) submitting multiple frivolous applications.

20. The appellant has a history of lengthy overstaying  and  may  not  even
    have been here lawfully in the first place.  Such instances are not  be
    condoned, but there are no aggravating features such as  use  of  false
    identity and fraudulent claims.

21. On working illegally, the ECO specifies a period of employment in  2012
    - 2013, which was legal, and another  from  April  to  September  2014,
    which was not legal, as the  application  leading  to  the  certificate
    permitting employment had by then been refused.   This  counts  against
    the appellant, but it is a relatively minor infringement.

22. Little is known of the circumstances of the applications  up  to  2013,
    although it seems likely they had slight foundations.   Proceedings  in
    2013 - 2014 failed, but had at  least  enough  substance  to  be  worth
    arguing, and not all eventual findings were adverse.  Proceedings  from
    2014 to 2018 were also  ultimately  unsuccessful  but,  as  Mr  Forrest
    submitted, the appellant had a stateable appeal to run.

23.  The  respondent  has  not   established   that   "multiple   frivolous
    applications"  is  a  fair  description  of  the  overall  history   of
    litigation.

24. It is to the appellant's credit, although not decisive in  his  favour,
    that he left the UK after the failure of the most recent proceedings.

25. The appellant has contrived in the past to frustrate the intentions  of
    the rules.  Whether that should  lead  to  discretion  being  exercised
    against him is a question of fact and degree, and  of  the  passage  of
    time.  Has his contrivance been such as should bar him from  entry  for
    the  rest  of  his  and   the   sponsor's   lifetime?    The   relevant
    considerations are the same as those invoked in relation to exceptional
    circumstances resulting in unjustifiably harsh consequences,  although,
    for the above reasons, I consider that the case  may  succeed  even  if
    short of that high test.

26. In my judgement, as matters stand today, the other terms of  the  rules
    being satisfied, and taking account of all matters referred to on  both
    sides, discretion should now be exercised in the appellant's favour.

27. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.   The
    decision substituted is that the appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

28. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


        Hugh Macleman

      21 January 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




