
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00856/2015
      IA/00867/2015
      IA/00873/2015
      IA/00885/2015                                IA



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2016                          |On 17 November 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 MRS MBP
                                        MR ZUP
                                  MISS FB
                           MASTER MOR
                   (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                         Appellant

                                  v


      SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                            Respondent
            ________________________________________

                       DECISION & REASONS
            ________________________________________

Representation:
For the Appellants: Mr A. Chohan, solicitor, instructed by S. Z solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. These appeals came before me for a resumed hearing, following my
decision of 7 July 2016 that First tier Tribunal Judge Phelan had erred
materially in law. The error of law decision is appended.

2. The First Appellant, to whom I shall henceforth refer to for convenience
as the Appellant, appeared before me and gave evidence. She relied upon her
statement of 7 September 2016, included in the Appellant's Bundle, which
was served on the Upper Tribunal on 7 September 2016. She stated that her
children all spoke English and that she had asked people who had moved back
to Pakistan with their children and they had said that their children were
very disturbed psychologically; forced to sit in the lower grades; started
feeling hostility and found themselves psychologically upset. She said that
her children had no idea of the language, dialects or social ties in
Pakistan. The Appellant stated that she was not in contact with her family
or her husband's family because nobody is willing to have contact with her
and her husband because their marriage was not accepted by either side. She
said that the family speaks English at home; that her daughter was 6 years
of age when she came to the United Kingdom and is now in year 5. Her son
was 2 years of age when they arrived and he started speaking his first
language here. She said that the children do not speak Urdu.

3. In response to my questions, the Appellant stated that she had suffered
from depression in Pakistan in 2006 after their families refused to accept
their marriage, although it was not identified as depression at that time.
After the birth of her baby she started feeling a little depressed and her
GP said she was suffering from postnatal depression. She is now being
followed-up with a psychiatrist and taking Sertraline 100mg daily. She said
that she did not exactly remember when her last contact was with her birth
family but it was in 2009 or 2008 and that talking about them was so
painful for her. She said that this was over the telephone and that bad
stuff had been said and threats made because they were not happy with her
marriage and did not accept it because they had wanted to arrange her
marriage to someone else. She married in June 2003.

4. In cross-examination by Mr Kotas, she said that she and her husband had
lived with her in-laws after their marriage until 2009 but had had a hard
time there and planned to come to the United Kingdom for education because
it was her dream to go abroad to study when she got the chance. The
Appellant stated that she undertook an MBA at Cardiff Metropolitan
University. Mr Kotas asked why she did not return to her home country after
she completed her MBA and she replied that circumstances changed - when she
came it was her intention to return to Pakistan, but after spending 5 and a
half years here it was very hard for her to take the children back and it
would be very hard for them to be accepted by the institutions there. She
said that she was not staying in the United Kingdom for herself but for the
sake of the children. They would be psychologically depressed and she would
not know what to do if they became depression patients like her. She
accepted that she is an overstayer. Mr Kotas suggested that the Appellant
was exaggerating her children's lack of knowledge of Urdu, which she denied
on the basis that they do not hear it spoken, they all speak English with
the neighbours and friends at school and they do not have contact with
family in Pakistan at all. She confirmed that both children were still in
primary school and that she had approached an Islamic University because
she wanted a general opinion from someone who is qualified there. She
confirmed that she had worked but had stopped because of her depression and
that her husband does little kinds of work helping neighbours. She said
that they were financially supported by their friends who helped them and
paid their rent. She said that they did not receive any benefits and that
they had some savings as well.

5. In re-examination by Mr Chohan, she said that she and her husband spoke
Pothwari, which is a dialect spoken in Rawalpindi and was a version of
Pakistani Punjabi which is not written and is not related to Urdu at all.
She said that this was their home language and that the kids had no idea
what they are talking about which was useful when they have to discuss
something secret.

6. In his submissions, Mr Kotas relied on the refusal letter of 5 December
2014 and the fact that under the Immigration Rules neither parent can meet
the private life requirements. The children have only been in the country
for 5 and a half years and so could not meet the seven year threshold. He
submitted that there is nothing compelling about this case. Whilst the
Appellant has had a difficult time, the difficulties with her in-laws
predated her arrival in the United Kingdom and she suffered from post natal
depression but on any construction to argue that those factors amount to
compelling circumstances is not a tenable submission. Mr Kotas submitted
that the case is basically that the children have been in the United
Kingdom for five and a half years and would have some difficulty adjusting
to life in Pakistan. He relied on the decision in AM (Malawi) at [39]. He
submitted that it was to put their case too high to state that the children
speak no Urdu because the children, especially the eldest, lived with the
in-laws and would have spoken the local language. Mr Kotas submitted that
the children's mother and father are educated and they would be able to
help with any transitional phase, bearing in mind they have savings and the
letters alluded to show that English is a medium taught in schools: page 52
of the Appellant's bundle. He submitted that it was simply not a
disproportionate interference with their private lives to expect them to
return. In respect of the
public interest factors, they were not financially independent cf. Rhuppiah
[2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [60]-[63] and were in part dependent on friends for
payment of the rent. Mr Kotas submitted that it was reasonable to expect
them to return to Pakistan and continue their life there; they are a close
knit family and would cope if they went back to Pakistan.

7. In his submissions, Mr Chohan invited me to take into account the oral
evidence as well as that in the bundle. He stated that it is true that the
Appellant came to the United Kingdom to further her education and she has
completed her Masters and applied for a Post Study Work visa. He submitted
that her background is well documented in the GP notes and psychiatric
report at [13A] & [B] where he has done an assessment and has also given
recommendations at the end that the Appellant should continue with
Setraline for 2 years; she should have access to CBT and needs continued
support from the Community Mental Health Team. He submitted that
she is academically very capable but her family has shunned her and this
has affected her psychologically and emotionally and she is very concerned
about her children, because she is ostracized and isolated from her family.
She has a supportive husband, it was a love marriage. Mr Chohan said that
it is true the family have been here for less than seven years but the
eldest child is eleven  years old and is in Year 6. The Appellant has
contacted someone in the educational department in Pakistan and schools do
teach English as a language but this is not the language that all the
subjects are taught in; many of the subjects are taught in Urdu and the
children do not know it. The children have no knowledge or memory of this.
The eldest daughter was only in school for less than a year in Pakistan so
had a very basic education whereas it is clear from page 63 of the bundle,
her school report, that she has confidence and academic ability. It would
impact on her confidence to expect her to return. Section 55 does not refer
to a cut off age or a threshold. It would be to Fatima's detriment because
she would have to go back and learn the language and start again. Fatima
could fall into a similar trap to her mother as she would not have an
extended family and would feel alien and ostracized unlike the other
children. Whilst the Appellant could help them, Fatima would have to get
through the matriculation system and pass each year before continuing. Mr
Chohan submitted that given the length of time they have been here and the
ages of the children, it would be disproportionate to the children's well-
being to remove them to Pakistan. The family are self-sufficient and
supporting themselves and are not claiming public funds. He asked me to
allow the appeal.

Decision

8. The Appellants do not qualify under any of the private or family life
provisions of the Immigration Rules. Consequently, it is necessary to
consider whether there are any compelling circumstances to justify
consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules cf. SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
387 at [33]. I find that the fact that the appellant has a history of
depression, firstly in Pakistan arising from the fact that her birth family
refused to accept her marriage and secondly, after the birth of her last
child on 8 June 2015, can constitute compelling circumstances, which
justify considering Article 8 outside the Rules.

9. I turn to section 117B of the Nationality Immigration & Asylum Act 2002
and the public interest considerations applicable in all cases. It is clear
from the judgment in Rhuppiah at [61] that whilst the Appellant speaks good
English the Appellant's ability to speak English is a neutral factor. It is
further clear from [63] that "financially independent" means financially
independent of others and since the Appellants are dependent upon friends
and neighbours, albeit they have some savings and both the Appellant and
her husband have worked in the United Kingdom, this is a negative factor.
Family life between the Appellants (bar the youngest who was born after the
refusal decision) was established prior to arrival in the United Kingdom
and has continued whilst the family has remained lawfully in the United
Kingdom. However, it is the case that the private lives of the family
members have been established at a time when their immigration status was
precarious and thus section 117B(5) applies as a negative factor. Neither
of the children are a qualifying child as the oldest has resided in the
United Kingdom for just over 6 years to date and thus section 117B(6) does
not apply.

10. Turning to the statutory obligation to have regard to the best
interests of the children, as set out in section 55 of the Borders,
Citizenship & Immigration Act 2009, it is necessary to have regard to the
need to promote and safeguard the welfare of the three children involved.
In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the Court of Appeal held:

"40. It will generally be in the child's best interests to live with his or
her parents and siblings as part of a family. That is usually a given
especially for younger children, absent domestic abuse or some other
reasons for believing the parents to be unsuitable. The approach of the
Secretary of State means that the stronger the public interest in removing
the parents, the more reasonable it will be to expect the child to leave.
But it seems to me that this involves focusing on the position of the
family as a whole. In cases where the seven year rule has not been
satisfied, that is plainly what has to be done.

47.     Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test where the
focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that leave must
be granted whenever the child's best interests are in favour of remaining.
I reject Mr Gill's submission that the best interests assessment
automatically resolves the reasonableness question. If Parliament had
wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of the leave
application, it would have said so. The concept of "best interests" is
after all a well established one. Even where the child's best interests are
to stay, it may still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave.
That will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the
links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed he should return.

11. In EV (Phillipines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874, Lord Justice Christopher
Clarke explained how a tribunal should apply the proportionality test where
wider public interest considerations are in play, in circumstances where
the best interests of the child dictate that he should remain in the UK:

"34. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present, the need
for immigration control outweighs the best interests of the children, it is
necessary to determine the relative strength of the factors which make it
in their best interests to remain here; and also to take account of any
factors that point the other way.

35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will depend
on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length of time that
they have been here; (c) how long they have been in education; (c) what
stage their education has reached; (d) to what extent they have become
distanced from the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)
how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what extent they will
have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that
country; and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere
with their family life or their rights (if they have any) as British
citizens.

36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer falls
to be given to the question: is it in the best interests of the child to
remain? The longer the child has been here, the more advanced (or critical)
the stage of his education, the looser his ties with the country in
question, and the more deleterious the consequences of his return, the
greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales. If it is
overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that he should not return, the
need to maintain immigration control may well not tip the balance. By
contrast if it is in the child's best interests to remain, but only on
balance (with some factors pointing the other way), the result may be the
opposite.

37. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into account
the strong weight to be given to the need to maintain immigration control
in pursuit of the economic well-being of the country and the fact that, ex
hypothesi, the applicants have no entitlement to remain. The immigration
history of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if they are overstayers,
or have acted deceitfully."

12. MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC), is a case
with some factual similarities to this case: the oldest child had resided
in the United Kingdom for 6 years and it was the view of her headteacher
and the family GP that it would be detrimental for her to be removed to
India. However, in allowing the appeal, the First tier Tribunal Judge at
[53] found that there would be access to good education in India and no
linguistic barriers.  On appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it was found that
the First tier Judge erred materially in law on the basis that: "There is
nothing to indicate that he factored into the equation his earlier finding
that there was good education readily available in India to both children
or that there were no linguistic or cultural barriers to their living back
in India with their parents." The Upper Tribunal concluded: "54.
    Considering these factors overall we do not find that the best
interests of either of the children would lie in remaining anywhere else
than with their parents and that their parents can reasonably be expected
to return to India." Relevant to the consideration of the public interest
was the fact that the parents were long-term overstayers.

13. Applying the guidance set out in the above cases. I make the following
findings:

13.1. the family has resided in the United Kingdom since 16 March 2011,
when the Appellant's husband and two children joined her after her entry on
4 October 2010;

13.2 the Appellant had leave to remain, firstly as a student and then as a
Tier 1 Post Study worker until 5 September 2014. The application for leave
to remain on the basis of her private and family life was made on 3
September 2014 and was thus made whilst the Appellant had extant leave. The
Respondent in her decision of 5 December 2014 expressly treated the
application as one to vary leave to remain. It follows that by virtue of
section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 she and by extension, her
dependants, have resided in the UK lawfully throughout;

13.3. The oldest child, F, was born on 1 January 2006, was five years of
age when she arrived in the United Kingdom and is now 10 years of age and
in Year 6 at primary school. Her school report for 2015-2016 commends her
excellent attitude to learning and homework [AB 54]. Her brother, M, born
on 16 November 2008, was two years of age on arrival. He is now 6 years of
age and in Year 3 at Primary School and his school report for 2015-2016
describes him as "sensible, polite and well-mannered. The youngest
daughter, M, was born in the United Kingdom on 8 June 2015.

13.4. The Appellant has been suffering from post natal depression since the
birth of her daughter last year and has been receiving treatment for this
in the form of Sertraline 100mg once daily. She previously suffered from
depression whilst living in Pakistan due to the behaviour towards her of
her parents-in-law. It is clear from the psychiatric report of Dr Nazir
that part of her depression is linked to apprehensions regarding the
family's immigration status and difficulties they would encounter on
return, including: the safety of her children; worsening depression and the
absence of access to appropriate treatment: AB 13A-B. He found her to be
suffering from a recurrent depressive disorder. The contents of the
psychiatric report are consistent with the letters from Dr Siddiqui at AB
35-36; 38-39 and from Dr Dawn Harris at AB 41-45 and Debbie Hunter, the
Perinatal CPN at 48-50. I accept the contents of these letters as
corroborating the fact that the Appellant is suffering from depression and
I accept Dr Nazir's recommendation that the Appellant should have access to
CBT and continued support from the Community Mental Health team. I find
that there is a serious risk that the Appellant's depression would continue
or worsen if removed to Pakistan, absent the current support she receives
and in light of her concerns as to difficulties the family would face on
return;

13.5. The Appellant further seeks to rely on a letter from Muhammad Zubair
of the International Islamic University dated 28 August 2016 in which he
states that the education system in Pakistan is based on Urdu and Arabic is
also required and that Urdu is a very complex language to learn [AB 51].
She further submitted a letter from the Principal of Aamir Public School,
Rawalpindi, sent by fax on 12 September 2016, in which he states that,
whilst his is an English medium school, he was particularly concerned about
the lack of knowledge of Urdu because some of the subjects are taught in
Urdu rather than English and both children would have to start with the
very basic learning group ie Reception [AB 52].

13.6. The Appellant's evidence was that she and her husband speak English
at home to the children and that she and her husband also speak to each
other in Pothwari, a Rawalpindi dialect which is an oral form of Punjabi
and entirely unrelated to Urdu. I accept her evidence and I find that the
three children have no knowledge of Urdu, given that the languages spoken
at home are Pothwari, which the children do not understand and English.

13.7. I find that it would not be in the best interests of F, the oldest
child, to return to Pakistan. This is because she is now in Year 6 at
Primary school in the United Kingdom whereas the evidence, which Mr Kotas
did not dispute, is that she would have to commence school again in
reception ie with the 4-5 year olds. I find this would be detrimental not
only to her education and learning but also to her general welfare,
particularly emotional and social, as she would be in a class with children
5-6 years younger. Whilst it may be that she could progress through the
school more quickly once she has mastered the basics of Urdu, the period of
time in which she would be in reception class would be upon return to
Pakistan, with all the consequent upheaval and disruption to family life. I
thus find that [39] of the decision in AM (Malawi) I distinguishable. I
accept Mr Kotas' submission that the Appellant and her husband are educated
and would undoubtedly do their best for the children in the event of a
return to Pakistan, however, I find the Appellant's ability to support her
children and present a positive outlook as to their changed circumstances
would be compromised by her depression, which would be contrary to the best
interests of all three children.

13.8 I also accept the Appellant's evidence, which is consistent with what
she has discussed with her community mental health team and psychiatrists,
that she had difficulties with her parents-in-law, with whom she and her
husband resided in Rawalpindi prior to coming to the United Kingdom and
this caused her to become depressed. This is because they do not support
the marriage. I also accept that the Appellant has become estranged from
her birth family for the same reason. I find that it would not be
reasonable to expect the Appellant and the family as a whole to return to
live with her parents-in-law. Consequently, they would be returning without
any expectation of support from the extended family.

13.9 Thus, applying the principles set out in EV (Philippines) I find that
the two oldest children, who are both at primary school in the United
Kingdom, the oldest child in her final year, are now distanced from
Pakistan, because of their ages when they left and the absence of contact
with relatives in Pakistan. I find that, whilst this connection may be
renewable, they will have linguistic, social and educational difficulties
in adapting to life in Pakistan, absent support from the extended family. I
find that the decision in MK (India) is distinguishable both in that the
Upper Tribunal found in that case that there were no linguistic or
educational barriers in India and the parents were overstayers.

13.10. Having found that it is not in the best interests of F to leave the
United Kingdom and return to Pakistan, I now consider whether it is
nevertheless reasonable for the family to return to Pakistan as a unit. I
find that, whilst the public interest considerations are very finely
balanced in this case [9 above refers] for the reasons set out above and
the fact that the family has been lawfully resident throughout their stay
in the United Kingdom for the past 5 and a half years, that it would be
disproportionate to require them to return to Pakistan.

13.11. The appeals of all four Appellants are allowed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

16 November 2016

