
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00005/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype Remote Hearing  |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 15th October 2020                          |On 26 October 2020           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Md Moynul Islam
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Syed-Ali, Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary of State
but nonetheless I refer to the parties hereinafter as they were described
before the First-tier Tribunal.

The respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Lawrence, who in a decision promulgated on 28th January 2020 allowed the
appellant's appeal against the refusal of his student leave, allowing the
appeal on human rights grounds.

The Secretary of State submitted that in allowing the appeal on that basis
that the respondent's decision was unlawful as the First-tier Tribunal
Judge had failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusion.

A short immigration history is, according to the Home Office file, that the
appellant's spouse first entered the United Kingdom on 29th October 2010
with leave to 28th October 2011 and on 10th August 2011 was granted leave
to remain as a student until 26th May 2014.  Quite when the applicant
entered the United Kingdom is not clear.  That said, he made an application
to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 14th May 2014.  The respondent,
not being satisfied he was qualified to leave under Part 6A of the
Immigration Rules, made a decision on 17th June 2015 to remove him from the
UK by way of directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and
Nationality Act 2006.  He had no Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies
because the CAS submitted was assigned by the London School of Technology.
This had been checked on 30th April 2015 and the college was not listed as
a Tier 4 sponsor as at that date.  Judge Herbert, however, allowed the
appeal on the basis that the appellant's inability to provide a CAS letter
was due to matters outside his control as the respondent was required to
return his original documentation so he could supply his CAS to a different
college.

In a letter dated 5th July 2017 (some time after the appeal) the Secretary
of State referenced the application dated 14th May 2014 and confirmed that
it would suspend consideration of his application for a period of 60
calendar days.  It was stated to be open to him to obtain a new CAS for a
course of study at a fully licensed Tier 4 educational sponsor and to
submit an application to vary the grounds of his original application.  The
letter stated:

"In order to assist you in obtaining a new CAS we have enclosed with this
letter an information leaflet which you can take to any potential new
sponsors.  This leaflet explains to them that you have an application
outstanding and that your previous Tier 4 educational sponsor's licence has
been revoked."

The Secretary of State also enclosed the appellant's passport, stating: "If
you decide to obtain a new CAS then your sponsor will need to see your
passport."

Subsequently on 7th January 2019 the Secretary of State refused the
application on the basis that the Secretary of State was not satisfied he
had produced a valid CAS because the CAS had been cancelled by the UK Visas
& Immigration.  Seemingly, the applicant provided no new CAS and the
application was decided on the basis of the CAS assigned by the London
School of Technology.

The matter was appealed and in the determination of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Lawrence, which is under challenge, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
acknowledged the two Home Office letters dated 5th July 2017 stating that
the appellant's leave was to be extended by 60 days in order for him to
find a Tier 4 licensed sponsor and instructions referred to that the
appellant was requested to follow in order to book a Secure English
Language Test and it was stated that he would be able to do so despite his
passport having expired.

Judge Lawrence correctly considered that the appeal was covered by
provisions saving the rights to appeal that were available under the
version of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as
in force immediately prior to 20th October 2014 ("the saved provisions").
As such, the grounds of appeal were the "old grounds of appeal" and not
merely confined to human rights grounds.

However, the judge added at paragraph 23 of his decision: "Some three years
after Judge Herbert OBE heard the appellant's appeal, the appellant's
situation appears not to have improved in terms of his stated wish to
progress his education in the United Kingdom".  At paragraph 24 the judge
stated:

"The appellant does not suggest he is now eligible for a grant of leave to
remain under the Immigration Rules and I do not consider that there is any
obvious eligibility within the various categories of the Rules.  The
appellant has not, for example, suggested that there are matters that would
constitute very significant obstacles to his reintegration in Bangladesh if
he was required to return to that country.  I do not find therefore that
the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules."

The judge added at paragraph 25: "There is a lack of detail or independent
evidence as to the extent of the efforts the appellant has made to obtain a
CAS."  The judge, however, found that the appellant was unable to provide a
CAS for reasons outside his control despite being given additional time and
that there was an "absence of any suggested or obvious way forward" and
concluded that "I consider that the respondent has yet to correct the
illegality that was identified by Judge Herbert OBE".

The judge on that basis proceeded to allow the appeal because he accepted
the appellant's claim to be unable to provide a CAS for reasons outside of
his control and the respondent had yet to correct the illegality identified
by Judge Herbert OBE.

The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the judge had failed to
give adequate reasons when finding on a material matter:

"However, I consider that the respondent has yet to correct the illegality
that was identified by Judge Herbert OBE, in that the appellant has yet to
be provided with any real opportunity to obtain a new sponsor to continue
his studies in the United Kingdom, as he wishes to do, and I therefore
consider that the decision under appeal was not in accordance with the
law",

Nor did the judge give adequate reasoning for finding the removal of the
appellant from the United Kingdom was contrary to Section 6 of the Human
Rights Act.  It was pointed out in the grounds of appeal that the
respondent's bundle included two Home Office letters dated 5th July 2017
giving the appellant leave extended by 60 days for him to find a new Tier 4
licensed sponsor with instructions as to how to an English language test.

It was asserted in the grounds that to find that the Secretary of State had
failed to correct the illegality indicated by Judge Herbert was a
misdirection which infected the ultimate conclusion, rendering it unsound.
The appellant failed to attend the hearing to elaborate his contention that
he had been unable to obtain a substitute CAS and the judge had found at
paragraph 25 that: "There is a lack of detail or independent evidence as to
the extent of the efforts the appellant has made to obtain a CAS."

The judge also found that there was a breach to the appellant's right to a
private life under Article 8 and that the judge recorded in his assessment,
paragraph 24 that the appellant had not advanced any argument in his
grounds of appeal that would suggest he would face any obstacles to
reintegration in Bangladesh and further: "There is little detail in the
evidence as to the life that the appellant is enjoying in the United
Kingdom presently", adding that little weight should be attached to a
private life that was established when in the United Kingdom precariously.

It was therefore asserted that it was unclear on what basis the judge found
the appellant's private life would be breached by return to his home
country.

Having listened to the submissions from both Mr Syed-Ali and Mr Jarvis, who
helpfully provided a skeleton argument, I do find an error of law.  As is
clear in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision, the appellant did not
attend the First-tier Tribunal hearing and provided no reasonable
explanation for not doing so.  Nonetheless, the judge placed material
weight on his written assertion that despite having been granted additional
time by the Home Office he could not obtain another CAS because he could
not find another college to take him.  As set out in the Secretary of
State's decision dated 7th January 2019, 'his sponsor's licence had been
revoked'.  The appellant had, however been given the opportunity to obtain
another CAS and had failed to do so.  The Secretary of State's decision
cannot be undermined on the basis of illegality or procedural unfairness by
the actions of third parties, in this case the new colleges who refused to
give the appellant a further CAS.  Dharmeshkumar Bhupendrabhai Patel &
Anor, R (on the application of) v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] EWCA Civ 229, set out in paragraph 28:

"There is an exception to the general rule, when public law fairness
requires a period of grace for an individual to identify a new sponsor; but
the authorities make clear that that is confined to cases in which the
problem that has arisen was of the Secretary of State's own making, e.g. if
the Secretary of State revokes a sponsor's licence or a student's CAS."

As Mr Jarvis pointed out, the refusal by third party colleges to give the
appellant a new CAS was not the decision of the Secretary of State, who had
provided further leave for the appellant to secure a CAS.

Further, the decision of Judge Lawrence to rely on the decision of Judge
Herbert was flawed because (a) the material reasons for Judge Herbert
reaching his decision in 2016 no longer persisted.  The appellant had been
given an opportunity to obtain a new CAS and further, the reasoning behind
Judge Herbert's decision has been undermined by Kaur & Anor v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1101 whereby the court
clarified the legal impact of the Secretary of State's retention of
passports.  In essence, Section 17 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment
of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 specifically provides for the retention of
passports by the Secretary of State and secondly, as stated at paragraph
31:

"Whilst..., in theory, a viable challenge to the exercise of the
discretionary power might lie in the existence of exceptional circumstances
which made the retention unfair or otherwise unlawful, the appellant has
come nowhere close to demonstrating such circumstances in this case."

First, I note that the letter of 5th July 2017 specifically enclosed the
passport of the appellant and secondly, the appellant provided no further
evidence to Judge Lawrence as to his efforts made to secure another CAS.
There was no causal nexus between the appellant's failure to get a CAS and
the retention of documentation.  Further, the judge materially erred by
failing to have regard to the decision of the Supreme Court in Patel & Ors
v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 in finding
without any evidence that the appellant had established a private life
under Article 8(1) in the United Kingdom.  Indeed the appellant did not
even attend the hearing.

I note that in particular Mr Syed-Ali did not pursue any grounds in
relation to Article 8 and pursued quite clearly the matter only in relation
to the Immigration Rules.  Under the Immigration Rules as set out in the
decision letter of 7th January 2019 the appellant did not satisfy the
requirements of the Immigration Rules, paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to
paragraph 117(b) of Appendix A and 245XZ(d).  The appellant had failed to
provide specified documents, in particular Confirmation of Acceptance for
Studies, CAS.

As such, I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence and
refuse the appeal in relation to the Immigration Rules and secondly,
bearing in mind that Mr Syed-Ali specifically stated he did not pursue the
matter on Article 8 grounds and that there was a complete absence of
evidence in relation to the appellant's private life, I find no Article 8
protected life, specifically with reference to paragraph 57 of Patel v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 and refuse the
appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence is set aside.  I remake
the appeal and dismiss the appeal of Mr Md Moynul Islam under the
Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed    Helen  Rimington                               Date  22nd  October
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed    Helen  Rimington                               Date  22nd  October
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
