

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/01493/2016

                                                     IA/01495/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 December 2017                       |     On 11 January 2018             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

|                         |Lorna Sylvia Peddy       | First Appellant         |
|                         |                         |                         |
|                         |Wayne Holmes             |Second Appellant         |
|                         |                         |                         |


                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr V Omipede, instructed by Stevjeme & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants are citizens of Jamaica.  They are  married  to  each  other.
The first appellant was born in 1966 and has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
since July 2001.  The second appellant was born in 1967  and  has  lived  in
the United Kingdom since arriving with the appellants'  son  in  June  2008.
They each entered with leave as visitors.  As far as  I  can  see,  in  each
case they arrived with a visitor's visa valid for the customary  six  months
and remained although they  did  introduce  themselves  to  the  immigration
authorities in March 2010 when they applied for leave.  As far as I can  see
the applications were unsuccessful but that is of little,  if  any,  present
relevance.

They each appeal a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  3  March  2016
refusing them leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   The  First-tier
Tribunal's  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal   are   essentially   very
straightforward.  Neither of them had lived in the United Kingdom  for  long
enough to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  neither  of  them
satisfied  the  judge  that  there  were  very  significant   obstacles   to
reintegration into life in Jamaica.

The judge conspicuously considered the requirements of Section 117B  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She accepted that  they  have
a good relationship with their grandchildren  but  not  that  theirs  was  a
parental relationship.  The grandchildren were in  the  day-to-day  care  of
their own mother.  The  appellants  were  financially  dependent  on  family
members and friends.  The judge was not dealing with  an  asylum  claim  and
she did not accept that the hostility in Jamaican  society  towards  people,
such as the second appellant, who are former soldiers  was  such  that  they
had a well-founded  fear  of  serious  ill-treatment.   The  judge  did  not
believe he would be regarded as an "informer" in the event of return.

The judge acknowledged  some  supporting  evidence,  including  a  character
reference from one Pastor Bamigbade from the Redeemed  Christian  Church  of
God.  I am slightly concerned that  Pastor  Bamigbade  describes  the  first
appellant as a person of "good repute" without any  acknowledgement  of  her
discreditable immigration history. She may have  may  commendable  qualities
but a character  reference  that  ignores  her  blatant  disregard  for  the
requirements of the immigration rules discredits itself.

Be that as it may, the judge clearly  gave  some  weight  to  the  community
support but said at paragraph 27:

  "I take into account the character references of the appellants'  bundle,
  including from Pastor Bamigbade from the  Redeemed  Christian  Church  of
  God.  In conclusion and in taking the evidence as a  whole,  I  find  the
  appellants built up their private life in the full knowledge  that  their
  immigration status was precarious.  I find that [the first appellant] has
  worked unlawfully in this country.  I find that  little  weight  must  be
  attached to a private life that was built up when an applicant was in the
  country unlawfully or where his immigration  status  was  precarious.   I
  find  that  any  interference  with  their  Article  8  rights  will   be
  proportionate.  I  find  that  immigration  control  was  in  the  public
  interest."

I have considered the arguments before me and the Upper Tribunal's grant  of
permission but  I  really  cannot  see  anything  wrong  with  the  decision
complained of.

Mr Omipede particularly asked me to  consider  the  concern  the  appellants
expressed at the possibility of return because  of  the  second  appellant's
history but I repeat this is not an appeal against  the  refusal  of  asylum
and the judge has given appropriate consideration to  the  limited  evidence
before her. There was  no  objective  evidence  to  elevate  the  expressed,
subjective, fear into an objective reality.

It seems to be accepted that the appellants play a significant part  in  the
life of their young grandchildren.  That  is  not  a  strong  reason  to  be
allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom  when  theirs  is  not  a  parental
relationship. There is no basis for deciding that the judge gave  unlawfully
little weight to the grandparental relationship.

In short although I have considered the points  made  before  me  I  see  no
basis for interfering with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  I
regard as sound in law.

It follows therefore that I dismiss the appeal of these appellants.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 9 January 2018                |
|Judge                                |                                     |







