
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05832/2015
                                                               IA/05836/2015
                                                               IA/05838/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 August 2016               |On 29 September 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                           SA & Miss and Master JA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                             DECISION & REASONS



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Otchie, counsel instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer



1.   The Appellants are nationals of Ghana and comprise a mother, born on 1
December 1978 and her two children who are twins born on 27 March 2006. The
first Appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom in 2002 in
possession of a six month visit visa and thereafter overstayed. The two
children were born in this country. The first Appellant applied for leave
to remain under Article 8 of ECHR on 27 April 2012 and this application was
refused in a decision made on 27 January 2015. Appeals were lodged against
these decisions, which came before First tier Tribunal Judge Miller for
hearing on 17 December 2015.

2.   In a decision and reasons promulgated on 11 January 2016, he dismissed
the appeals. The Judge was not satisfied that the first Appellant had
separated from the children's father, despite her evidence that she and the
children had not seen him since 2011.  He did not find her evidence to be
credible and at [22] did not accept that the first Appellant had severed
all links with remaining family members and friends in Ghana. At [25] the
Judge held that it would be proportionate for the Appellants to leave the
United Kingdom and with regard to section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002, that it
would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

3.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought in time on the
basis that the Judge failed to treat the children's best interests as a
primary consideration. It was pointed out that the children would be
eligible for British citizenship on 27 March 2016, having been born in the
United Kingdom. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
Canavan on 19 July 2016 on the basis that:

    "It is at least arguable that the judge did not conduct a full
    evaluative assessment of the children's best interests and their ties
    to the United Kingdom in accordance with the principles contained in EV
    (Philippines) and ZH (Tanzania). It is arguable that his finding at
    paragraph 20 that casts doubt on whether he considered the best
    interests of the children as a primary consideration."



Hearing

4.   At the hearing before me, Mr Otchie confirmed that applications for
British citizenship had been made on behalf of the children. He submitted
that the Judge had materially erred in that the majority of his decision
focuses on the actions of the parents rather than the best interests of the
children and no reference was made to the judgments in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC
34, EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197
(IAC). He submitted that there is a difference between the assessment at
paragraph 276ADE(iv) and section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002. In response, Mr
Avery submitted that the Judge could not be blamed for failing to engage
with paragraph 276ADE(iv) given that the Appellants' representative at the
First tier Tribunal hearing conceded that the appeals could not succeed
under the Immigration Rules. Mr Avery further sought to rely on the Court
of Appeal judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 to the effect that
the assessment of reasonableness is not confined to the children but also
encompasses the status of the parents.



Decision

5.   I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons. I find that
the First tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in his assessment of the
best interests of the two minor Appellants. The Judge's reasons are set out
at [19]-[26] of the decision but despite recording the submission by the
Appellant's representative that "it will be disproportionate and contrary
to section 55 for them to be removed, as the children were just under 10
years of age and had never been to Ghana" at no stage does the Judge engage
with any analysis of the best interests of the children. This analysis is
mandatory in light of the section 55 statutory duty and a failure to
conduct a reasoned analysis of where the children's best interests lie and
why is clearly necessary as part of any proportionality assessment.

6.   However, I do not accept Mr Otchie's submission that the Judge erred
in failing to consider paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules. It
is clear from paragraph 276ADE(1) that the requirement must be met at the
date of application. The application in this case was made on 27 April
2012, at which stage the children were 6 years of age and thus did not
qualify as they had not lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years.

7.   However, there is no such requirement in respect of section 117B(6) of
the NIAA 2002, which provides that "the public interest does not require
the person's removal where (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting
relationship with a qualifying child and (b) it would not be reasonable to
expect the child to leave the United Kingdom." A "qualifying child" is
defined at section 117D (1) as a person under the age of 18 who is either
(a) a British citizen or (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a
continuous period of seven years or more. Whilst the Judge found, in all
the circumstances of the case, that it would be reasonable to expect the
second and third appellants to leave the United Kingdom, I do not consider
that this finding is sustainable absent any assessment of the best
interests of the minor Appellants. Moreover, it is clear from the judgment
of Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [46] that with
reference to section 117B(6) "where the seven year rule is satisfied, it is
a factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave to remain being
granted."

8.   Applications for British citizenship have now been made in respect of
the two minor Appellants, based on their birth and ten years residence in
the United Kingdom. Whilst Mr Avery was unable to assist with regard to
whether or not a decision has been made, he did not seek to argue that the
applications will not be granted. In these circumstances, I find it would
not be reasonable for the two minor Appellants to leave the United Kingdom,
given that they were born in the United Kingdom and have resided
continuously in this country for more than ten years. I find that it would
be contrary to their best interests to be required to leave. The children
have clearly developed social, cultural and educational ties that I find
that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling
reason to the contrary cf. Azimi-Moayed at [13](iii). I do not consider
that the fact that the first Appellant, their mother, is an overstayer
constitutes a compelling reason so as to outweigh her children's best
interests, in light of the judgment in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4. It
follows that, in light of section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002, the public
interest does not require removal of the first Appellant and thus her
removal to Ghana would not be proportionate.

9.   I find that First tier Tribunal Judge Miller erred materially in law.
I substitute a decision allowing the appeals of all three Appellants.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

28 September 2016

