

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08989/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 December 2016              | On 19 January 2017             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                        MR KHAJA MASI UDDIN MOHAMMED

                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Shilliday, counsel instructed by Rashid &
Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                       ______________________

                       DECISION & REASONS
                       ______________________

1. This appeal came before me for hearing on 17 February 2016, following
the grant of permission to appeal to the Secretary of State for the Home
Department, who sought to challenge the decision of a First tier Tribunal
Judge to allow the appeal.

2. In a decision and reasons dated 21 March 2016 [appended], I found that
the First tier Tribunal Judge had made a material error of law and I
adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing following judgment in the test
ETS cases of SM & Qadir. The First tier Tribunal Judge's findings as to the
evidence were not challenged and were therefore, preserved.

Hearing

3. At the hearing before me, Mr Shilliday confirmed that he relied on the
skeleton argument of 1.9.15 drafted by previous counsel, Mr Palmer and the
Appellant's bundle dated 26.8.15. He called the Appellant to give evidence
and he confirmed that he had undertaken an MBA and his dissertation had
been in the subject of strategic analysis and this was all in English. He
passed his undergraduate degree in 2008. The Appellant said that he can
speak fluently in English, Urdu and Hindi. He can speak but not write in
Arabic and Telugu (Hyderabad state language).

4. Upon cross-examination by Mr Tarlow, the Appellant stated that he had
taken an English language test in September and November 2011 because he
had needed to take it again regarding the score in reading. The Appellant
confirmed that he had taken the test at Elizabeth College in Oxford and
that he was aware that the Secretary of State is taking issue with the way
the College conducted the tests. The Appellant stated that the procedures
on both tests were the same. He said that when he arrived at the college
they checked his identity and he entered the hall where the tests were
taking place. He said that he did the reading test one day and on the other
day he had done the speaking and writing test. He confirmed that he had
taken the test himself. He was asked what he had to do when he took the
reading test and he said that he had to write the answer from the passage
but he was not sure what the questions were at the exam because this was in
2011. He confirmed that he was given a sheet of paper which had questions
on it and he needed to write an answer. He said that with the writing test
the same happened, there was a sheet of paper. In respect of the speaking
test he had to speak on a small topic and then explain it. There was no re-
examination

5. In his submissions, Mr Tarlow relied upon the refusal letter. He said
that the Home Office position is that the report of Professor French
highlights difficulties with automatic testing systems. There is a
probability that false positive results are lower than the report of Dr
Harrison would suggest;
the criminal investigation report into Elizabeth College was conducted by
trained criminal investigators and it is unclear that the Appellant himself
took the tests. He acknowledged the Appellant's educational certificates
but submitted that there are a number of reasons why he may not have wished
to take the test himself. He asked for the appeal to be dismissed.

6. In his submissions, Mr Shilliday submitted that the appeal should be
allowed. He submitted that the report of DI Carter on Elizabeth College did
not take the matter further in that there were no criminal proceedings
against anyone (at Elizabeth college) and it does not effect the Appellant
in that [11] of the report makes clear that 69% of the results were invalid
but 31% were valid. The Appellant says he was one of the 31%. There is no
evidence that he was not one of those who took a test. He submitted that is
was for the Secretary of State to show on the balance of probabilities that
the Appellant did use deception, that burden having shifted upon the
Appellant's innocent explanation (i) his written and live evidence that he
did take the test and (ii) he had no reason to lie.

7. In 2010 the Appellant wrote a 20,000 word dissertation in English which
he passed. He has taken an undergraduate degree in India primarily in
English but not just in English. He speaks English, Hindi and Urdu but is
not fluent in Arabic. He is a perfectly adequate linguist. Given that the
burden is upon the Secretary of State and he is known to be a proficient
speaker of English before, there is no possible way that the Secretary of
State can rely on the generic evidence and make out her case cf. SM &
Qadir. Mr Shilliday sought to rely upon paragraph 3.4. of Mr Palmer's
skeleton argument and submitted that it was relevant how he performed under
cross examination and there was no reason for him to have cheated. Mr
Tarlow submits that there may be reasons but this is speculative and it is
inconceivable why the Appellant would cheat.
At G1 of the Respondent's bundle when the Appellant was interviewed at port
late at night having been told something quite startling when he professed
in English "it's not fake - I have submitted my assignments and
dissertation". He has told the Tribunals this and the Secretary of State.
In all the circumstances, there was no reason for him to cheat and the
Secretary of State cannot make out her case.

Decision

8. The Appellant was not an impressive witness. He stated in cross-
examination that he attended Elizabeth College in September and November
2011 because he had to re-take the reading part of the test. However, the
documentary evidence, as set out in the look-up tool database at Appendix E
of the Respondent's bundle is that he took the listening and reading test
on 15 November 2011 and the writing and speaking test on 14 December 2011.
In his witness statement of 26 August 2015 at [7] the Appellant states that
he attended the test centre on 14 November 2011, rather than 15 November
2011 and 14 December 2011.

9. In his evidence before me the Appellant stated that Elizabeth College
was in Oxford, whereas in his witness statement at [7] he states that the
college was in Vauxhall and he chose it because it had the earliest date
available and was more convenient for him to travel there. In neither his
oral evidence nor his witness statement did the Appellant give any
particular details about the process of the test or what questions he was
asked. His evidence in both respects is vague. Even allowing for the
passage of time, in light of the differences between his accounts given at
different times I do not find the Appellant to be a credible witness.

10. The look-up tool database at Appendix E of the Respondent's bundle
shows that the Appellant's TOEIC test results were "questionable" in
relation to 15 November 2011 and "invalid" in relation to 14 December 2011.


11. I have regard to the recent Presidential Upper Tribunal decision in R
(on the application of Saha and Another) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department (Secretary of State's duty of candour) [2017] UKUT 00017 (IAC)
which concerned an Applicant who had also undertaken his TOEIC at Elizabeth
College. In the course of their judgment the Upper Tribunal considered the
witness statement of Mr Sewell, Lead Analyst in relation to Secure English
Language Testing ("SELT"), with training in Government intelligence
analysis techniques. The Upper Tribunal held as follows:

      "(58) Since February 2014, Mr Sewell and the members of the team
which he    leads have been engaged in analysing data provided to the Home
Office by   ETS. His witness statement contains the following especially
material    passage:

      "Wider analysis of tests conducted by the Elizabeth College Test
Centre and  the results of voice analysis conducted by [ETS] reveals that
there was   widespread abuse of testing by the Elizabeth College Test
Centre. Multiple       candidates that reportedly sat speaking and writing
tests at the same time in    the same classroom as the Applicant were
deemed to have used proxy test    takers by [ETS]. This shows that the
Elizabeth College Test Centre was not   operating genuine tests under
genuine test conditions at the time that the       Applicant claims to have
undertaken [his] tests. Therefore none of the results    from these test
sessions could be considered genuine even if the candidate had      sat the
test in person."

12. The Home Office (Criminal Investigations (Immigration) have produced a
report into Elizabeth College entitled "Project Faï¿½ade - criminal inquiry
into abuse of the TOEIC" dated 15th May 2015, written by Detective
Inspector Andrew Carter. The report provides the following definitions:
"invalid - where evidence exists of proxy test taking and/or impersonation"
and "questionable - test takers who should re-test due to administrative
irregularities." The statistics in relation to Elizabeth College, which
were referred to by Mr Shilliday in his submissions, are that between
18.10.11 and 26.9.12, Elizabeth College undertook 3919 TOEIC speaking and
writing tests of which ETS identified 2074 as invalid, 1845 as questionable
thus 69% invalid. The submission on behalf of the Appellant was that he was
one of the 31%. However, by way of comparison, the report recorded the
following test figures at public test centres in Bloomsbury and Westminster
over the period 11.4.11-9.2.14 during which time 3 results were invalid and
none were questionable. One invalid test taker at Elizabeth College was
interviewed and admitted that a "pilot" (imposter) had sat the test of his
behalf, arranged by a named agent.

13. The written submissions on behalf of the Appellant acknowledge at [1.5]
that, in light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in SM & Qadir (ETS -
evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 000229 (IAC) the Respondent's
evidence (at that time simply the statements of Ms Collings and Mr
Millington) was sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of proving
that the Appellant obtained his TOEIC through dishonesty, but contended
that the Respondent has failed to discharge the legal burden.

14. I do not accept this submission. Whilst the Appellant clearly has a
good standard of spoken English and was very likely capable of taking and
passing the test himself, his oral evidence was not consistent with his
previous witness statement; he was unable in his oral evidence to remember
the dates he took the tests or even the location of the test centre. His
evidence was vague, lacked detail and was unconvincing.

15. I consider that the evidence before me, particularly the test results
contained in the look up database, which expressly found that the 14.12.11
results were invalid ie there was evidence of a proxy or impersonation,
coupled with the specific Home Office report into Elizabeth College
covering the period during which the Appellant took the TOEIC tests and
which found that more than two thirds of the test results were invalid, are
sufficient, on the balance of probabilities, for the Respondent to
discharge the burden of proving that the Appellant obtained his TOEIC
through dishonesty. The recent decision in R (on the application of Saha
and Another) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Secretary of
State's duty of candour) [2017] UKUT 00017 (IAC) simply confirms that
widespread abuse of testing was taking place at Elizabeth College.

15. The appeal is dismissed.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

18 January 2017

