
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08905/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 11th October 2013                          |On 17th October 2013         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                FOZIA HAMEED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Hussain instructed by RKS Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen -Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Birkby, promulgated on  the  16th  July  2013,  in  which  he
        dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
        application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse
        of a person present and settled here  under  both  the  Immigration
        Rules and on human rights grounds.


     2. In relation to the Rules the Judge found the  Appellant  could  not
        meet the requirements relating to maintenance for the  reasons  set
        out in paragraphs 13 to 16 of the determination.   In  relation  to
        the human rights claim the Judge states this was considered both by
        reference to the ECHR and the Immigration Rules.  The core  finding
        is to be  found  at  paragraph  19  of  the  determination  in  the
        following terms:


              19. I am satisfied that the Appellant and  Sponsor  are  in  a
   subsisting                       relationship.  I am satisfied  that  the
   Appellant is expecting a child  in                       August  of  this
   year.  I  am  further  satisfied  that  both  the   Appellant   and   the
   Sponsor enjoy a family and private life in the  United  Kingdom.   To  an
          extent therefore the decision of the  Respondent  interferes  with
   the                     Appellant's right to respect for her private  and
   family life. However, I find                  that the decision is lawful
   and pursues the legitimate aim of immigration                    control.
   I also find that the  decision  is  proportionate.   The  Appellant  does
     not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for settlement as  a
              spouse.  The Appellant states that  she  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom as a                 student.  She came  in  May  2011.   She  no
   longer studies.  She married her                   husband on  30th  July
   2012.    Her   husband   started   work   in   the   UK   on   2nd   July
   2012.  He has provided evidence that he works in the United Kingdom for a
                  company called Hyder Beds.  The most  recent  evidence  of
   his payslips                 indicates that his net take-home pay exceeds
   �300 per week. It is  clear  that                the  Appellant  and  the
   Sponsor would have been aware  of  the  need  to  meet                the
   Immigration  Rules  at  the  time  that  they  married  in   the   United
     Kingdom.  I accept that the Appellant  is  expecting  a  child  in  the
   United                  Kingdom and that will  have  a  great  effect  on
   their lives.  The Sponsor                     stated that the Appellant's
   family, her mother, father, brothers and sisters                 were  in
   Pakistan.  He stated that  the  Appellant  lived  with  them  before  she
     came to  the  United  Kingdom.   I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  no
              insurmountable obstacles which  would  prevent  the  Appellant
   returning to                 Pakistan in re-establishing her life  there.
   I also find that the Sponsor could                 return with her should
   he   choose   so   that   they   could   establish   a   life    together
   in Pakistan.  I believe that  the  Appellant  would  have  the  care  and
   support                 of her own  immediate  family  during  the  early
   months when help may be                   needed to care  for  her  newly
   born child.  In my judgment it  would  be                      reasonable
   for the Appellant  to  return  to  Pakistan  in  all  the  circumstances.
     It would also be reasonable in my judgment that the Sponsor return with
                  her should he so choose.  Should he choose not  to  return
   with the                     Appellant to  Pakistan,  she  could  clearly
   make an application in the coming                  months  or  thereafter
   for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  in  the                 usual
   way, if it  could  be  proved  that  the  appropriate  Immigration  Rules
     were met.  In the interim period if the sponsor remained in the  United
              Kingdom, clearly communication could be  maintained  by  using
   modern                  methods  of  communication,  or  indeed,  if  the
   Sponsor were to have holiday                  entitlements from his  work
   he will be able to visit the Appellant in Pakistan                    for
   short periods of time.  I know that bank accounts of the  parties  showed
          funds in the order of �10,000 and so in that sense  finance  would
   not be                  prohibitive.



Discussion



     3. In relation to the Immigration Rules; the maintenance  requirements
        for a spouse wishing to settle in the  United  Kingdom  are  to  be
        found in Appendix FM in the following terms:


          Financial requirements
          E-ECP.3.1. The applicant must provide specified evidence, from the
   sources        listed in paragraph E-ECP.3.2., of-


          (a)     a specified gross annual income of at least-
              (i) �18,600;


              .............


     4. The Judge refers to the evidential requirements, in paragraph 14 of
        the determination, which are to be found in Appendix  FM-SE.  These
        state that wage slips should cover:


          i.  A period of six months prior to the date of application if the
   applicant has           been employed by their current  employer  for  at
   least six months (and            where paragraph 13 (b) of this  appendix
   does not apply); or


          ii. Any period of salaried employment in the period of  12  months
   prior to the            date of application if  the  applicant  has  been
   employed by their current             employer for less than  six  months
   (or at least six months but  the  person              does  not  rely  on
   paragraph   13   (a)   of   this   appendix),   or   in   the   financial
   years relied upon by a self-employed person.


     5. The requirement to produce wage slips relating to  "any  period  of
        salaried employment in the period of twelve  months  prior  to  the
        date of application"  is  somewhat  ambiguous.   The  Secretary  of
        State's interpretation of this provision is that an applicant  must
        provide wage slips covering the whole of the twelve month period if
        they have not been employed by their current employer for a  period
        of at least six months. It may also be  argued  that  all  that  is
        required to be provided by this wording is evidence of  periods  of
        salaried employment undertaken within the period of  twelve  months
        prior to the date of application, provided the  applicant  has  not
        been employed by a  current  employer  for  at  least  six  months,
        allowing for breaks in employment without there being any  specific
        requirement in the Rules for the wage slips to cover the  whole  of
        the period of twelve months prior to the date of the application.


     6. Whilst  it  is  arguable  that  a  period  of  six  months  current
        employment or evidence of twelve months  previous  employment  will
        establish a pattern of employment suggesting consistency,  as  most
        probationary periods in employment contracts are  for  six  months,
        the Secretary of State's interpretation prevents a person  who  may
        have worked for say five months from  being  able  to  satisfy  the
        evidential requirements as will a  person  who  may  not  have  six
        months with their current employer but may have  more  than  eleven
        but  less  than  twelve  months  other  employment  with  different
        employers which may apply, for example, to agency workers.   During
        that period the income earned could be greater than  that  required
        by the Rules yet they would be unable  to  satisfy  the  evidential
        requirements.  If one compares that to the previous test under  the
        Rules for the requirement to provide 'adequate  maintenance'  there
        was no such restriction and all that had  to  be  proved  was  that
        sufficient income was available at the date  of  decision  (in  ECO
        cases), based upon the applicants and their  spouses  circumstances
        relating to a hypothetical future  date  of  entry  to  the  United
        Kingdom.


     7. The application leading to the decision under appeal is  dated  9th
        August 2012 which is the point at which the relevant evidence  must
        be  provided.  The  Appellant  and  her  husband  provided  letters
        confirming  they  started  their  jobs  in  May   and   July   2012
        respectively.  At the date of application they had not  worked  for
        their employer for a period of six months and so could not meet the
        evidential requirement in (i) above and therefore  had  to  satisfy
        (ii).


     8. The Secretary of State imposes a two-part test the first element of
        which must be to show that the minimum �18,600 is available. On the
        evidence it  is  accepted  before  me  that  the  available  income
        exceeded  this  minimum  requirement.  There  is  then   a   second
        requirement summarised in the Immigration Directorate  Instructions
        (IDI) as follows:

          IDI Chapter 8 Appendix FM (Family Members):


         5.3. Category B: Less  than  6  months  with  current  employer  or
variable               income - person residing in the UK

         5.3.1.   This category can be used where  the  applicant's  partner
(and/or the                applicant if they are in the UK  with  permission
to work) is in salaried or                   non-salaried employment at  the
date  of  application,  but  has  not  been                  with  the  same
employer and/or not earning the income level  relied  upon                in
the application for at least 6 months prior to the date of  application.  It
              can therefore be used  by  those  who  have  been  with  their
current                    employer for less than  6  months,  or  who  have
been with their current                 employer for at least 6  months  but
earning a variable income and wish               to be  considered  in  this
category rather than under Category A.

         5.3.2.   Under Category B, the financial requirement  must  be  met
and                    evidenced in two parts.

         5.3.3.   First, where the applicant's partner and/or the  applicant
(if they are in                 the  UK  with  permission  to  work)  is  in
salaried employment at the date of               application  and  has  been
with the same employer,  or  earning  the                     amount  relied
upon,  for  less  than   the   last   6   months,   they   can   count   the
gross annual salary  at  the  date  of  application  towards  the  financial
         requirement.

         5.3.4.   Gross income from non-salaried employment will be  counted
on the                 same basis as income from salaried  employment  where
the person has                  been with the same employer, or earning  the
amount relied upon, for                 less than 6 months at  the  date  of
application.

         5.3.5.   Non-salaried employment includes that paid  at  an  hourly
or other rate                   (and the  number  and/or  pattern  of  hours
required to be worked  may                vary)  or  paid  an  amount  which
varies  according  to   the   work   undertaken.                    Salaried
employment  includes  that  paid  at   a   minimum   fixed   rate   (usually
     annual) which is usually subject to a  contractual  minimum  number  of
              hours to be worked.

         5.3.6.   The only difference in Category  B  between  salaried  and
non-salaried                employment  is  how  gross  annual   salary   or
employment income at the                date of application is calculated:

                  Where the person is in salaried employment - the level  of
gross                       annual  salary  will  be  as  at  the  date   of
application.  This  must  be                     evidenced  by  the   latest
payslip  or  the  signed  contract  of  employment  (if                    a
payslip does not provide this information).

                  Where the person  is  in  non-salaried  employment  -  the
level of gross                  annual employment income relied upon in  the
application can be no               greater than the  annual  equivalent  of
the person's average gross                       monthly  income  from  non-
salaried employment in the 6 months prior to                   the  date  of
application, regardless of whether that employment was                  held
throughout that  period.  The  calculation  will  include  all  non-salaried
         employment undertaken during that  6  month  period,  and  will  be
                  calculated over that 6  month  period  regardless  of  how
much of that               period was spent in employment.

                  To calculate  this  annualised  average  for  non-salaried
employment in                   Category B the following calculation  should
be used:

                  (Total gross income from all employment undertaken  during
the 6                  month period,  divided  by  6)  multiplied  by  12  =
Income from  non-salaried                 employment  that  can  be  counted
towards the financial requirement.

          5.3.7.    If  necessary  to  meet  the  level  of  the   financial
requirement applicable to               the application, the  applicant  can
add to this:


                  .    The gross  amount  of  any  specified  non-employment
income                          received by  the  applicant's  partner,  the
applicant or both jointly in                     the 12 months prior to  the
application, provided they continue to                    own  the  relevant
asset (e.g. property, interest from shares) at the                      date
of application;

                  .    An amount based on the  cash  savings  above  �16,000
held by the                     applicant's partner, the applicant  or  both
jointly for at least the 6                       months prior  to  the  date
of application and under their  control.  At                      the  entry
clearance/initial    leave    to    remain    stage    and    the    further
leave  stage,  the  amount  above  �16,000  must  be  divided  by  2.5   (to
         reflect the 2.5 year or 30-month period before the  applicant  will
                  have to make a further application)  to  give  the  amount
which can                       be added to income. At the indefinite  leave
to remain stage, the                    whole of the  amount  above  �16,000
can be added to income;                      and/or

                  .    The  gross  annual  income  from  any  State  (UK  or
foreign) or private                     pension received by the  applicant's
partner or the applicant.

         5.3.8.   Second, the person must in addition have received  in  the
12 months                  prior to the date of  application  the  level  of
income required to meet                  the  financial  requirement,  based
on:


                   .     The  gross  amount  of  salaried  or   non-salaried
employment income                       of the applicant's partner  (in  the
UK or overseas) and/or  the                             applicant  (if  they
are in the UK with permission to work);

                  .    The gross  amount  of  any  specified  non-employment
income                          received by  the  applicant's  partner,  the
applicant or both jointly,                       provided they  continue  to
own the relevant  asset  (e.g.  property,                     interest  from
shares) at the date of application; and/or

                  .    The gross amount of any  State  (UK  or  foreign)  or
private pension                     received by the applicant's  partner  or
the applicant.

         5.3.9.   So, under Category B,  the  assessment  of  the  financial
requirement is                  based on:

                  (1)  The gross annual salary or income  from  salaried  or
non-salaried                    employment at the date of application.  This
source can  be                            combined  with  Category  C:  non-
employment income, Category D:                   cash savings  and  Category
E: pension; and

                  (2)  The actual amount of gross income received  from  any
salaried or                     non-salaried employment  in  the  12  months
prior to the application.                    This can be combined  with  the
actual gross  income  received  from                      Category  C:  non-
employment income and  Category  E:  pension                       over  the
same    12-month    period.    Category    D:    cash     savings     cannot
be used under (2).

         5.3.10.  Case studies  -  Category  B:  Less  than  6  months  with
current                    employer or variable income - person residing  in
the UK


|Example (b)                                                                |
|The applicant's partner works in the UK. She started a new job 3 weeks ago.|
|Her gross annual salary is �20,000. She meets part (1) of the calculation  |
|for Category B because she is in salaried employment at the date of        |
|application and her gross annual salary at the date of application meets   |
|the financial requirement.                                                 |
|In addition, she must have received in the 12 months prior to the          |
|application the level of income required to part (2) of the calculation for|
|Category B. But she has had no other job in the last 12 months as she has  |
|been travelling.                                                           |
|The financial requirement is met under part (1) of Category B because the  |
|applicant's partner is currently in a job paying at least �18,600, but not |
|under part (2) as she has not earned at least �18,600 from employment in   |
|the last 12 months. Therefore the applicant cannot meet the financial      |
|requirement using Category B.                                              |


     9. The above example mirrors closely that of the Appellant who  cannot
        prove  that  she  received  in  the  twelve  months  prior  to  the
        application the required minimum level of income, as  there  is  no
        evidence she or her husband had a job for the whole of the previous
        twelve  months.  On  the  basis   of   the   Secretary   of   State
        interpretation of the Rules I find no legal error  in  the  Judge's
        analysis and finding that the Appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to maintenance.  The
        Appellant is unable to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules in relation not  only  to  Appendix  FM  but  also  paragraph
        276ADE, for the reasons set out in the refusal  letter  dated  11th
        March 2013.


    10. The second challenge relates to Article 8 under both the Rules  and
        ECHR. The grant of permission to appeal refers to the  decision  of
        MM and Others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
        EWHC 1900 (Admin) in which it was held that the  SSHD's  June  2012
        amendments to the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended)  concerning
        the maintenance requirements for the admission of  spouses  to  the
        UK, including raising the minimum income level to be provided by  a
        UK sponsor to �18,600, had a legitimate aim in  promoting  measures
        that required spouses to be maintained at a somewhat  higher  level
        than the bare subsistence level set under previous  interpretations
        of the Rules. The measures were, however, so onerous in  effect  as
        to be an unjustified and  disproportionate  interference  with  the
        ability of spouses to live together contrary to their rights  under
        Article 8 of the ECHR.


    11. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 response referred to the fact
        this case is subject to a grant of  permission  to  appeal  to  the
        Court of Appeal although no decision has been made  by  that  Court
        and, although not binding as it is a High Court judgment, it can be
        taken into account and applied by this Tribunal.


    12. When considering the proportionality  of  the  decision  the  Judge
        proceeded on the basis that the fact the Appellant  was  unable  to
        succeed  under  the  Rules   in   relation   to   maintenance   was
        determinative  of  this  element  without  considering  the  actual
        available funds which exceeded the  minimum  requirements  and  are
        supplemented  by  �10,000  worth  of  savings,  as  part   of   the
        proportionality exercise.  I note the challenge by the Secretary of
        State on the  basis  that  the  minimum  requirement  reflects  the
        Secretary of State's legitimate aim of preventing  burdens  on  the
        taxpayer in the long-term and promoting good integration  outcomes.
        I find, however, that the Article 8 assessment  is  inadequate  not
        only for this reason but also as a result of failure by  the  Judge
        to give adequate reasons for why  it  was  reasonable  in  all  the
        circumstances for the Sponsor to return to Pakistan with  her  and,
        if he was unable to return, why it was proportionate to expect  the
        Appellant to return to make an  application  to  re-enter,  without
        considering relevant case law.


    13. The Sponsor is settled in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in  permanent
        employment. He is a British citizen.  The evidence  does  not  show
        that the loss of his ability to enjoy his rights of citizenship, as
        both a British  and  European  citizen,  is  proportionate  in  the
        circumstances of this appeal.  The fact the  Sponsor  has  recently
        obtained full-time employment and his prospects of  retaining  that
        employment if he left the United Kingdom for  any  period  of  time
        should have been factored into the account, especially  in  today's
        economic climate.


    14.  The  Judge's  finding  there  were  no  insurmountable   obstacles
        preventing the Appellant returning to Pakistan and  re-establishing
        her life may be correct in relation to her individual private  life
        but not so in relation to her family life,  which  it  is  accepted
        exists recognised by  Article  8,  if  she  and  her  husband  were
        separated. In the recent decision in MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
        EWCA Civ 1192 the Court of Appeal considered  the  meaning  of  the
        phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' and found:


          47. Before we come to the decision that was made on the facts of
   this case, we need               to say something about "insurmountable
   obstacles". It will be recalled that one of                 the
   situations in which para 399 applies is where the person has a genuine
   and                 subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the
   UK and is a British citizen,                  settled in the UK or in the
   UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and                the
   partner satisfies the condition stated in para 399(b)(i) and "there are
              insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
   continuing outside the UK".
          48. At para 38 of their determination, the UT said that they were
   bound by authority to hold            that the proper test for article 8
   purposes is "reasonableness". It is not in dispute that MF           has
   a genuine and subsisting relationship with SB and that SB satisfies the
   condition           stated in para 399(b)(i). As already noted, it was
   conceded on behalf of the Secretary of             State before the UT
   that it would not be "a reasonable option" for SB and F to be
   relocated with MF to Nigeria and that there were "insurmountable
   obstacles" to family life             with SB and F continuing outside
   the UK.
          49. In view of the concession made before the UT, the question of
   the meaning of                   "insurmountable obstacles" does not
   arise. We did, however, hear argument on the point.             We would
   observe that, if "insurmountable" obstacles are literally obstacles which
   it is          impossible to surmount, their scope is very limited
   indeed. We shall confine ourselves to              saying that we incline
   to the view that, for the reasons stated in detail by the UT in Izuazu
     at paras 53 to 59, such a stringent approach would be contrary to
   article 8.


    15. There is a reference to the Sponsor having a period of holiday  and
        it could be argued that it would not be disproportionate for him to
        return with his wife while she made an application to re-enter  the
        United Kingdom lawfully if this meant a limited period  of  absence
        from the UK.  The Judge found that if the Sponsor could not  return
        to Pakistan the Appellant could return to make an  application  for
        entry clearance "in the usual way" if it could be proved  that  the
        appropriate Immigration Rules were met.  What is missing  from  the
        findings is an analysis whether the requirements of the Rules could
        be met. This is something the Judge  is  required  to  do  in  case
        involving a finding that it would be  proportionate  to  return  to
        make an application to re-enter - see below.


    16. The proposed scenario has been considered both by the Tribunal  and
        higher courts in the number of reported authorities/judgments.  The
        House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40  said  that  in
        deciding whether the general policy of requiring people such as the
        Appellant to return to apply for entry in accordance with the rules
        of this country was legitimate and proportionate  in  a  particular
        case, it was necessary to consider what the benefits of the  policy
        were.  Whilst acknowledging the deterrent effect of the policy  the
        House of Lords queried the underlying basis of the policy in  other
        respects and made it clear that the policy should not be applied in
        a rigid, Kafka-esque manner.  The House of Lords  went  on  to  say
        that it would be "comparatively rarely, certainly in  family  cases
        involving children" that an Article 8 case should be  dismissed  on
        the basis that it would be proportionate and more  appropriate  for
        the Appellant to apply for leave from abroad.


    17. This is not a case similar to LE (Turkey) v Secretary of State  for
        the  Home  Department  [2010]  CSOH  153  it  was  held  that   the
        combination of a long  term  breach  of  immigration  control,  the
        recent establishment of a relationship in  the  full  knowledge  of
        such  breach  and  the  relative  weakness  of  that  relationship,
        militated  strongly  against  the  Claimant's  Article   8   claim,
        distinguishing Chikwamba and MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for
        the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 953.


    18. The Court of Appeal considered this issue further in  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department v Hayat; Secretary of State  for  the
        Home Department v Treebhowan (Mauritius) [2012] EWCA  Civ  1054  in
        which the Court outlined the following guidance as to the effect of
        Chikwamba and the subsequent decision of the Court of Appeal in  TG
        (Central African Republic)[2008] EWCA Civ  997  and  SZ  (Zimbabwe)
        [2009] EWCA Civ 590 and MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953 in  which
        it had been considered:


              (i)      Where an applicant who  did  not  have  lawful  entry
   clearance                    pursued a claim under Article 8, a dismissal
   of the claim on  the                        procedural  ground  that  the
   policy required that the applicant should                   have made the
   application    from     his     home     state     might,     but     not
   necessarily would, constitute a disruption  of  family  or  private  life
          sufficient to engage Article 8, particularly where  children  were
              adversely affected;


               (ii)      Where  Article 8  was  engaged,  it  would  be  a
   disproportionate                      interference with family or private
   life to enforce such a policy unless               there was  a  sensible
   reason for doing so;


              (iii)    Whether it was sensible to enforce that policy  would
   necessarily be                   fact sensitive, and potentially relevant
   factors included the                      prospective length  and  degree
   of disruption of  family  life  and                        whether  other
   members of the family were settled in the UK;


              (iv)     Where Article 8 was engaged and there was no sensible
   reason for                   enforcing the  policy,  the  decision  maker
   should  determine  the                       Article 8  claim  on   its
   substantive merits, having regard to all material                factors,
   notwithstanding   that   the    applicant    had    no    lawful    entry
   clearance;


              (v)      Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to  alter  the  way
   the courts                   should approach substantive Article 8 issues
   as laid down in seminal                   cases as Razgar and Huang;


              (vi)     If the Secretary of State had no sensible reason  for
   requiring the                    application to be  made  from  the  home
   state, the fact that he had               failed  to  do  so  should  not
   thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the                       substantive
   Article 8 balancing exercise (para 30).


    19. In Hayat at paragraph 17, Elias LJ states:

         17.  In Chikwamba the Article 8 claim was particularly strong.  But
in my view it is clear from             paragraph 44 of  his  judgment  that
Lord Brown's objection to the routine enforcement  of            the  policy
was not limited to such  cases.  His  observation  that  a  one-stop  appeal
process           should generally be adopted is  equally  valid  where  the
claim might appear to be weak. It            is true  that  the  enforcement
of  the  policy  is  likely  to   be   particularly   futile   where   entry
clearance will ultimately be granted because it  is  requiring  a  temporary
disruption of              family life for no good purpose. To that  extent,
a preliminary assessment  that  the                 substantive  merits  are
strong  may  be  relevant  to  determining   whether   the   policy   should
be enforced or not. But often the merits will not be clear until  a  careful
assessment of the               facts is made, and  the  dogmatic  adherence
to policy may in  those  cases  too  be  a                  disproportionate
interference with Article 8 rights.


    20. The evidence considered at the appeal hearing makes it unlikely the
        Appellant would be able to succeed in an  application  to  re-enter
        under the Rules as the Judge dismissed that aspect of  the  appeal.
        If the only issue was  whether  six  months  wage  slips  could  be
        provided showing that the required minimum level of maintenance was
        available, any application made after a return  shortly  after  the
        date of decision would no doubt be supported  by  six  months  wage
        slips provided by the Sponsor, confirming employment generating  an
        income above the minimum required levels for at least  the  minimum
        required period.  It is not claimed the other requirements  of  the
        Rules could not be met. If  the  Appellant  is  able  to  meet  the
        requirements of the Rules why is it necessary for her to return  to
        apply and re-enter shortly thereafter?


    21. An additional issue is that the Appellant is pregnant.   The  child
        has not been born and therefore is not a legal entity who can claim
        the benefits of the Human Rights Convention but the birth  was  due
        to take place in August 2013, one month after the  appeal  hearing,
        and so at such a late stage of the pregnancy, which was viable, the
        child will form part of the private life of  both  parents.  It  is
        also unlikely that the Appellant will be permitted to fly  so  late
        in pregnancy.  Airlines have different rules  regarding  the  upper
        limit beyond which they would not allow a pregnant woman to fly. As
        a general guide, almost all airlines decline to fly women beyond 36
        weeks of gestation and for some  it  is  34  weeks.  In  the  phase
        between 28 and  36  weeks,  most  airlines  will  demand  that  the
        passenger bring her doctor's letter stating that she is fit to  fly
        and that she is unlikely to go into labour within 36 hours.  It was
        therefore foreseeable that the Appellant will only return after the
        birth of her British and European national child.


    22. I set the determination aside in relation  to  the  findings  under
        Article 8 ECHR. The findings  relating  to  the  Immigration  Rules
        shall be preserved findings. Having considered the evidence in  the
        round with the degree of care required in an appeal of this  nature
        I am not satisfied the Secretary of State has discharged the burden
        of proof upon her to the required standard show  that  in  all  the
        circumstances  it  is  necessary  in  this  democratic  society  to
        interfere with the  family  life  of  this  couple  to  the  extent
        proposed.   I  find  no  sensible  justification  established   for
        requiring her to return to Pakistan to make an application  to  re-
        enter.  It has not  been  proved  that  it  is  proportionate  when
        balancing the legitimate aim relied upon with the  interference  to
        the family and private life that exists between her and her husband
        as a couple or that  which  will  exist  in  the  new  family  unit
        including their child.  It has not been proved that  requiring  the
        Appellant's husband and/or child as British and  European  citizens
        to leave this country and Europe, and hence be denied  the  benefit
        of exercising rights  to  which  they  are  lawfully  entitled,  is
        proportionate in all the circumstances.  I do not  find  it  proved
        that the Appellant or her husband will  place  a  burden  upon  the
        social welfare system of the United Kingdom. The decision  has  not
        been shown to be proportionate.


Decision

    23. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)  as  no  application
   for anonymity was made and no         basis for such an order established
   on the facts.


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    25. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule
        23A (costs) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005 and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
        Enforcement Act 2007).


          I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
   Awards in           Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


          I make no fee award.


          Reasons:     Although she has succeeded under Article 8 the reason
   the SSHD       rejected  this  claim  was  a  lack  of  evidence  of  the
   existence  of  the  relationship          relied  upon.   That   is   the
   responsibility of the Appellant.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th October 2013












