
                                                          [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
IA/10144/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 October 2017                  |     On 2 January 2018                  |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     S N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Sanders, counsel instructed by Deo Volente
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 6 June 1976. He claimed
to have arrived in the United Kingdom illegally on 24 November or 24
December 2004. He fathered a child, PGN, who was born on 22 June 2008 to
NI, a national of Nigeria without leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
The Appellant then made applications for a residence card on 8 May 2009 and
on 1 April 2011 but these applications were refused. He fathered another
child, KEAN, who was born on 19 December 2011 to OS, a national of Nigeria
without leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2. The Appellant was encountered working illegally by the Immigration
Service on 28 May 2012 and informed of his liability for removal. On 20
June 2012, the Appellant made a further application for a residence card,
which was rejected on 23 August 2012. He made a further application for a
residence card on 29 August 2012, which was refused on 30 January 2013 and
his appeal against that decision was dismissed on 6 June 2013. On 19
September 2013, the Appellant made an application for leave to remain on
the basis of his private and family life. This application was refused on
11 October 2013 without the right of appeal but following a judicial
review, which was settled by consent, the Respondent reconsidered her
decision and issued a further refusal with the right of appeal on 12
February 2015.

3. The basis of the refusal was that the Appellant failed to meet the
eligibility requirements E-LTRPT 2.2.-2.4 of Appendix FM of the Rules, in
the absence of evidence that he has access rights to his children or is
taking an active role in their upbringing. It was further not accepted that
the requirements of EX1(a) were met as the Appellant's children are not
British nor living in the United Kingdom continuously for at least 7 years.
It was not considered that the private life requirements of the Rules were
met nor that there were exceptional circumstances justifying the grant of
leave pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules. The Appellant appealed
against this decision. A subsequent male child, GN, was born to OS on 27
November 2015.

4. The appeal came before FtTJ Swinnerton for hearing on 12 January 2017.
In a decision and reasons promulgated on 1 February 2017, the Judge
dismissed the appeal. At the hearing of the appeal, the FtTJ took into
consideration additional documentation viz an undated and untimed
photograph of the Appellant purportedly having contact with his son PGN, a
letter to the Appellant from the Respondent in 2012 confirming his
entitlement to work and two computer printouts submitted by the Respondent
dated 12 January 2017 showing that the Appellant's partner, OS, had been
refused leave to remain in the United Kingdom and had appealed and that NI
was an overstayer who had been refused leave to remain but had not appealed
that decision at the time of the printout. The Judge found the Appellant's
oral evidence lacked credibility [17]. She took into account the fact that
the Family Court had granted the Appellant indirect contact with his son,
PGN from 1 November 2016 and that he could have direct contact commencing
on 7 January 2017, on an increasing incremental basis rising to 4 hours
from March 2017.

5. The FtTJ took into account her section 55 duty at [35] but at [38] found
that the evidence from the Family Court shows that the Appellant has had
minimal contact with his son in the last few years and the child's mother
described the Appellant's relationship with his son in 2016 as non-
existent, but accepted that the Appellant does wish to establish a caring
relationship with the child and that under the terms of the interim court
order he has been granted limited contact until the end of March 2017 [38].
She went on at [40] to find that, whilst she accepted that it is in the
best interests of PGN to re-establish and maintain a relationship with the
Appellant but as he is not a UK citizen and neither is his mother, if she
chooses to leave the UK to return to Nigeria then the Appellant's son would
be residing in a different country from him. She found that the Appellant
would be able to maintain and develop a relationship with his son through
social media and skype [46] and whilst she accepted that the Appellant does
have a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son, PGN for the
purposes of section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002, it was reasonable to expect
the child to leave the UK because he resides with his mother who is a
Nigerian citizen with no leave to remain in the UK [49] and [50]. She
further found that it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect
the Appellant and his partner and their two children to leave the UK as a
unit and go to Nigeria to live together as a family [51].

6. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time on 13 February 2017. The grounds in support of the application
asserted that the First tier Tribunal Judge had erred materially in law:

(i) in allowing the Respondent to adduce late evidence, which prejudiced
the Appellant due to the fact that it was produced after cross-examination;
that this was unfair and due to his strained relationship with NI, the
Appellant was unable to rebut the late evidence. The Appellant's evidence
was that NI intended to remain in the United Kingdom with PGN;

(ii) in her determination of the reasonableness of expecting the
Appellant's son, PGN, which was determined solely on the basis of the late
evidence as to NI's immigration status [50] refers and the First tier
Tribunal Judge erred in failing to apply the principles set out in MA
(Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [49] and [50] that leave to remain should
be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary, if a child
has been in the UK for seven years and the First tier Tribunal Judge failed
to identify any powerful reasons to depart from that starting point.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Designated
Judge Murray in a decision dated 17 August 2017, on the basis that there
are arguable errors of law in the Judge's decision.

Hearing

8. I heard submissions from Ms Sanders on behalf of the Appellant and Mr
Bramble on behalf of the Home Office. I have recorded these submissions in
full in my typed record of proceedings.

9. I have concluded that the First tier Tribunal Judge made material errors
of law in her decision to dismiss the appeal, for the reasons set out in
the grounds of appeal.

10. The issue of procedural fairness arises out of the fact that, following
the oral evidence and the submissions on behalf of the Home Office, the
Judge asked to see the evidence upon which the Presenting Officer had
relied in her submissions viz that the application made by the mother of
the Appellant's eldest son, PGN had been refused and no appeal had been
lodged against that decision.

11. The attendance note drafted by Mr Sarwar, who was counsel for the
Appellant at that hearing, makes clear that he raised a number of
objections to the admission of this evidence, including the fact that: (i)
it should have been filed and served in line with directions; (ii) it was
highly prejudicial to the Appellant's position; (iii) the Appellant is not
in a relationship with Ms N and cannot speak to her to clarify any ongoing
matters, but if the evidence had been served in advance his solicitors
could have written to her seeking clarification; (iv) the line of cross-
examination as to his former partner's immigration status were unfair and
an attempt to ambush the Appellant, given that the Presenting Officer
patently had knowledge of this and (v) the evidence may not be reliable. Mr
Bramble accepted the contents of the attendance note.

12. Mr Bramble submitted that the issue of the immigration statuses of the
Appellant's current and former partner were raised in the refusal decision
so the Appellant was on notice of this issue. He acknowledged that it was
not best practice to put in evidence after the evidence has been completed
during submissions and it was potentially problematic that the Judge had
asked for this evidence during submissions, but it was not material.

13. Whilst I accept that the fact that at the date of decision, neither the
Appellant's former or current partner had leave to remain, I have concluded
that there was procedural unfairness and that it was material, given that
it is clear from her findings at that the First tier Tribunal Judge relied
heavily on the fact that the Appellant's former partner did not have extant
leave and that, at the date of hearing, no appeal against the refusal of
leave to remain had been received by the Home Office. This is apparent from
[37], [39], [40], [46] and [50] of her decision and reasons.

14. I further find that the First tier Tribunal Judge made a material error
in failing to apply the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan)
[2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [49] and [50] that, once a child has resided in the
United Kingdom for seven years, this should be accorded significant weight
in any proportionality exercise, because of its relevance to determining
the nature and strength of the child's best interests and "because it
establishes as a starting point that leave should be granted unless there
are powerful reasons to the contrary." It is apparent and I accept the
submission that the only reason provided by the Judge for finding that it
was reasonable for PGN to leave the United Kingdom was because he resides
with his mother who is a Nigerian citizen with no leave to remain in the
United Kingdom and there was no evidence that she had lodged an appeal
against the refusal of leave to remain. Thus there was no consideration by
the Judge of whether this constituted "powerful reasons to the contrary"
nor any consideration of any private and family life ties that PGN (who was
8 and a half years of age at that time) had developed in the United
Kingdom.

15. It follows that the appeal by the Appellant is allowed. I remit the
appeal for a hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal, to be heard by
a Judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                                22
December 2017








