
[pic]


First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/12911/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 February 2015                          |On 03 March 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           KELVI CHINEDU EMESIOBI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley dismissing his appeal against  the
    refusal of the respondent on 24 January 2014 to refuse his  application
    for a Residence Card as confirmation of a right to reside in the United
    Kingdom.

2.   Permission was granted on the basis that  unusual  circumstances  arose
in relation  to  the  venue  and  the  consequences  of  attendance  at  the
incorrect venue. At paragraph 21 of the determination the judge stated  that
it was found significant that the EEA sponsor did not  attend  the  hearing.
Even in the absence of this  an  arguable  error  of  law  arises  since  at
paragraph 22 the judge did not accept that the decision breached  Article  8
without giving any reasons.  Section 55 was not considered.

3.   At today's hearing there was no appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
appellant.  Graceland, Solicitors sent a fax to the court dated 26  February
2015 requesting that the hearing be  adjourned  because  the  appellant  was
ill.  If I was not prepared to adjourn  the  hearing,  they  requested  that
permission be granted and the appeal listed on a later  date.   Attached  to
the fax was a prescription  issued  by  a  doctor  on  24  February  for  28
Naproxen tablets.  The  appellant  submitted  a  self  certificated  medical
report (Statutory Sick (SSP)) stating that he had "muscular bruises  on  the
body". He said the sickness began on 23 February 2015 and the end  date  for
the sickness was 30 February 2015".  As we all know February this  year  has
28 days.  For this reason and the lack of explanation as to  what  precisely
"muscular bruises" are, I do not find the medical report satisfactory.

4.   I was tempted to determine the appeal because the medical evidence  was
not a satisfactory explanation for his failure to attend  coupled  with  the
fact that there was no appearance by his sponsor either.

5.   However, for the reasons given by First-tier Judge P J  M  Hollingworth
for granting permission, I find that the appeal would have  to  be  reheard.
I take on board the point made in the respondent's response  under  Rule  24
that the judge was not obliged to consider Article 8 and section  55  within
Article 8 because there was no removal decision.

6.   The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing  by  a  First-tier
Judge other than FtTJ Handley.  The  Notice  of  Hearing  will  have  to  be
specific as to the hearing centre where the appeal will be heard.






Signed                              Date


Judge Eshun

Judge of the Upper Tribunal



