
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/16542/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 November 2016                        |On 24 November 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                          Sidath Sanjey Wijaysuriya
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Kumudusena, Solicitor from Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

I see no need for, and do not make, any order  restricting  publicity  about
this appeal.

This is an appeal brought with the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb
against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
appeal against a decision to refuse  him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

It is a feature  of  this  case  that  the  application  dates  back  to  29
September 2009 and the decision  letter  is  dated  6  November  2009.   The
grounds of appeal were not lodged until 29 April 2015, which is rather  more
than five years late.

On 11 December 2015 the appellant had lodged a "Section 120  notice",  which
is a reference to Section 120 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002, in  which  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  become  entitled  to
indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph 276B of  HC
395 because he had completed ten years of lawful  residence  in  the  United
Kingdom.

The application of 29 September  2009  (refused  on  6  November  2009)  was
refused under paragraph 245ZX(d) of HC 395 because the  respondent  was  not
satisfied that the appellant was entitled to ten  points  under  Appendix  C
(maintenance (funds)) of HC 395.  The respondent decided that the  appellant
had not proved that he had sufficient funds directly available  to  him  and
did not demonstrate the level of funds  required.   The  applicant  had  not
shown how the funds in the bank account of one Miss M G were  available  for
the appellant and if they were how they were from an acceptable sponsor.

The appellant argued that he was at least entitled  to  a  decision  on  his
application for permission to remain on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  lawful
residence and in particular on  his  assertion  that  his  presence  in  the
United Kingdom was in fact lawful because he had never received  a  decision
refusing his application made in September 2009.

At paragraph 25 of her decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  expressed
herself "satisfied that the respondent sent the Decision  to  the  Appellant
at [an address] by post, recorded delivery."   This  decision  is  based  on
contemporaneous or near contemporaneous record and for my part I can see  no
basis whatsoever for criticising the judge's finding that the notice was  in
fact sent.

Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb reminded  himself  that  proof  of  postage  only
creates a rebuttable presumption that notice had been given and he said:

  "The Judge did not consider whether the presumption had been rebutted  on
  the basis of the evidence and subsequent dealings with  the  Home  Office
  that, at least arguably, was consistent with the  claim  the  notice  had
  never actually been received.  In failing to do so,  the  Judge  arguably
  erred in law in concluding he had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal."

At paragraph 27.1 of  her  decision  the  judge  found  not  only  that  the
decision was sent  but  also  delivered.   She  gave  an  explanation.   She
acknowledged the appellant's evidence that he had "chased it  up"  and  also
noted that there were  only  three  letters  produced  as  evidence  of  the
chasing and they were not on the respondent's file.  The judge said:

  "Given the importance of the application and the fact that  he  says  the
  respondent retained his papers, it is reasonable  to  have  expected  the
  appellant to have made far greater efforts  to  establish  the  situation
  during a period of six years.  He waited  until  November  2014  to  seek
  legal advice and, on his own evidence, this was because he wanted to make
  an application based on ten years' residence."

With respect to the judge, I think she may have invited criticism by  saying
at paragraph 26 that she found the "written notice of  decision  was  served
on the appellant in accordance with the 2003 Regulations  having  been  sent
by recorded delivery."  This equates "service" with "being sent"  and  I  am
not sure that that is right.  However, in paragraph 27.1 she  clarified  her
position and expressly asked herself if it was  delivered.   She  has  given
reasons for the conclusion that it was delivered.

The criticism in the grounds is directed to the judge's apparent failure  to
satisfy herself that there was any formal proof of postage.  I see no  merit
in that whatsoever.  The judge had a full record.   In  an  ideal  world  it
would have been  supplemented  by  positive  proof  of  postage  such  as  a
recorded delivery receipt but  there  is  nothing  irrational  or  otherwise
unlawful in accepting the record at face value.   The  judge  did  not  fall
into the error of equating proof of postage as proof of receipt.

The second point taken in the grounds is that the  judge  did  not  consider
whether the Home Office had taken any course of action as a  consequence  of
the decision.  With respect, the Home Office often does not appear  to  take
any action after making a decision to refuse leave.   Although  the  absence
of any such action might be evidence that no decision to  refuse  leave  had
been made it is clear that a decision had been made and  that  part  of  the
grounds does not illuminate the appellant's case at all.

I sat back and reflected on this because I realise  the  importance  of  the
decision to the appellant and the fact that an adverse  decision  must  mean
that he has been found to have acted dishonestly  by  suppressing  knowledge
of receipt of the notice.  That is a conclusion the judge reached.   Neither
the grounds nor the arguments nor the point identified when  permission  was
granted undermine that finding.  It follows therefore  that  I  dismiss  the
appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 November 2016               |





