
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/17223/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 February 2015                            |On 10 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              THOMAS KOFI KUSI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Owusu (BWF Solictors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I  shall  refer  to  the
original appellant, a citizen of Ghana born  on  5  December  1968,  as  the
appellant herein.

2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 28 November 2012  from  Italy
on an European Economic Area family  permit.  His  brother  Francis  is  the
sponsor. The brother holds an Italian passport. The  appellant  applied  for
leave  to  remain  as  an  extended  family  member  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  The  respondent  refused  the
application on 31st March 2014 on the  basis  of  insufficient  evidence  of
dependency.

3. The appellant appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Judge
Holder on 23rd  October  2014.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
appellant and his brother  and  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  a
relative of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom,
that the appellant had lived with his brother in  Italy  and  was  dependent
upon him and continues to be dependent upon him in the  United  Kingdom  and
resided  with  him.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant   met   the
requirements of reg. 8(2)(a) and (c) of  the  regulations.  He  allowed  the
appeal.

4. The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the  judge  should  not
have allowed the appeal outright but remitted it to the Secretary  of  State
following Ihemedu (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC). Permission was  granted
by First-tier Judge Holmes.

5. Mr Bramble relied on YB (Ivory Coast) [2008] UKAIT  00062  and  Aladesalu
(Nigeria) [2011] UKUT  00253  (IAC)  as  well  as  Ihemedu  to  support  his
proposition that the First-tier Judge  had  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
outright.  He  referred  in  particular  to  the  following   passage   from
Aladesalu:

     "The regulation 17(4) issue


     29.    Establishing that one is an OFM/ extended family member is  not,
         however, the end of the matter.  The appeals are against  decisions
         refusing to issue each of the appellants  with  a  residence  card.
         Unlike the position that obtains for Article 2.2 family  members  -
         or CFMs - who are entitled to a  residence  card  by  operation  of
         regulation 17(1) ("the Secretary of State  must  issue....."),  the
         position set out  in  the  2006  Regulations  for  extended  family
         members affords the respondent a  discretion.   Reflecting  Article
         3.2 of the Citizens Directive, regulation  17(4)  states  that  the
         Secretary of State "may" issue a  residence  card  to  an  extended
         family member if the EEA spouse is a qualified  person  or  an  EEA
         national with a permanent right of residence and "(6)  in  all  the
         circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State  appropriate  to
         issue the residence card".  As the Tribunal noted in  YB  (EEA  reg
         17(4)-proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast  [2008]  UKAIT   00062,   the
         discretion afforded by regulation 17(4) is  not  unfettered,  there
         being not only the obligation to consider all the circumstances but
         also the requirement set out in regulation 17(5) to  undertake  (in
         response to  an  application)  "an  extensive  examination  of  the
         personal circumstances of the  applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
         application shall give reasons justifying  the  refusal.....";  see
         also recital 6 of the Directive.


     30.    The initial difficulty that  confronts  the  Tribunal  in  these
         appeals is that  the  respondent  has  not  as  yet  exercised  the
         regulation 17(4) discretion or carried  out  the  regulation  17(5)
         examination.  That is because in the refusal letter the  respondent
         did not accept they qualified  as  extended  family  members  under
         regulation 8.  The Immigration Judge followed suit.


     31.    In such circumstances it is clear that the hands of the Tribunal
         are tied.  Whilst we can consider  whether  a  discretionary  power
         should have been exercised differently, we cannot seek to  do  that
         if there has as yet been no exercise of that power. It follows that
         the appeal can only be  allowed  to  the  extent  that  it  remains
         outstanding before the Secretary of State."


6. Mr Owosu accepted that the appeal should be allowed to  the  extent  that
the appeals of the appellants were allowed in Aladesalu:  "The  decision  we
remake is to allow the appellants' appeals to the extent that  they  remains
outstanding before the Secretary of State to decide whether to exercise  the
regulation 17(4) discretion in their favour." He asked  me  not  to  disturb
the fees order that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  in  favour  of  the
appellant.

7. By agreement accordingly I find that the First-tier Tribunal did  err  in
law as submitted by Mr Bramble and I remake the decision as follows:

      I  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  extent  that  it  remains
      outstanding before  the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide  whether  to
      exercise the regulation 17(4) discretion in his favour.


      I do not disturb the fee award made in the appellant's favour  in  the
      circumstances.



Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               9 February 2015



