


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/18406/2012
     IA/18407/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at : Field House                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 9 July 2013                              |On : 10 July 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               GURPREET SINGH
                               MICHALA GUJDOVA
                                  Appellant


                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The first appellant is a citizen of India, born on 12 July 1986  and  the
second appellant is a citizen of the Czech  Republic  born  on  28  December
1985. On 25 July 2012 the respondent refused to issue the  second  appellant
with a Registration Certificate under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006 and on the  same  day  refused  to  issue  the  first
appellant with a Residence Card as the family member  of  his  EEA  national
spouse.

2. The appellants' appeals against those decisions were  formally  dismissed
by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  on  5   March   2013   without   any
consideration of  the  merits,  on  the  basis  that  they  had  made  fresh
applications on  13  August  2012  which  had  yet  to  be  decided  by  the
respondent.

3. The appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on
the grounds that they had not made any such new applications  and  that  the
judge had failed to consider the merits of the appeals.

4. Subsequent to my grant of permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on
14 April 2013, which followed a failure by both parties  to  respond  to  my
directions of the same date, I made  the  following  directions  on  20  May
2013:

   "1. In the absence of any, or any adequate, response from  either  party,
   to the directions issued by the Upper Tribunal on 24 April 2013,  and  in
   the absence  of  any  evidence  of  a  further  application  having  been
   submitted by the appellants on 13 August 2012 (the  only  acknowledgement
   of receipt of that  date  being  in  respect  to  the  notice  of  appeal
   submitted in relation to the respondent's decision of 25 July 2012),  the
   Tribunal is minded  under  rule  34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008 (and compatibly with Practice Statement  7)  to  set
   aside the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid and  to  remit
   the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.


   2. Any objection to this proposed  course  must  be  made  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal in writing, giving reasons, not later than 14 days from the date
   these directions are sent out. In the absence of any reasonable response,
   within that time, the Upper Tribunal may then proceed to  set  aside  the
   First-tier Tribunal's decision and  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal"

6. No response has been received from either party and thus there  has  been
no objection by the respondent to the proposed course stated.

7. In the circumstances, for the reasons set out in the grant of  permission
and directions as referred to above, I set aside Judge Majid's decision  and
remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge  aside  from  Judge  Jhirad  and
Judge Majid.












                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
