
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/20777/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2016                       |On 1 April 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                          MR ARUMUGAM THILAGANATHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 24 January 1968. He
entered the United Kingdom unlawfully on 10 February 2010 and claimed
asylum. This application was refused and his appeal against that decision
was dismissed by Immigration Judge Horvath on 28 June 2010.

2. On 13 March 2014, the Appellant made an application for a residence card
as confirmation of his right to reside in the United Kingdom as an extended
family member of an EEA national under regulation 8 of the Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2006. The EEA national in question was his brother in
law, a French national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom as a
self-employed business person. This application was refused on 28 April
2014 and an appeal was lodged against this decision on 8 May 2014, which
raised ground of appeal in respect of Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR

3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wilson for
hearing on 11 February 2015 and in a decision and reasons promulgated on 23
February 2015 he dismissed the appeal on the basis that he did not find
that the Appellant was dependent upon his brother in law prior to entry
into the United Kingdom [11] whilst he accepted that he is now living with
him and forms part of his household [12]. The Judge held at [3] that he was
not satisfied that an appeal under the EEA Regulations generated a
sufficient basis for lodging a section 120 notice or for the grounds of
appeal to be extended beyond those directly attacking the merits of
otherwise of the decision under the EEA Regulations [3].

4. An application for permission to appeal was made to the Upper Tribunal
on 9 March 2015 on the basis that the First tier Tribunal Judge erred in
failing to permit the Appellant to appeal on asylum grounds as paragraphs
26(4) and (5) only permit exclusion of asylum and human rights grounds if
those grounds have been certified by the SSHD and permission to appeal to
the Court of Appeal had been granted on this point: TY (Sri Lanka)
C5/2013/1110. No challenge to the findings of the First tier Tribunal Judge
in respect of the EEA Regulations was made in the grounds of appeal.

5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
Macdonald on 27 April 2015 on the basis that the grounds of appeal
disclosed an arguable error of law.

6. The appeal first came before me on 10 September 2015 when the Appellant
was represented by Ms S. Jegarajah of counsel. She stated that permission
to appeal had been granted to the Court of Appeal in TY on 14 April 2014
and that the appeal was due to be heard on 3 and 4 November 2015. On that
basis I agreed to adjourn the appeal to be listed for a case management
review hearing in February 2016.

7. The appeal next came before me for a case management review hearing on
14 March 2016. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant,
however, a letter dated 14 March 2016 came in later in the day from the
Appellant's solicitors requesting that the appeal be determined on the
papers following the judgment in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

8. In light of [27]-[35] of that judgment it is clear that the appeal
cannot succeed as this Appellant's case is on all fours with that of the
Appellant in TY. No section 120 notice was served on the Appellant and
there was no duty upon the Respondent to serve a one stop notice under
section 120 of the NIAA 2002. The position in relation to any asylum or
human rights claim is as set out by the Respondent in the refusal decision
of 28 April 2014 (and cited in identical terms by Lord Justice Jackson at
[29] of TY: "If you consider that you are entitled to remain in the UK on
the basis of other Immigration legislation then please visit the UKBA
website and submit the appropriate application for consideration."

Notice of decision

9. It follows that there is no material error of law disclosed in the
decision and reasons of First tier Tribunal Judge Wilson of 23 February
2015 and the appeal against that decision is dismissed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

16 March 2016
