
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/23486/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 November 2016             |On 6th January 2017             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SYED SHOAIB ABBAS ZAIDI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Haji, counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer to as the Claimant, is a national
of Pakistan, born on 16 December 1991. On 15 June 2015, he was refused
leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student, with
reference to paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that
the Respondent believed that he had submitted false documents. He appealed
to the First tier Tribunal. Following a hearing which took place on 15
March 2016, Judge of the First tier Tribunal Swinnerton allowed the appeal
in a decision promulgated on 1 April 2016, on the basis that she was not
satisfied with the checks carried out by the Secretary of State in relation
to the allegation of false documentation, nor that that evidence adduced
was sufficient to support the allegation that the Appellant submitted false
documentation in connection with his application. The evidence in question
comprised emails dated from 21 May 2014 to 29 May 2014 from the manager of
UBL Shaheen to the Secretary of State, which state that the letter and bank
statement are both bogus, however, the email does not specifically identify
the letter or the bank statement.

2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
on 12 April 2016. The grounds in support of the application asserted that
the FTJ materially erred in law for failure to give adequate reasons.
Whilst the emails do not make express reference to the letter and bank
statement, it is quite apparent that the subject reference throughout the
email chain is the same. Permission to appeal was granted by First tier
Tribunal Judge Heynes in a decision dated 25 August 2016 on the basis that:
"it is arguable that the Judge gave inadequate reasons for placing no
weight on the emails since they all contained the same subject number."

Hearing

3. At the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis sought to rely upon the ground of
appeal and the grant of permission on the basis that there was before the
Judge a series of emails from R Booth of the Fraud team of the Home Office.
He accepted that the subject reference was numeric and that there were
redactions but that there are sensible reasons why personal details are
redacted. He submitted that the evidence was sufficient to justify the
Secretary of State's decision to refuse the application with reference to
paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules.

4. On behalf of the Claimant, Ms Haji submitted that the Judge at [48]
clearly states that the initial assertion by the Secretary of State has not
been made out and at [46] that there was clearly insufficient evidence in
that the emails do not specifically identify the letter or bank statement
alleged to be bogus. The Judge at [45] was not satisfied with the checks
carried out by the Secretary of State and she was entitled to make that
finding on the basis of the emails produced. The first email was sent to
Karachi but received no response. Although it would have been simple to
find out who sent it, there is no evidence of checks to confirm that it was
the manager who sent the email. Given that the burden of proving dishonesty
is upon the Secretary of State, she was required to do more to discharge
that burden. Ms Haji reminded me that the refusal decision was made 14
months later. The evidence before the Judge is that the Claimant's father
had closed this bank account having transferred the money. In response to a
question from the Tribunal as to the
date the account was closed, she drew attention to the affidavit from the
Appellant's father which states 28 days after statement to send to the
Claimant in the United Kingdom. The affidavit further states that the
account has been closed and the Claimant's father had not been able to get
evidence of a closed account, despite contacting the branch manager in
Karachi and at Head Office, which begs the question of what checks the
manager in the emails was able to carry out.

5. In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that the question was a public law one
viz is there a sufficient explanation for matters materially in dispute? He
submitted that [48] of the decision has no substance to it whatsoever and
that,
if the Judge is going to do lawful justice to the case, the Judge in public
law terms had to resolve in detail why the email chain was not enough to
show that the account was bogus. The Secretary of State does not know why
the emails are not enough. The standard of proof is the balance of
probabilities. The Judge had to explain why it was not enough for a manager
to say that in terms that the account does not exist in our branch and both
documents are bogus. He submitted that there was clear evidence of
deception. What the Judge had to do, but failed to do, was lay out the
competing arguments on both sides and decide whether the affidavit for the
father and the evidence stood up to scrutiny and explained why it was not
enough.

Decision

6. The Judge's conclusions on the material issue are as follows:

      "46. I note that the e-mail sent at 10.34 am on 29.5.14 from the
manager at  UBL Shaheen to the Home Department stated that the letter and
the bank    statement are both bogus. That email does not specifically
identify the letter or       the bank statement which are alleged to be
bogus.

      47. The e-mails making up the DVR are dated from 21.5.14 to 29.5.14
and   have been provided today in connection with an application made on
16.4.14     and refused on 15.6.15.

      48. Having looked at the documents in this case with care, I am not
satisfied   with the checks carried out by the Secretary of State in
relation to the  allegation of false documentation. I do not find that the
evidence adduced by    the Home Department is sufficient to support the
allegation that the Appellant     submitted false documentations in
connection with his application."

7. However, the Judge does not set out the content of the emails nor
explain why she is not satisfied with the checks carried out by the
Secretary of State nor why she did not find the evidence adduced on behalf
of the Secretary of State was sufficient to support the allegation that the
Claimant submitted false documentation. The Judge does not address or make
findings in respect of the evidence on behalf of the Claimant, as to
whether or not his father closed the bank account and if so, when.

8. Whilst the redacted emails from United Bank Limited do not specify in
terms which letter and statement of account are bogus, the case reference
number corresponds with that used by the Claimant in his correspondence
with the Home Office [13 of his bundle refers] and that contained in the
originating email from R Booth of the Fraud Team, who also gives the same
bank account number as that contained in the affidavit from the Claimant's
father. The fact that there is consistency throughout the documentation is
not addressed by the First tier Tribunal Judge.

9. I find that Judge of the First tier Tribunal Swinnerton erred materially
in law in allowing the appeal, on the basis that she failed to engage fully
with the evidence submitted by both parties and make clear findings upon
that evidence.

10. I allow the appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department to
the extent that the appeal is remitted for a hearing de novo before a
different Judge of the First tier Tribunal, in order that the credibility
of the Claimant can be assessed along with the evidence submitted by both
parties.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

5 January 2017

