

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/27420/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 1 August 2016                              |On 15 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MUHAMMAD ADREES

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen       (Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Miss R Pickering      (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  the  Secretary
of State for the Home Department (hereinafter "the  Secretary  of  State").
The respondent is Mr Muhammad Adrees  (hereinafter  "the claimant").   The
Secretary of State has appealed to  the  Upper Tribunal,  with  permission,
against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Bircher  hereinafter
"the Judge") to allow  outright  the  appeal  of  the  claimant  against  a
decision of 22 July 2015  refusing  to  issue  him  a  residence  card  as
confirmation of  a  right  of  residence  under  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

Some relevant legislation

2.     In  this  part  of  the  determination  I  shall  summarise   certain
legislation and shall set out certain legislation  which  either  the Judge
found it necessary to consider or I have found it necessary to consider.

3.    The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as  amended
(which I shall refer to hereinafter as "the 2006 Regulations") set out who
shall be a "qualified person" (Regulation 6) and who shall be  regarded  as
an "extended family member" (Regulation 8).  Regulation 6 makes  it  clear
that a "worker" is a qualified person and Regulation 8 makes it clear  that
a person who is in a "durable relationship"  with  an  EEA  national  is  an
extended family member.  Regulation 17(4) says that the Secretary of  State
"may" issue a residence card to an extended family member who is not an  EEA
national.  So, that is a discretionary  power.   Regulation 26  permits  an
aggrieved person to appeal against "an EEA decision".

4.    As is well known, the Immigration Act 2014 substantially amended  the
appeal provisions as  contained  within  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002.  The last of the relevant amendments came into force prior
to the decision under appeal in this case.  In  particular,  section 86  of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in its  amended  form  now
reads as follows:

      "     (1)  This section applies to an appeal under section 82(1).

            (2)  The Tribunal must determine -

                       (a)   any matter raised as a ground of appeal, and

                       (b)   any matter which  section 85  requires  it  to
consider."

5.    Section 86 in its un-amended form had contained the  following  which
is now no longer there:

      "     (3)  The Tribunal must allow the appeal  insofar  as  it  thinks
that -

                       (a)   a decision against which the appeal is  brought
                       or is treated as being brought was not in  accordance
                       with the law (including Immigration Rules), ..."

6.     The Immigration European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2015  amended,
                       from 6 April 2015,
various provisions contained within the 2006 Regulations including  Schedule
                       1 with the upshot
that sections 84, 85 and 86 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
                       2002 in its amended
form have effect in relation to an appeal under the 2002 Regulations  as  if
                       it were an appeal under
section 82(1) of that Act.

7.    The relevance of the above provisions will, hopefully,  become  clear.


The background

8.    The claimant is a national of Pakistan and was born on 8 August 1987.
 He applied for a residence card on the basis of his relationship  with  an
EEA national one Mrs Oana Madalina Vladoiu whom he  said  was  exercising
treaty  rights  in  the  UK  as  a  worker.   There  had  been  a   previous
unsuccessful application but the one which led to the decision under  appeal
was made in February 2015 and was refused on 6 July 2015.  The respondent
issued, simultaneously, a Notice of Immigration Decision refusing  to  issue
the residence card and a "reasons for refusal letter" explaining why it had
been decided to so refuse.   The  letter,  in  summary,  explains  that  the
Secretary of State did not think that the evidence presented in  support  of
the application demonstrated that Ms Vladoiu was a "qualified person",  its
not being accepted that evidence she  had  supplied  regarding  her  claimed
employment in the UK was persuasive, nor was it  believed  that  the  couple
were in a "durable relationship".  As to  the  discretion  contained  within
regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations the Secretary of  State,  in  the
reasons for refusal letter, said this:

       "As  you  have  failed  to  establish  that  you  meet  the  relevant
      conditions of Regulation 8, it  is  not  accepted  that  you  are  an
      extended family  member  as  claimed.   Regulation 17(4)  allows  the
      Secretary of State to assess whether having established that a  person
      is  an  extended  family  member  it  is  appropriate   in   all   the
      circumstances to issue a  residence card.   As  you  have  failed  to
      demonstrate that you are an extended family member,  your  application
      has not been subsequently assessed under regulation 17(4)."

9.     The  claimant,  through  his  solicitors,  appealed  to  the   First-
tier Tribunal.  The  grounds  of  appeal  were  set  out  in  a  letter  of
31 July 2015 which was attached to and incorporated  into  the  notice  of
appeal.  The letter contained factual assertion and  disagreement  with  the
Secretary of State's view concerning the state of the relationship  and  the
employment status of Ms Vladoiu.  It was also contended that:

       "The  appellant's  application  should  have  been  looked  at  under
      regulation 17(4)  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006."

10.   The appeal was considered by way of an oral hearing which  took  place
on 7 January 2016.  Both parties had representation and the claimant  gave
evidence along with Ms Vladoiu and one other witness.   The Judge,  having
considered the evidence and submissions, found that Ms Vladoiu was indeed a
worker  and  that  she  and  the  claimant  were,  indeed,  in   a   durable
relationship such that the claimant  was  to  be  regarded  as  an  extended
family member.  Having explained her conclusions as to that, the Judge then
said this:

      "     40.  Therefore I find that the claimant meets  the  requirements
      of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, as amended, for the  issue
      of an EEA Residence Card on the basis that he is the extended  family
      member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the UK."



11.   Thereafter, under the heading "Decision" the Judge wrote:

      "     46.  The appeal is allowed."

12.   It is to be noted that the Judge did not make any reference,  in  her
determination, to regulation 17(4) and to the point that the issuing  of  a
card, even where it was established that a claimant is  an  extended  family
member of a qualified person, would be discretionary.

The permission stage

13.   The Secretary of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal.  The grounds did  not  seek  to  challenge  the  favourable
findings regarding the "qualified person" or "durable relationship"  aspects
and, in fact, only sought to challenge the Judge's decision  to  allow  the
appeal outright.  It was contended that following what had been said  in  FD
(EEA discretion - basis of appeal) Algeria [2007]  UKAIT 49  and  Ihemedu
(OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 the Judge did not have power to
allow the appeal outright but, instead, given the  findings  she  had  made,
could only allow the appeal to the limited extent that the decision  of  the
Secretary of State  was  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  because  the
Secretary of State had not yet exercised the discretion conferred  upon  her
under regulation 17(4).  Permission to appeal was granted in these terms:

      "The grounds argue that the Judge erred in allowing  the  appellant's
      appeal outright whereas, as it  was  a  matter  for  the  respondent's
      discretion as to whether she issued a residence card  in  OFM cases,
      the Judge  should  have  concluded  that  the  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law, with a view to the appeal being  remitted  to
      the respondent for consideration of the exercise  of  her  discretion.
      The grounds reveal an arguable error of law."

13.   Permission having been granted the appeal was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me).

The hearing before me

14.   Representation  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am  grateful  to  each
representative.  Mrs Pettersen relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  the
basis upon which permission had been granted.  She invited me to  set  aside
the decision of the Judge and to remake the decision myself in a way  which
would achieve remittal so that the Secretary of State could consider how  to
exercise regulation 17(4) discretion.   Ms Pickering  contended  that  any
error in  the  decision  was  not  material  given  the  favourable  factual
findings.  Her view was, in effect, that no other outcome, on the  facts  as
found, other than the issuing of a residence card could be  possible.   Her
second ground was to the effect that, in light of the content of section 86
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in its amended form and
what had been said  in  Greenwood  (No. 2)  (para 398  considered)  [2015]
UKUT 00629 (IAC) the Judge did not have power to simply allow the appeal to
a limited extent on the basis that the decision was "not in accordance  with
the law".  The Judge's only option was, it was said, to  allow  the  appeal
outright or to dismiss it.   Ms Pickering,  though,  as  I  understand  it,
seemed to accept that even if I did not set aside the Judge's  decision  on
the basis of the second ground of appeal, there would still  have  to  be  a
process  whereby  the  Secretary  of  State   exercised   regulation 17(4)
discretion one way or the other.  She urged me, nevertheless, to  allow  the
decision of the Judge to stand.



My consideration of the arguments

15.   It is now accepted that the claimant  is  in  a  durable  relationship
with a qualified person.  It is not in dispute that even had  the  Secretary
of State accepted all of that was so when considering  the  application  for
the residence card, there would still have been a separate process to  have
gone through concerning the exercise of discretion  under  regulation 17(4)
of the 2006 Regulations.  I accept that in the two decisions cited  by  the
Secretary of State  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal  did
indicate, on the basis of the law as it then was, that in  appeals  such  as
this where the discretion has not  been  exercised  a  judge  who  finds  in
favour of a claimant on the  primary  facts  (as  here)  was  restricted  to
allowing an appeal on the basis that the decision under appeal  was  not  in
accordance with the law and  then,  I  suppose,  indicating  that  a  lawful
decision,  which  would  encompass  the  exercise  of  the  discretion,  was
awaited.   Had  there   not   been   legislative   changes   regarding   the
determination of appeals as brought in by the Immigration Act 2014, I would
have  accepted  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  and  would,  in   all
probability, have set aside the Judge's decision on that particular basis.

16.   The position with respect to appeal rights and how appeals are  to  be
dealt with, though, has  changed.   In  this  context,  it  appeared  to  be
accepted by both representatives before me that the full regime  of  changes
introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 applied because they were in  force
prior to the date of the  decision  under  appeal  having  been  made.   The
claimant's right of appeal, in this case, was derived from Regulation 26 of
the 2006 Regulations but new provisions inserted into the 2002 Act by  the
2014 Act largely applied to the appeal, and indeed  to  appeals  under  the
2006 Regulations  generally,  because  of  the  content  of  Schedule 1,
paragraph 1 (as referred to above) to the Regulations in its amended  form.
Insofar as it is relevant it was clearly intended by the Secretary of  State
that new provisions contained  within  the  2014 Act  would  apply  in  the
context of appeals brought under the 2006 Regulations and that was  clearly
stated to be the intention in the explanatory memorandum to the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) (Amendment) Regulations 2015.   In  that  document
this was said:

      "Paragraph 15 of Schedule 1 amends paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the
      2006 Regulations  (Appeals  to  the  First-tier Tribunal)  so  that
      sections 84, 85 and 86 of the amended 2002 Act have effect in relation
      to an appeal under the 2006 Regulations  as  if  it  were  an  appeal
      against the decision of the Secretary of State under section 82(1) of
      the 2002 Act (right of appeal to the Tribunal).  In  looking  at  the
      amended wording of Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations, it  is  clear
      that that aim has been  achieved.   In  particular,  section 86  does
      apply."

17.   In Greenwood (No. 2), cited above, the  Upper Tribunal  was  dealing
with appealable decisions which had been made under  the  Immigration Rules
rather than under the 2006 Regulations.  Nevertheless, given the content of
Schedule 1, it seems to me that what it had  to  say  about  how  a  First-
tier Tribunal must dispose of an appeal applies across the board.  However,
before returning to Greenwood (No. 2) it is necessary to look at  what  was
said by the Upper Tribunal in Greenwood (Automatic Deportation:   Order  of
Events) (2014) UKUT 00342 (IAC).  Here, the Upper Tribunal was looking  at
the old or un-amended version of section 86 and the range of  possibilities
that it gave  to  judges  in  the  First-tier Tribunal  when  disposing  of
appeals.  The Upper Tribunal observed:

      "17.  Ignoring the pleonasm of 'remit back' I think it is  in  general
      doubtful whether the First-tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to remit  a
      matter to a decision maker.  It has a power to allow  or  dismiss  an
      appeal; and if allowing an appeal it has a power to  give  directions,
      with which the Secretary of State must comply.  It does  not  formally
      have the power to quash the decision under  appeal,  but  it  is  well
      understood that a decision of the tribunal  to  the  effect  that  the
      decision  was  not  in  accordance   with   the   law   prevents   the
      decision maker from relying on it or acting on it, so that it  is  to
      that extent of no effect.  In those circumstances, if the decision  is
      one which results from an  application  made  by  an  individual,  the
      position is that the application is  outstanding,  awaiting  a  lawful
      decision.  No remittal is necessary.  Any circumstances  arising  from
      the fact that an application has not yet  been  decided  (for  example
      under s.3C of the 1971 Act, or s.77 of the 2002 Act) will  continue,
      and will be treated as not having been  interrupted  by  the  unlawful
      decision.  If  there  is  any  doubt  about  the  matter,  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, in allowing the appeal, can direct the decision maker
      to treat the applicant accordingly.

            18.  If, on the other hand, the decision is  one  which  results
      not from an application but from the Secretary of State's  own  motion
      (for  example,  deportation,  removal,  curtailment)  the   tribunal's
      determination that the decision was an unlawful one simply leaves  the
      matter open, as it was before.  The Secretary of State cannot continue
      to treat the appellant as though the decision under appeal had been  a
      lawful one.  Again,  if  necessary,  that  can  be  made  clear  by  a
      direction; but there the First-tier Tribunal's jurisdiction stops.  In
      cases where the Secretary of State is the initiator of actions, it  is
      not the tribunal's function to suggest that such action ought to be re-
      initiated."

18.   In Greenwood (No. 2) the Upper Tribunal, in light of the amendment to
section 86 brought in by the Immigration Act 2014, said this:

      "     21.  We  consider  it  clear  that  prior  to  the  most  recent
      amendment of section 86, the F-tT, in determining statutory  appeals,
      had two main choices viz. to allow or dismiss the appeal.  A third and
      fourth option were also available.  The third option was to  allow  an
      appeal and, simultaneously, to make directions in order to give effect
      to its decision, per section 87 of the 2002 Act as amended.  However,
      this  has  been  repealed  by  paragraph 37  of  Schedule 9  to  the
      Immigration Act 2014, effective from 20 October 2014.  Thus [17] of
      Greenwood (Automatic Deportation:  Order of Events) (2014) UKUT 00342
      (IAC), which predated this statutory development, must  be  read  with
      this adjustment.  The fourth possible outcome of an appeal to  the  F-
      tT, as Greenwood noted, was the  following.   If  the  effect  of  the
      tribunal's decision was to conclude that the decision of the Secretary
      of State under appeal was unlawful and the tribunal did not substitute
      another decision:

                 (a)   if the decision of the Secretary of State involved  a
                 determination of an application made  by  the  litigant,  a
                 lawful decision remains to be  made  by  the  Secretary  of
                 State - and it is preferable that the F-tT say so clearly;

                 (b)   alternatively, if the challenge in the appeal was  to
                 an 'own motion' decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,  it
                 would be a matter for the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide
                 whether a further decision should be made in  the  wake  of
                 the F-tT's decision.

            This is, in effect, a declaratory decision.

            22.  As noted above, in  the  seemingly  interminable  merry-go-
      round of legislation activity, section 86 has undergone a significant
      recent amendment.  This is linked to wholesale reduction in  statutory
      rights  of  appeal  affected  by  the  amendments  introduced  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014, operative  from  20 October 2014.   In  this
      context, the exercise of juxtaposing  the  new  section 82  with  its
      predecessor is enlightening.  This reduction in  appealable  decisions
      is accompanied by a significant pruning of the  permitted  grounds  of
      appeal, which are enshrined in section 84.  By section 85, the F-tT is
      obliged to consider certain matters.  By this  route  one  arrives  at
      section 86, which bears the cross-heading 'Determination of Appeal'.

             23.   In  notable  contrast  with  its  predecessor,  the   new
      section 86 does not reproduce the two basic options  of  allowing  or
      dismissing  the  appeal.   In  this  respect,  the  drafting  is  both
      surprising and infelicitous.  However, applying elementary  dogma,  it
      is the function of every  appellate  tribunal  and  court  to  resolve
      appeals, normally by allowing  or  dismissing  them,  unless  directed
      otherwise by statute.  I consider that  any  reconfiguration  of  this
      basic model would, given the legislative history,  require  clear  and
      elaborate new provisions.  There are none.  The new statutory language
      is 'determine'.  I  conclude  that  this  encompasses  the  two  basic
      options of either allowing or dismissing an appeal.  The third  option
      - noted in [21] above - of allowing  an  appeal  with  directions  has
      clearly been extinguished by the repeal of section 87 of the 2002 Act.
       I consider, however, that the fourth option noted above, with its two
      dimensions, continues to apply.  This has  been  a  feature  of  UTIAC
      jurisprudence for some years and, in the new  legislation,  Parliament
      has not taken the opportunity to interfere."

19.   It seems to me, then, despite the deletion by way of amendment of  the
"not in accordance with the law" basis for allowing an appeal, the  position
is not simply one of the First-tier Tribunal only being able to on the  one
hand allow an appeal outright and, on the other  one,  to  dismiss  it.   To
that extent I am not in agreement with Ms Pickering  although  I  initially
thought that I was.  When reading the two Upper Tribunal cases together, it
is clear that remittal, if it was ever available, is no longer so  now  but,
on my reading, it remains open to a First-tier Tribunal to conclude that  a
decision made by the Secretary of State is  unlawful  with  the  consequence
that, so long as the decision of the Secretary of State was  a  decision  on
an application made  by  an  applicant  who  has  then  appealed,  a  lawful
decision is still awaited.

20.   On the other hand, though, the respondent's attack  upon  the Judge's
decision in this case is specifically on the basis that she was  obliged  to
and failed to conclude,  in  light  of  her  favourable  findings  from  the
claimant's perspective, that the decision was "not in  accordance  with  the
law"  such  that  it  remained  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise
discretion.  However, the new section 86 no longer specifically permits the
tribunal to allow an appeal on the basis  that  the  decision  "was  not  in
accordance with the law".  The section does,  as  it  did  in  its  previous
form, require the tribunal to determine any matter raised  as  a  ground  of
appeal.  The amendment to Schedule 1 to the 2006 Regulations (as  set  out
above) effectively means the ground of appeal  which  the  claimant  can  be
taken to have been relying upon was:

      "A ground of appeal that the decision appealed  against  breaches  the
      appellant's rights under the EUT treaties in respect of entry  to  or
      residence in the United Kingdom."

21.   The claimant had contended that the Secretary of State ought  to  have
dealt with the regulation 17(4) discretion when making the  decision  under
appeal.  Against that background, whilst  I  would  accept  that  the Judge
erred not by, as is suggested by the Secretary of State, failing  to  decide
that the decision could not stand on a 'not  in  accordance  with  the  law'
basis, given that such decisions  are  not  now  recognised  under  the  new
appeals regime, but rather by not dealing with the regulation 17(4)  ground
at all, given that that was a relevant part of the deemed ground  of  appeal
in light of the wording of  the  amended  first  paragraph  of  Schedule 1,
before deciding to allow the appeal.  Put another way,  in  order  to  allow
the appeal outright, an option which was available  to  her  given  the  new
appeals regime, the Judge had to be satisfied not only  that  the  relevant
EEA national  was  a  qualified  person  and  that  there  was  a  durable
relationship between the couple but that  it  was  appropriate  to  exercise
discretion in the claimant's favour.  Had  she  done  that  she  would  have
properly determined the appeal as is required  by  section 86.   One  would
think, therefore, that the appropriate course of action would be to set  the
decision aside.  However, I am not obliged to set  a  decision  of  a  first
instance tribunal aside merely because I have decided that such  a  decision
contains an error of law.  The power to  do  so  under  section 12  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, is  a  discretionary  one.   In
this case, despite the changes to  the  appeals  regime,  the  Secretary  of
State did not seek to raise any arguments to the effect that if the  primary
facts regarding the  status  of  the  EEA  sponsor  and  the  state  of  the
relationship between the couple were resolved  in  favour  of  the  claimant
discretion should, nevertheless, be exercised against him.   It  was,  given
the changes to the powers of the First-tier Tribunal brought about  by  the
new appeals regime, open to the Secretary of  State  to  argue  such  points
before the Judge at the appeal hearing.  However, none were advanced.   So,
although  the Judge  technically  erred,  no  basis  for  the  exercise  of
discretion  against  the  claimant  has  ever   been   advanced.    In   the
circumstances, and given that the favourable  findings  made  by  the Judge
have not  been  subject  to  any  challenge,  I  consider  that  it  is  not
appropriate for me to set the decision aside.  Essentially, on the  material
before her, the Judge reached the right conclusion even if she did  err  in
so doing.  Accordingly, her decision shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed:                                 Dated: 15/08/2016

M R Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                                 Dated:

M R Hemingway

