
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/28728/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 September 2016            |On 26 September 2016            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                          MR NDEDE FRANCIS AKETCHI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                   ______________________________________

                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS
                   ______________________________________

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer



1.   The Appellant is a national of the Cote D'Ivoire, born on 31 October
1978. On 22 November 2013, he applied for a residence card as an extended
family member of Ms [MB], a national of Finland born on 24 December 1971 in
Abidjan. This application was refused on 2 July 2014 on the basis that the
Respondent considered that there was a lack of a durable relationship
between the couple which had lasted for at least two years. The Appellant
appealed against this decision and the appeal came before Judge of the
First tier Tribunal Raymond for hearing on 21 August 2015.

2.   In a decision and reasons promulgated on 12 January 2016, the Judge
dismissed the appeal, essentially on the basis that there were problematic
features in the evidence and he did not accept that the Appellant was in a
durable relationship with his partner, despite the birth of a son on 29
March 2014.

3.   An application for permission to appeal was made in time on the basis
that the Judge erred materially in law: (i) in that his findings were
perverse; (ii) his findings were not based on inconsistent oral evidence
but by him reading the Appellant's bundle; the Respondent's decision and
speculation; (iii) the decision by the First tier Tribunal Judge is
seriously flawed. In essence, the point being made in the grounds of appeal
was that the Judge had made findings against the Appellant and his witness
which were not based on their answers to questions put to them as no
questions had been put by either the Presenting Office or the Judge on the
issues the Judge found to be in contention.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 12
August 2016 on the basis that:

    "It is arguable that the Judge, in making the adverse findings he did,
    unduly speculated on matters not raised at the hearing and erroneously
    relied upon matters that were not arguably relevant to the appeal
    before him."

Hearing

5.   At the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis helpfully conceded that on the
facts of this particular case, given that the Presenting Officer only asked
three questions by way of cross-examination, the Judge had acted unfairly
in proceeding to go into the evidence in such forensic detail after the
hearing had finished, without providing the Appellant and his witness with
the opportunity to respond to his concerns.

6.   I agree entirely with Mr Jarvis' concession in this case, which I
consider was properly made. The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge
is extensive [116 paragraphs] and is almost entirely based on the Judge's
speculative findings based on his examination of the documentary evidence.
However, none of the issues upon which the Judge made adverse findings were
put to the Appellant or his witness during the appeal hearing, in order to
provide them with an opportunity to respond. This is clearly unfair and a
breach of natural justice, particularly in circumstances where the case
concerned whether the Appellant and his partner were in a durable
relationship and there was a child of the relationship and the Appellant's
paternity had been confirmed by way of a DNA test.

7.   Therefore, I find there is a material error of law and set aside the
decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge.

8.   However, Mr Jarvis helpfully drew to my attention the judgment of the
Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC)
handed down yesterday, where the Upper Tribunal held that there is no
statutory right of appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State
not to grant a Residence Card to a person claiming to be an Extended Family
Member.

9.   In light of the decision in Sala therefore, the Appellant has no right
of appeal before the First tier Tribunal.

10.  Ms Clarke informed me that the Appellant and his partner are now
married and she had advised them to make an application for a residence
card as a family member pursuant to regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA)
Regulations 2006.

Decision

11.  I find that First tier Tribunal Judge Raymond erred materially in law
and I set aside his decision. However, in light of the very recent decision
in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) the Appellant is
not entitled to appeal against the refusal of a residence card as an
extended family member because it has been found by the Upper Tribunal that
there is no statutory right of appeal against a refusal made under
regulation 8(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

21 September 2016
