
[pic]

|The Upper Tribunal                      |                                   |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        |Appeal Number: IA/28675/2014       |


                            The Immigration Acts


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & reasons promulgated        |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 3 September 2015                   |


                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                     Upper Tribunal Judge Edward Jacobs


|            |BETWEEN                                           |            |
|            |                                                  |            |
|            |Secretary of State for the Home Department        |Appellant   |
|            |                                                  |            |
|            |and                                               |            |
|            |                                                  |            |
|            |Husband of Mrs M                                  |Respondent  |
|            |Anonymity Order Made                              |            |


|Representation     |                                                        |
|For the appellant: |Mr Avory                                                |
|For the respondent:|No representative                                       |




                      Decision and Reasons for Decision

This is one of two cases  that  were  heard  together.  The  other  case  is
reference IA/28677/2014. Our decisions are identical and our reasons,  apart
from the names, are the same.

    History and background


Mrs M is a student with limited leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
These  appeals  concern  her  husband  and  daughter;  we  refer   to   them
collectively as her family. She entered the United Kingdom on 11  June  2008
and her family followed on 22 August 2008.  They  all  had  leave  that  was
coterminous, at first until early August 2009, then until 30  January  2012.
On 4 July 2011, the Immigration Rules  were  changed.  The  family  was  now
required to apply together for their leave to  be  extended.  By  then,  for
reasons relating to her course, Mrs M's leave  had  been  extended  until  7
April 2013, but her family's  had  not.  Her  leave  has  subsequently  been
extended, first to December 2014 and now to May 2016.

Coming back to Mrs M's family, they applied for their leave to  be  extended
at the end of January 2012. This was refused on 26 October 2012.  There  was
an appeal, but this lapsed as the Secretary of State withdrew the  decision.


A new decision was made  on  20  March  2013;  again,  the  application  was
refused.  It  is  important  that  this  was  a  new  decision,  not  a  new
application. The application that was refused was still that of  28  January
2012. There was now a second appeal.

Mrs M and her family also applied (at the same time) for leave on  28  March
2013. She told us that she had been advised to do  this  by  the  presenting
officer at the appeal, although there is  no  record  in  the  Secretary  of
State's file to that effect. In any event, the application was not valid  as
there was already an outstanding application.

Returning to the second appeal, this  came  before  Judge  Brenells  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, who  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  presenting  officer
informing the tribunal that Mrs M's leave had been extended.  The  case  was
remitted to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.

The application was again refused on  25  June  2014,  leading  to  a  third
appeal. This came before  Judge  Samimi  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who
allowed the appeal on  the  ground  that  leave  should  have  been  granted
outside the Immigration Rules in order to avoid an interference with  family
life.

The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on three grounds:

  . the judge had taken  an  impermissible  'near  miss'  approach  to  the
    Immigration Rules, contrary to Miah v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 261;

  . the judge had failed to have proper  regard  to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; and

  . the judge's consideration of Article 8 was fundamentally flawed.

Judge Pirotta of the First-tier Tribunal gave permission to appeal, saying:

    "The reasons in the Determination reveal the error in the  Decision  as
    the IJ [Immigration Judge] concluded that the family  life  of  the  13
    year old son [this is a mistake for  daughter]  who  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2008 was sufficient to  override  the  Immigration
    Rules and paid scant regard to pertinent issues to be considered  under
    s.117B.

    The application discloses  arguable  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    assessment exercise and findings which the  IJ  made,  the  conclusions
    reached were not open to  the  IJ  on  the  facts  before  him  as  the
    Appellants' residence was precarious and could not have given  rise  to
    any expectation of being permitted to remain."

    The application of the Immigration Rules


The Secretary of State was right to refuse the application under the  Rules.
Mrs M's family did not apply for leave at the same time as  her  family  and
that was fatal. It matters not that she was put into  a  difficult  position
as a result of the change of rules. Before  us,  she  relied  on  the  joint
application made on 28 March 2013. That cannot assist  her  either,  because
it was not a valid application.  Even  if  she  was  advised  to  make  that
application by a presenting officer, that cannot change the  position  under
the Rules.

    Leave outside the rules - interference with family life


The legislation


Any consideration of Article 8 requires a tribunal to  apply  sections  117A
and 117B of the 2002 Act:

                                   PART 5A

            Article 8 of the ECHR: Public Interest Considerations

    117A Application of this Part

    (1)    This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

    (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
         under Article 8, and

    (b)    as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.

    (2)    In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
    tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

    (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

    (b)    in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
         considerations listed in section 117C.

    (3)    In subsection (2), 'the  public  interest  question'  means  the
    question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to  respect
    for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

    (1)    The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
    public interest.

    (2)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-

    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)    It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
    of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
    to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-

    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)    Little weight should be given to-

    (a)    a private life, or

    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)    Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a)    the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.'

Analysis


The judge began by making the self-evident point that a failure  to  satisfy
the Immigration Rules did not prevent an applicant  relying  on  Article  8,
citing Izuazu [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC).

Next the judge took account of the need to have regard  to  the  welfare  of
children. Again, that cannot be disputed as a relevant factor.

The judge had regard to section 117B,  setting  out  its  terms  and  making
findings relevant to its provisions. We note:

  . Section 117B(1): both applicants 'have continued to comply with all the
    requirements of the Immigration Control.'

  . Section 117B(2): both applicants 'speak English'.

  . Section 117B(3): 'The Appellants meet the financial requirements of the
    Immigration Rules'. 'There  has  been  no  challenge  to  the  family's
    ability to financially support' the applicants. 'The family's  presence
    in this country is contributing to  the  economic  well  being  of  the
    country.' 'There has been no suggestion that the Appellants have been a
    burden on the tax payer, to the contrary the presence of the Appellants
    together with the Sponsor continues to contribute to the well being  of
    the country.'

  . Section 117B(4): 'Both Appellants ... have continued to comply with all
    the requirements of the Immigration control.'

  . Section 117B(5): this relates to private life. It was not  relevant  as
    the judge based the decision on an interference with family  life,  not
    private  life:  'the  Respondent's  decision  clearly  would   have   a
    detrimental effect on the continuation of family life.'

  . Section 117B(6): there was no dispute as to the genuine and  subsisting
    relationship between parents  and  their  daughter.  It  would  not  be
    reasonable to remove the child 'who has been at school  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2008.' She 'would clearly be forced to  live  apart  from
    her mother for the duration of her leave.'

We reject the argument that the judge applied  an  impermissible  near  miss
approach. It is right that the judge was aware that the only factor  in  the
way of giving leave under the Rules was the fact that the three  members  of
the family did not apply at the same time, but that  is  just  a  background
fact to the application of Article  8.  It  explains  why  the  exercise  of
discretion outside the Rules arose for consideration. It is also right  that
the judge referred to the family's compliance with immigration control,  but
that is relevant under section 117B(4). It is, again, right that  the  judge
referred to the fact that the family were financially  independent  and  met
the financial requirements of  the  Rules,  but  they  were  relevant  under
section   117B(2).   Those   matters,   whether   viewed   individually   or
collectively, do not show that the  judge  reasoned  from  the  'near  miss'
under the Rules to the application of Article.

We come now to the argument that the judge's  application  of  section  117B
was  'a  superficial,  and  therefore  unlawful,  appraisal  of  the  public
interest factors'. Taking the points made in the grounds individually:

  . The judge did  not  fail  to  acknowledge  that  effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest. That is  surely  self-evident  given
    the legislation. Judges do not have to repeat what  is  in  legislation
    that they have cited in full in order  to  demonstrate  that  they  are
    complying with that legislation. That would be mere empty formality. It
    is more pertinent to ask whether  there  is  anything  in  the  judge's
    reasoning to indicate that the judge did not have due regard  to  this,
    as required by section 117A(2). We accept that  the  judge  could  have
    given fuller consideration to this issue, but that does not  mean  that
    this is necessarily an error that has affected the outcome. The  impact
    of this omission has to be considered in the context of the case  as  a
    whole.

  . The grounds state that the Secretary of State 'asserts that  where  the
    Rules (which form the rubric of immigration control) are not satisfied,
    the public interest requires removal.' That  cannot  be  right.  If  it
    were, there would be no scope for the Secretary of State to exercise  a
    discretion  outside  the  Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State  would   be
    abdicating that discretion, which would be unlawful.

  . Next, the grounds argue that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the
    precarious nature of the family's presence. Again, it is right that the
    judge did not expressly state this, but that does  not  mean  that  the
    judge overlooked this well-known  consideration.  As  before,  we  have
    asked ourselves whether the  lack  of  express  consideration  of  this
    factor was an error that affected the outcome.

  . Finally, the grounds argue that section 117B is not an 'a la carte menu
    of matters to be considered'. We do not accept that  that  is  how  the
    judge viewed the section. What the judge did was to make findings  that
    were relevant to section 117B. They were all permissible,  even  beyond
    dispute. The Upper Tribunal has to take  account  of  the  difficulties
    facing judges when a case requires a  consideration  of  a  variety  of
    factors. A judge who focuses on the individual  factors  is  criticised
    for not considering them as  a  whole,  while  a  judge  who  takes  an
    overview of the factors  as  a  whole  is  criticised  for  not  making
    specific findings. In this case, the judge made individual findings  on
    matters that were relevant. Their cumulative impact speaks  for  itself
    on the overall assessment that he had to make.

The final ground relates to Article 8. In effect, this  argument  builds  on
the previous grounds  in  order  to  show  that  the  judge's  analysis  was
fundamentally flawed. The Secretary of State argues that:

    "It is for the family to decide whether they  wish  to  return  to  the
    Philippines together (as a unit) or whether  the  As  [the  applicants]
    return to the Philippines and either make a fresh  application  as  the
    S's [Sponsor's] dependants, or await her  return  at  the  end  of  her
    leave."

Our conclusions

We accept that the judge's analysis was not perfect, but  that  is  not  the
test. We accept that the judge could have  given  express  consideration  to
the public interest and not left the findings to speak for  themselves.  But
the Upper Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited  to  errors  of  law  and  that
means errors that are material in that they affected the outcome. It is  our
view that the judge made  findings  of  fact  that  were  justified  on  the
evidence and that form a sound foundation for the conclusion that there  was
an interference with the family life of each of  the  applicants.  Returning
to the Philippines, with or without their mother, and whether  or  not  they
submitted a fresh application for leave, would interfere with  their  family
life.

The reality is this. There was a family  life.  It  was  precarious  to  the
extent that it depended on the leave given to each member. But within  those
limits it was soundly established in this country. If Mrs M did  not  return
with her family, they would be split as a family, at least temporarily,  for
the time it took to make a fresh application and receive  leave.  If  Mrs  M
returned with  her  family,  they  would,  temporarily  or  permanently,  be
deprived of the family life they have established in  this  country,  albeit
that it was precarious within the limits  of  the  leave  allowed  to  them.
Either way there will be an inference with the family life they  have.  That
leaves the issue of proportionality. As a paper exercise, the  Secretary  of
State's argument of the alternatives may seem sound. But the issue  of  what
is disproportionate must be founded in reality, albeit  one  viewed  through
the lens of section 117B. It is our view that, given the findings made,  the
judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  balance  lay  in  favour  of  the
applicants. To the extent that the judge's analysis was not as  full  as  it
might have been, we  consider  that  fuller  consideration  would  not  have
produced a different outcome.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal made on did not involve  the  making
of an error on a point of law (sections 11 and 12 of the  Tribunals,  Courts
and Enforcement Act 2007).

                         anonymity order Respondent

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the respondent is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report
of these  proceedings  (in  whatever  form)  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the respondent or any member of the  respondent's  family.  Failure
to comply with this order could lead to a contempt of court.


|Signed on original                   |Edward Jacobs                         |
|on 1 September 2015                  |Upper Tribunal Judge                  |

