
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/29319/2015,
ia/31660/2015,
     ia/31666/2015, ia/31668/2015 & ia/31669/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 July 2017                        |On 26 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

|                         |E M O O                  |First Respondent         |
|                         |A A DO                   |Second Respondent        |
|                         |A S A O                  |Third Respondent         |
|                         |A A K O                  |Fourth Respondent        |
|                         |A A D O                  |Fifth Respondent         |


                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Goh, Counsel instructed by Direct Access
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the Respondents, or any  of
them. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
this order because a similar order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal  and
the case concerns the welfare of children.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal allowing the appeals  of  the  Respondents,  hereinafter  "the
Claimants", against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  refusing  them
leave to remain on human rights grounds.

The Claimants are all citizens of Nigeria.  The first  respondent  was  born
on 20 March 1976 and so is now 38 years old.  The  remaining  Claimants  are
her children.  The second Claimant was born in April 2004 and so is  now  12
years old, the third Claimant was born in October 2007 and so is now  almost
10 years old, the fourth Claimant was born in October 2009 and so is  now  7
years old and the fifth Claimant was born in July 2013 and so  is  now  very
nearly 4 years old.

The minor Claimants are  the  children  of  the  first  respondent  and  her
partner who I will identify here simply as "AG".  It is their case that  the
Claimants and AG have lived together in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  nuclear
family.

AG was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in December 2013  for  his  part
in assisting unlawful immigration from an  EU  member  state  and  providing
immigration advice for services in contravention of a  prohibition.   He  is
the subject of a deportation order.

Mr Mills explained that the deportation order was  certified  under  Section
94B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   AG  purported  to
challenge that decision, I  assume  by  way  of  judicial  review.   He  was
unsuccessful and applied for  leave  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.
Clearly following the decision of the Supreme Court in Kiarie and  Byndloss,
R (on the applications of) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2017] UKSC 42 and, without being disrespectful of the role of the Court  of
Appeal, it seems at least likely that, assuming the information given to  me
is correct, he will soon be given a decision that he can and will choose  to
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

It is the first Claimant's case in that she has no family left  in  Nigeria.
Her parents died in 1985 and her grandmother  in  2009  and  her  uncle  has
since died.  She has another close relative, a sister who lives in Dubai.

She says there is no family home in Nigeria to which they could  return  and
live.  She said that AG is  also  bereft  of  relatives.   His  only  living
relative in Nigeria is his mother aged 76.  His father died in 2004 and  his
sisters between 2006 and 2011.  She understands there are uncles in  Nigeria
but AG has never met them.  She confirmed that he has no home in Nigeria.

She  did  not  feel  able  to  find  work  in  Nigeria  although   she   has
qualifications as a care assistant.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge,  in  summary,  allowed  the  appeals  out  of
concern for the needs of the children.  Paragraph  19  of  the  Decision  is
particularly pertinent.  The judge said:

  "I find that the [first Claimant] is  part  of  a  family  unit  in  this
  country consisting in particular of her partner and  her  four  children.
  They are all Nigerian nationals.  The third to fifth [Claimants] were all
  born in the UK  and  have  lived  there  all  their  lives.   The  second
  [Claimant] has lived here since he was 2 years  old.   The  children  all
  attend school or nursery in the UK.  I have seen school reports  for  the
  second and third Claimants which show they are progressing  well  through
  their education with good attendance, punctuality and  behaviour.   There
  is also evidence to show that the  third  Claimant  has  participated  in
  extra-curricular activities.  The fourth Claimant has also been attending
  school, is progressing satisfactorily and received certificates  of  100%
  attendance award at the end of the Autumn term 2015 and Spring term 2016.
   The fifth Claimant has attended nursery  at  St  Luke's  Primary  School
  since September 2016."

The judge had the benefit of a Social Services report showing  the  children
are well cared for and happy in the UK that they have friends at school  and
are integrated into society.

The third Claimant suffers from asthma and  the  judge  was  satisfied  with
evidence that she had  to  use  the  school's  emergency  inhaler  on  eight
occasions in 2015 and 2016.

The judge noted there were no health concerns for the other children.

The judge acknowledged letters from the second, third and  fourth  Claimants
saying they did not want to go to Nigeria that they were  happy  in  England
where they enjoy school and have friends.  The family belonged to  a  Church
where the first Claimant sings in the  choir  and  the  second  Claimant  is
learning to play the  drums.   They  had  previously  attended  a  different
church.  The judge  acknowledged  that  she  had  seen  letters  of  support
confirming  that  the  first  Claimant  and  her  children  have   a   close
relationship with other residents in the United Kingdom.   The  judge  noted
how the second Claimant had been in the United Kingdom for  ten  years,  the
third Claimant since birth which was then for almost nine years, the  fourth
Claimant since birth which was then  seven  years  and  the  fifth  Claimant
since birth which was three years.  The third, fourth  and  fifth  Claimants
had never been to Nigeria and  the  second  Claimant  had  not  returned  to
Nigeria since arriving in  the  United  Kingdom  aged  only  2.   The  judge
accepted the evidence that neither the Claimant  nor  her  partner  had  any
close relatives remaining in Nigeria and found that if they were  to  return
"they would therefore be entirely self-dependant, with  no  assistance  from
family there."  In effect in practical terms they  appear  to  have  severed
all ties with Nigeria and have settled in the UK."

The Learned Judge then directed herself about the  significance  of  leading
cases involving the removal of children and then considered  the  Claimants'
cases individually.

The judge considered the first Claimant and noted that she did not meet  the
requirements of the Rules because neither she nor her partner  were  British
citizens or refugees or in the United Kingdom with humanitarian  protection.
 She noted that the first Claimant had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  at
least seven years immediately preceding the application but also noted  that
she was not the sole carer because she had  joint  responsibility  with  her
partner who was subject to removal.

Clearly she had not lived in the United Kingdom for at least  twenty  years.
She had been in the United Kingdom for  ten  years.   However  there  is  an
additional difficulty in her case.  At paragraph  18  of  the  decision  the
judge said:

  "I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me and
  I accept that whilst the  first  Claimant  has  a  troubling  immigration
  history given the marriage of convenience she entered  into  with  an  EU
  national in order to attempt to secure permanent residence in the UK, and
  whilst her partner is the subject of a deportation order because  of  the
  immigration offences he had committed, these do not impact  on  the  main
  issues to be determined in this appeal in that the factual matrix  is  in
  effect agreed."

I cannot agree with the judge's observation here.  She had to decide  if  it
was "reasonable"  to  remove  require  the  children  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom.  This is a no doubt deliberately imprecise word and there has  been
disagreement about how it should be interpreted and  in  particular  whether
what is reasonable should be understood in the sense of what  is  reasonable
for the child or whether it is reasonable in all  the  circumstances  having
regard for the bad immigration history (if any) of the child's  parents.  It
follows that  removal in circumstances that would  be  unreasonable  in  the
case of parents who had an unblemished  or  reasonable  immigration  history
might be entirely reasonable in the case of someone whose  conduct  made  it
more than ordinarily desirable for  them  to  be  removed.   This  has  been
considered by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
705 and although Elias LJ gave a clear indication  that,  had  he  not  been
bound by precedent, he may have taken a  different  view,  he  regarded  the
point as settled by the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
Civ 450 where the Court was considering the meaning  of  "unduly  harsh"  in
Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  court
concluded that the reasoning in MM had to be followed  and  applied  to  the
case such as the one I have to decide where Section 117B(6)(b) applied.

The First-tier Tribunal's error goes to the very core of its decision and  I
must set it aside.

Given the clear findings about the evidence I have no hesitation  in  saying
that I can remake the decision without the need for further evidence.

I begin by considering the case of the oldest Claimant.  Her case  on  human
rights grounds is determined by Section 117B and I note the  fact  that  she
is an English speaker willing and able to work and has  established  herself
in society as indicated by her involvement  in  a  church.   These  are  not
negative features but they do not amount  to  very  much  in  an  Article  8
balancing exercise and do little to outweigh the strong public  interest  in
her removal.  Further her  private  life  has  been  established  while  her
immigration status was precarious and for most of the time it was  unlawful.
I am restrained from much  weight  to  a  private  life  acquired  in  these
circumstances.  She does have a close personal  relationship  but  far  from
being with a qualifying partner  it  is  with  someone  who  is  subject  to
deportation.  Taken on its own her case is close to  hopeless  and  is  made
worse by her "troubling immigration history".  The first  appellant  is  not
simply someone who has overstayed but someone who has behaved  badly  in  an
unsuccessful attempt to obtain leave.  Clearly it is  more  than  ordinarily
important that she is not allowed to benefit from her overstaying.

There is one further factor that is much more  helpful  to  her.   She  does
have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  three  qualifying
children, the third and fourth Claimant.  These  children  are  "qualifying"
by reason of having lived in the United Kingdom for more than  seven  years.
The public interest does not require the first Claimant removal if it  would
not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

The difficulty here is determining what is  "reasonable".   It  is  my  view
that the law requires me to have regard to all the  circumstances  including
the mother's poor behaviour.  None of the children have particularly  strong
reasons to remain in the United Kingdom.  It is the country  they  know  and
understand and they are doing well enough at school and are settled.   These
are positive features and do weigh in  favour  of  their  being  allowed  to
remain but it is not the law that a child acquires a right to remain in  the
United Kingdom by reason of seven years' residence.

It is difficult to get a clear picture of how they would manage in  Nigeria.
 I must accept the evidence (because there is no reason to  doubt  it)  that
there is no useful family support in Nigeria but the mother has lived  there
for long enough to know how to manage.  They  would  be  returned  to  their
country, and their mother's country,  of  nationality  where  she  could  be
expected to find work as an enterprising English-speaking woman.

I am satisfied that it is reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave.   I
reach this conclusion having thought of each of the  appellants  separately.
There is no reason to distinguish between them.  For example this is  not  a
case where one  of  the  children  suffers  from  an  extremely  significant
medical condition or has some particularly telling reason to remain  in  the
United Kingdom.  Removal is often part of childhood experiences and  is  not
in any way inherently unreasonable.

I am required to consider their best interests and I have no  hesitation  in
saying their best interests lie in their remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
which is the country they know with both parents.  However their  father  is
unlikely to be allowed  to  remain  and  at  the  moment  is  certainly  not
entitled to remain and for  the  reasons  I  have  already  explained  their
mother is not allowed to remain except possibly for their  sakes.   Although
I am required to have regard to their best interests  I  cannot  necessarily
make a decision that gives them their best result.

Again as the First-tier Tribunal explained in  its  decision  "the  ultimate
question was whether it was reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
parent who had no  right  to  remain  in  the  country  of  origin".   I  am
satisfied that it is reasonable especially when it is  remembered  that  any
other decision would involve the  first  Claimant  remaining  and  therefore
establishing a right to stay  even  though  she  has  lived  in  the  United
Kingdom without permission for a long period  and  has  a  poor  immigration
history.

I find that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  and  I  set  aside  its
decision.  Further I remake the decision  dismissing  the  appeals  of  each
appellant.

Notice of Decision

I allow the Secretary of State's appeals. The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
law. I set aside its decision and I substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
appeal of each appellant against the decision of the Secretary of State.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |








