
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/38195/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              Mrs KAMALJIR KAUR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S Bellara
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of India born on 12 December  1983.  On  1
October 2014 the Respondent made a decision to remove  the  Appellant.  This
followed a decision of the same date in which  the  Respondent  stated  that
she was satisfied that there was substantial evidence to conclude  that  the
Appellant had fraudulently obtained an ETS certificate by  use  of  a  proxy
test taker. The right of appeal was provided but only  after  the  Appellant
had left the United Kingdom.

2.    The Appellant sought to appeal in-country and lodged  an  IAFT-1  form
with the First-tier Tribunal on 6  October  2014.  The  appeal  came  before
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Loughridge for a decision on the papers  on
6 July  2015  and  was  dismissed  due  to  the  "almost  complete  lack  of
information/ evidence."

3.    The Appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
the basis that the Respondent had not discharged the burden of proving  that
the Appellant had used deception and permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
Designated Judge Shaerf for this reason.

4.    In a rule 24 response, Mr David Clarke made two points: firstly,  that
the Appellant had failed to identify a ground of appeal under section 84  of
the NIAA 2002 challenging the Respondent's decision  and  so  her  complaint
was misplaced and secondly, that the decision  under  appeal  is  an  IS151A
part 2 decision which provides the Appellant with an out of  country  appeal
and if this is so, the Upper Tier does not have  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
appeal.

5.    At the hearing before me, Mr Bellara  sought  to  argue  that  as  the
Appellant had raised human rights  in  her  application  for  permission  to
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal she was entitled to  an  in-country  right
of appeal. In response, Mr Whitwell drew my attention to  the  judgments  in
Nirula [2012] EWCA Civ 1436 and Virk [2013] EWCA Civ 652.

6.    It is clear  from  Nirula  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1436  per  Lord  Justice
Longmore that, in a case which would otherwise require  an  out  of  country
appeal, any human rights claim has to be made before a notice of  appeal  is
served. This Appellant raised human rights grounds for  the  first  time  in
her application for permission to appeal to the FtT.  In  Virk  [2013]  EWCA
Civ 652, Lord Justice Patten held  at  [23]  that:  "Statutory  jurisdiction
cannot be conferred by waiver  or  agreement;  or  by  the  failure  of  the
parties or the tribunal to be alive to the point." It is clear in  light  of
these authorities that neither the First-tier nor  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.

Decision

7.    The appeal is dismissed through want of jurisdiction: rule 8(2)(a)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman     22 January 2016
