
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/43845/2014
                                                               IA/43846/2014
                                                               IA/43847/2014
                                                               IA/43911/2014
                                                               IA/43916/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated      |
|On 16th May 2017                       |On 7th June 2017          |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                              Mr Justice Nicol
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


                                   Between

                         Mr Mohammed Mahbubur RAHMAN
                              Mrs Aysa SIDDIKA
                           Mr Nazmus Sakib MAHBUB
                            Mr Md Mijanur RAHMAN
                              Mrs Sonia SULTANA
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                               Appellants
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Jones, counsel instructed by Chancery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a decision of Judge of the
First- tier Tribunal (FtTJ) Black, promulgated on 21 October 2015,
dismissing their appeals against a decision by the Respondent (SSHD) made
on 21 October 2014, refusing to grant the first and fourth Appellants leave
to remain as Tier 1 Migrants (and the second, third and fifth Appellants
leave to remain as their dependants).

2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused, both by the
First tier Tribunal and upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal, but following
an application for a Cart judicial review on 23 January 2017, Sir Stephen
Silber granted permission to apply for judicial review on the basis that it
is an exceptional case which meets the high threshold for obtaining
permission. The decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing permission to
appeal was quashed in an order dated 16 February 2017 and permission to
appeal was granted by the Vice-President of the Upper Tribunal in a
decision dated 4 April 2017.

3. The first Appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh born on 31 December
1973, arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 November 2009 with leave to enter
as a Tier 4 student until 31 December 2012. He was subsequently granted
leave to remain as a Tier 1 post study Migrant until 21 August 2014, on
which day he made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 1
Entrepreneur, along with the fourth Appellant (also Mr Rahman). The
applications were refused on 21 October 2015.

4. At the hearing before us, Mr Jones sought to advance two grounds of
appeal:

(i) that the SSHD and FTTJ erred in law in concluding that the Appellants
were ineligible for a grant of leave due to failure to meet the advertising
requirements at paragraph 41-SD(e) and that there is a differentiation
between the two categories of entrepreneur: the category seeking leave to
remain in order to invest funds, which falls for consideration under
paragraph 41-SD ("future investment" category and those who have already
made the required investment, which is the category into which the
Appellants fall who should be considered under paragraph 46-SD and there is
no advertising criteria in paragraph 46-SD. Thus the error of law is the
fact that the appeal was dismissed on the basis that the Appellants did not
meet the advertising criteria, when there was no advertising requirement;
and

(ii) in the alternative, on the basis that it was necessary for the
Appellants to meet advertising requirements at paragraph 41-SD (e), the
principle of evidential flexibility was engaged pursuant to paragraph 245AA
(b)(i) or (iv) of the Immigration Rules viz it is one of a sequence of
documents or a document that does not contain all of the specified
information.

5. Mr Jones made detailed and helpful submissions in support of the first
ground, including the construction of Annex A to the version of the
Immigration Rules in force at the date of decision. He also drew our
attention to the unreported decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss in
Neela & Gundu IA/4415/2014 and IA/44121/2014, promulgated on 12 February
2016, where the Respondent's representative conceded that the SSHD had
applied the wrong legal provisions because paragraph 46-SD deals with funds
which are already being invested and this had been accepted by the SSHD
(and that paragraph 46-SD complied with) but the SSHD had then proceed to
treat the funds as only being available to invest and refused the
application with reference to paragraph 41-SD, in the basis inter alia that
the advertising material did not cover a continuous period commencing on a
date before 11 July 2014 and up to no earlier than 3 months before the date
of application. The 11 July 2014 is the date that the PSW category was
phased out and transitional provisions were put in place that enabled a PSW
to switch into investment categories under the Points Based System.

6. Mr Jones submitted that the only deficiency in the Rule is the failure
to refer in addition to paragraph 46-SD in Table 4(d)(iv). In the
alternative, his submission is that the documents that must be provided as
specified are the documents concerning continuous work in an occupation
skilled to National Qualifications Framework Level 4 or above, which
equates to (e)(i) and (ii) but not (iii). He submitted that either Table
4(d)(iv) is not sufficiently clear as it does not distinguish between those
who have invested and those who have yet to invest and so it does not
reflect the rest of Annex A, or the practice of the SSHD may be a useful
indicator of how to interpret the scheme given the potential ambiguity,
which he asked us to rule on.

7. In respect of Ground 2, Mr Jones sought to argue in the alternative that
the principle of evidential flexibility was engaged pursuant to paragraph
245AA (b)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. This was premised on the basis that
the Appellants do have to meet the advertising requirements for a
continuous period commencing before 11.7.14 up to no earlier than 3 months
before the date of application. Mr Jones drew our attention to the evidence
that was before the First tier Tribunal Judge at page 265 of the
Appellant's bundle which comprises registration of the domain and whilst
this is undated it was posted on Monday 4 August 2014 and in a separate box
the document states that the user has been posting advertisements since
July 2014.

8. The principle of evidential flexibility relied on is set out at
paragraph 245AA (b) (iv) of the Immigration Rules viz "a document does not
contain all of the specified information". Mr Jones submitted that the
Appellants fit within this sub-category in that the evidence does not
contain all of the specified information eg the date the advertisement was
placed. He submitted that it could fit under (i) as well viz it is one in a
sequence of documents because it is clear from the document that there had
been earlier postings eg in July 2014 given that the posting was in August.


9. Mr Jones also drew our attention to page 116 of the Appellant's bundle,
which is an extract from the Respondent's refusal decision of 21 October
2014 where reference is made to 245AA(c) indicating that the Respondent had
considered applying the concession but had decided not to request
additional evidence on the basis that it would not affect the outcome of
the application. He submitted that the earlier (missing) date was crucial
to the application. He also drew our attention to page 125, which is the
covering letter to the application dated 20 August 2014 and at item 14
there is reference to renewal advertisements copies: 3 pages. Thus it would
have been apparent to a reasonable decision maker that there were earlier
advertisements. At page 268 there is an receipt for the placing of
advertisements dated 5.11.14 which makes reference to the date and time of
booking as 10.7.14 and that web and internet postings commenced on 11.7.14
and were still live. This later document was not before the SSHD at the
time of her decision, but it was before the FtTJ and it showed that,
contrary to the assumption made by the decision maker, it could readily be
demonstrated that the advertising requirement was met.

10. Mr Jones submitted that the First tier Tribunal Judge erred at [15] of
her decision in failing to accept that the Respondent should have contacted
the Appellants under paragraph 245AA because the documents do not come with
the provisions of (i)-(iv) as they were not missing documents nor documents
omitted from a sequence. It is apparent from the documents that there was a
series which are capable of amounting to a sequence, prior to 14.8.14. In
the Supreme Court judgment in Mandalia [2015] UKSC 59 at [32] and [33] Lord
Wilson considered the meaning of sequence. Whilst it is more obvious when
numbered if it is clear that there is a sequence it clearly falls within
(i) and it is clear from the covering letter and the evidence that there
was a sequence.

11. Mr Jones further submitted that there is no challenge to the
credibility of the entrepreneurs contained in the decision and before the
Judge there were two witness statements adopted as evidence at pages 97 and
101 of the Appellant's bundle, yet nowhere does the Judge engage with this
evidence and its probative effect. At 2(2) of the grounds to the Upper
Tribunal at 74-75 of the Appellant's bundle the Judge's approach was
challenged on the basis that she erred in her approach to and findings
regarding paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) by failing to consider extrinsic evidence
regarding the period which advertising material had to cover or otherwise.

12. Ms Holmes, on behalf of the Respondent indicated that she had taken the
opportunity during the lunchtime adjournment to speak to a colleague in the
Home Office policy unit regarding the position taken by the Respondent in
Neela & Gundu and she was instructed that an investor has to meet all of
the requirements set out at Table 4 and he has to meet paragraphs 46-SD and
41-SD(e) of the Rules. Thus her position was that the Appellants do not
meet the requirements of the Rules. Whilst the Appellants met the
requirements of
Table 4 because they had already invested the money [page 52] they also
have to meet paragraph 46-SD and 41-SD(e) [page 58] and the advertising
requirement at (e)(iii). Given that they failed to meet the advertising
requirements she submitted that there was no error of law made by the First
tier Tribunal Judge on the basis of the evidence before her.

13. Ms Holmes further submitted that it was open to the Judge not to apply
the principle of evidential flexibility. She submitted that it was clear
from
page 265 of the Appellant's bundle that the advertisement for Alpha Domino
does not give a date and from page 267 it was not clear to her the date it
was produced and the statement that "user posting ads since: July 2014" is
very vague. Critically, it did not say whether the advertising had begun
before 11th July 2014

14. However, Ms Holmes accepted that nowhere in the Judge's decision did
she consider all the sub-provisions of paragraph 245AA(i) to (iv) or
provide sufficient reasons at [14]- [15] as to why she did not accept that
the principle of evidential flexibility was not applicable on the facts of
these cases. She accepted that this constitutes a material error of law and
that, given the length of time that had passed since the application was
made, she was content for us to re-make the decision ourselves.

15. Mr Jones submitted that the evidence at page 268 of the Appellant's
bundle fulfils the advertising requirements set out at paragraph 41-SD(e)
of the Rules and thus we could re-make the decision ourselves and allow the
appeal on this basis. Ms Holmes did not seek to persuade us otherwise. In
light of the agreement of the parties that Ground 2 of the grounds of
appeal succeeds, we are not required to determine whether or not Ground 1
discloses a material error of law in the decision of the First tier
Tribunal and we are content to leave that argument for decision on a
different case.

16. We decided to allow the appeal and announced our decision at the
hearing. We now give our reasons.

17. Paragraph 245AA of the Rules provides:

Documents not submitted with applications
"(b) If the applicant has submitted the specified documents and:
      (i) some of the documents within a sequence have been omitted (for
      example, if one page from a bank statement is missing) and the
      documents marking the beginning and end of that sequence have been
      provided; or
      (ii) a document is in the wrong format (for example, if a letter is
      not on letterhead paper as specified); or
      (iii) a document is a copy and not an original document; or
      (iv) a document does not contain all of the specified information."

18. The first and third Appellants made joint applications for further
leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants pursuant to paragraph
245DD of the Rules on 21 August 2014. Their applications were rejected by
the Respondent on the basis that the material submitted in relation to
advertising was not acceptable as it did not cover a continuous period
commencing before 11 July 2014 as the 'Friday-ad" copy advertisement was
dated 4 August 2014. The Respondent's decision was upheld by First tier
Tribunal Judge Black in a decision promulgated on 21 October 2015 on the
same basis.

19. However, it is clear from the 'Friday-ad" advertisement for the
Appellants' company "alpha domino ltd" whilst posted on Monday 4 August
makes reference to the user posting advertisements since July 2014 [267 of
the Appellant's bundle refers]. This document was before the Respondent and
the First tier Tribunal Judge. We find that it is clear from the face of
the document that since the user had been posting advertisements since July
2014, the advertisement posted on 4 August was an example and it was
reasonably likely that this was part of a sequence. Alternatively, the
documents submitted did not contain all of the specified information, but,
in the circumstances, the SSHD ought to have requested clarification under
paragraph 245AA (b)(iv). In these circumstances, it was clear that, had the
Respondent applied the principle of evidential flexibility, the Appellants
could have provided further evidence that would have met the requirements
of the Rules and crucially, addressed the question of whether or not this
evidence pre-dated 11 July 2014.

20. We find, with the agreement of the parties, that the First tier
Tribunal Judge erred materially in law in her approach to the principle of
evidential flexibility.

21. We proceed to re-make the decision. Paragraph 41-SD (e)(iii) (1) of
Appendix A of the Immigration Rules (the version in force at the date of
decision of 21 October 2014) provides as follows:

      "41-SD The specified documents in Table 4 and paragraph 41, and
associated  definitions, are as follows ...

      (e) If the applicant is applying under the provisions in (d) in Table
4, he must  also provide:

      (iii) one or more of the following specified documents covering
(either together       or individually) a continuous period commencing
before 11 July 2014 up to no      earlier than three months before the date
of his application:

      (1) advertising or marketing material, including printouts of online
advertising, that has been published locally or nationally, showing the
applicant's name (and the name of the business if applicable) together with
the   business activity or, where his business is trading online,
confirmation of his    ownership of the domain name of the business's
website."

22. The evidence before us, in addition to the "Friday-Ad" at page 267 of
the bundle, is a receipt from Friday-ad dated 5 November 2014 in respect of
a booking made on 10 July 2014 for (1) internet advertising from 11 July
2014 and (2) web advertising from the same date [268]. There is also a copy
of the advertisement/leaflet [at 269]; copies of business cards in respect
of each Appellant [at 270] and an invoice from Dot Print UK dated 7 July
2014 in respect of the printing of 1000 A5 leaflets; 1000 business cards
and 500 letterheads [271 refers].

23. In light of this evidence and bearing in mind that the requirements of
paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii)(1) of Appendix A makes provision for advertising or
marketing material, we find that the Appellants met the requirements of
paragraph 245DD of the Rules at the date of decision of 21 October 2014
because they provided evidence of relevant, specified documents commencing
on a date prior to 11 July 2014, which was within 3 months prior to making
their application for an extension of leave to remain as Entrepreneurs on
20 August 2014.

24. It follows that, in light of the date of decision, the Appellants are
entitled to the grant of leave under the Immigration Rules and we would
invite the Respondent to grant appropriate leave on this basis.



Decision

25. We find an error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge
Black. We substitute a decision allowing the appeals of all five Appellants
(the first and fourth Appellants as principals and the remainder of the
Appellants as their dependants).



Signed:     Rebecca Chapman                  Date: 7 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


