
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/48711/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 25th July 2014                     |On: 30th July 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                          Priyatharsan Thiyagarasa
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent is a national of Sri Lanka date of  birth  28th  October
1981. On the 15th April 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Seelhoff)
allowed his appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
to vary his leave to remain in the UK as a spouse under Appendix FM.

The matter in issue in the appeal  was  finances.  In  a  detailed  and
cogent determination Judge Seelhoff found  that  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law, because she  had
failed to properly assess the evidence in line with Appendix FM-SE.

The Secretary of State then appealed that decision, submitting that  in
view of the overriding objective of  the  Tribunal  to  handle  appeals
fairly, quickly and efficiently there was no  point  to  the  remittal.
That was because, on the view  of  the  drafter  of  the  grounds,  the
Respondent had no prospect of success upon review by the  Secretary  of
State.

The irony of those grounds was not lost on Mr Duffy who  very  sensibly
withdrew them. He was quite right to do so, since it would  be  fairer,
quicker and more efficient for the Secretary of State to actually apply
her own guidance as set out in Appendix FM-SE, look at the evidence  as
a whole and consider whether  to  apply  the  'evidential  flexibility'
procedure built in to that appendix at paragraph D.


Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
is upheld.

I make no direction as to anonymity. None was in place before the First-
tier Tribunal and I was not asked to make one in the Upper Tribunal.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              25th July 2014
