
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/49595/2013
                                                               ia/49602/2013
                                                               ia/49604/2013
                                                               ia/49616/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 September 2014                          |On 22 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

     mr Dimingu Badathuruge Manesh Nishantha De Silva (first appellant)
     MRS Dasni Tharshulya Pathegama Kuruppu DE SILVA (second appellant)
    MASTER Dimingu Badathuruge Manul Dinushana DE SILVA (third appellant)
             miss Thanuri Chathurya de silva (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms A Sahra, Counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens of Sri Lanka.  Mr De  Silva's  date  of
    birth is 28 June 1968 and his wife Mrs De Silva's date of  birth  is  9
    August 1967.  Their children are the two  younger  appellants.    Their
    son Manul's date of birth is  14  September  1997  and  their  daughter
    Thanuri's date of birth is 21 January 2002.      They made applications
    for leave to remain  on  17  October  2013.   Their  applications  were
    refused by the Secretary of State in decisions of 7 November 2013 under
    the Immigration Rules.  Exceptional circumstances were also  considered
    by the Secretary of State in relation to the parents and  the  decision
    maker found that there were none in this case.

2.   The appellant Mr De Silva came to the UK in 2005  in  order  to  study.
    His wife and their two children joined him here  in  2006.   They  have
    been granted extensions of leave. They have  all  remained  in  the  UK
    since then legally (Mr De Silva continuing to  study).   Both  children
    are now attending secondary school.

3.   The appellants made an application to appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of  State  on  7  November  2013  and  their  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lobo in a  decision  that
    was promulgated on 11 July 2014 following  a  hearing.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted  to  the  appellant  in  a  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R A Cox dated 31 July 2014.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The Judge made the following findings:

    (1)  The third and fourth appellants have lived in the  United  Kingdom
         for nearly eight years.


    (2)  The third and fourth appellants have done  exceptionally  well  in
         the United Kingdom as evidenced by the  glowing  reports  of  their
         academic and sporting success and their social involvement.


    (3)  The first and second appellants made  a  second  decision  not  to
         speak to their children in Sinhalese.  It is claimed that the third
         and  fourth  appellants  do  not  speak  Sinhalese  but  the  first
         appellant's sister Mrs Jayasuriya does not speak  English  and  she
         frequently looks after the children and speaks to them in Sinhalese
         which they understand.


    (4)  There is no evidence that the  return  of  the  third  and  fourth
         appellants to Sri Lanka  would  be  detrimental  to  their  general
         welfare  including  their   education.    Families   and   children
         frequently move from country to country, and whilst  there  may  be
         difficulties it cannot be assumed that these are insurmountable nor
         can it be assumed that the effect is always negative.


    (5)  The family presents as intelligent, well-educated,  ambitious  and
         hardworking.  They have demonstrated a resilience  in  moving  from
         Sri Lanka to the United Kingdom.  There is no evidence that a  move
         as a family to Sri Lanka would  be  a  negative  move  which  would
         adversely affect the third and fourth appellants.
    (6)  The third and fourth appellants have failed to  establish  to  the
         necessary standard of proof that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
         expect them to leave the United Kingdom and therefore  they  cannot
         succeed under paragraph 276ADE(iv).


    (7)  The appellants have not established to the necessary  standard  of
         proof that there are arguably good grounds for granting them  leave
         to remain outside the Immigration Rules.


    (8)  The fact that the third and fourth appellants may  have  lived  in
         the United Kingdom during a formative period of their lives  is  an
         advantage which they can take back with them to Sri  Lanka.   I  do
         not accept that they do not understand Sinhalese  and  although  it
         may take some time for them to become fluent speakers of  Sinhalese
         I do not accept that these appellants, from this family, will  have
         any insurmountable difficulty.  Even if there  is  an  interference
         with  their  private   life   that   interference   is   completely
         proportionate when balanced against the interests of the  community
         as a whole in a firm and open immigration policy.


    (9)  With  regard  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009 there is nothing which allows me  to  conclude
         that the Secretary of State has not discharged her duty.


5.   The Judge recorded at paragraph 20 that  the  appellants  relied  on  a
    bundle comprising 142 pages and he also acknowledged  further  evidence
    as provided by Mr Palmer at the hearing including a photograph of Manul
    receiving a cricket  award  and  a  letter  from  the  Slough  Athletic
    Association dated 25 June 2014 concerning the selection of the youngest
    child to represent at under 13 level in the Berkshire Schools  Athletic
    Championships.

The Evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal

6.   The evidence of Mr De Silva and his wife was  that  they  always  speak
    English to their children and neither can read  or  write  in  Sinhala.
    Both his children do well at school and his son won a  place  at  Upton
    Court  Grammar  School.   He  is  involved  in   many   extracurricular
    activities.  His wife's mother is in Sri Lanka; however, there  are  no
    other relatives there.  His only sibling lives in the UK and they  have
    a very close relationship with her.  They do not own  property  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Their  children  would  not  be  able  to  go  into  mainstream
    education in Sri Lanka should they be forced to return because they  do
    not have language skills and are entrenched  into  the  United  Kingdom
    system.  There is no possibility of Mr De Silva and his wife being able
    to send their children to the English Language International School  in
    Colombo and it is  very  unlikely  that  they  would  be  able  to  get
    reasonably remunerated employment so that we could afford to  privately
    educate them.

7.   There was a witness statement  from  each  of  the  children.   Manul's
    evidence was that he worked very hard for his  GCSEs  and  that  he  is
    planning to study maths, physics, chemistry and psychology at  A-level.
    He has lived in the UK for more than half his  life  and  he  has  made
    numerous friends here.  He has integrated well into  the  community  in
    the UK.  Thanuri's evidence is that she has lived nearly two thirds  of
    her life in the UK and could not bear the thought of  leaving  all  the
    amazing friends that she has made here.  She  is  unfamiliar  with  Sri
    Lankan culture and unable to read, write or speak Sinhalese.   She  has
    spent the greater part of her life here.

8.   In support of the application there  was  a  letter  from  Upton  Court
    Grammar School of 5 June 2014 relating to Manul confirming that he  has
    made an excellent contribution to the school community  throughout  the
    five years of his studies there.  He has fully immersed himself in  the
    ethos of the school and his  most  notable  contribution  has  been  in
    extracurricular school sport.  There  is  a  certificate  presented  to
    Manul of 5 September 2008 for working cooperatively and  a  certificate
    awarded to him in year six.  There are many  certificates  relating  to
    both children and their successful studies in the UK.

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

9.   The thrust of the grounds clarified by Ms Sahra is that the  Judge  did
    not consider material evidence in relation to the children, he did  not
    make a finding in relation to their best interests and  he  misdirected
    himself. The Judge did not give sufficient weight to the length of time
    that the children have lived in the UK and he did not take into account
    their evidence.   No weight was given to jurisprudence relating to  the
    best interests of the children specifically EM and  Others  (returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC), E-A (Article 8 -  best  interests  of
    child)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00315  (IAC),  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC).
    The children are appellants in this case  and  the  Judge  should  have
    applied paragraph 276ADE and allowed their appeal on the basis of their
    private life within the rules.

10.  Mr Tarlow relied on the response under Rule 24 of  the  2008  Procedure
    Rules namely that the  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately  and  he
    correctly referred to current case law under the Immigration  Rules  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of the determination and relevant case law  relating
    to Article 8 at paragraph 12.  The findings of the Judge at  paragraphs
    25 and 26 were open to him on the evidence.  Mr Tarlow  submitted  that
    it is clear that the Judge had the best interests of  the  children  in
    mind.  He applied the right test but he used  the  wrong  words.   Both
    parties agreed that in the event that the decision  would  need  to  be
    remade this could be done without a hearing.

The Law

11.  Paragraph 276ADE provided as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:


         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and


         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and


         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


         (vi) is aged 18 or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less
             than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has
             no ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK."

12.  In relation to the best interests of the child in the  case  of  Azimi-
    Moayed the Upper Tribunal identified the following principles to assist
    in the determination of appeals where  children  are  affected  by  the
    appealed decisions:
         "i)      As a starting  point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both their parents and if both parents are
             being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.


         ii)      It is generally in the interests of children to have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.


         iii)     Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.


         iv)      Apart from the terms of published policies and rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to be
             more significant to a child than  the  first  seven  years  of
             life.  Very young  children  are  focussed  on  their  parents
             rather than their peers and are adaptable.


         v)       Short periods  of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional factors.   In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic well-being of society amply justifies removal in such
             cases."

13.  The same case also  looked  at  the  position  of  children  in  onward
    appeals and noted that:

         "(2)     Duties to have regard as a primary  consideration  to  the
             best interests of a child are so well established that a judge
             should take the point for him or herself as an  obvious  point
             to be considered, where the  issue  arises  on  the  evidence,
             irrespective of whether the appellants or the  advocates  have
             done so.


         (3)  Although in some cases this may require  a  judge  to  explore
             whether the duty requires further information to  be  obtained
             or inquiry to  be  made,  the  judge  primarily  acts  on  the
             evidence in the case.  Where that evidence gives no hint of  a
             suggestion that the welfare of the child is threatened by  the
             immigration decision in question, or  that  the  child's  best
             interests are undermined thereby, there is no  basis  for  any
             further judicial  exploration  or  reasoned  decision  on  the
             matter.


         (4)  Even if a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the
             making of an error on a point of law, in deciding  whether  to
             grant permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  is
             relevant whether there are any reasonable  prospects  of  that
             Tribunal exercising its powers to re-make the  decision  in  a
             different way.  The Upper Tribunal is unlikely to do so if the
             error was marginal and would not have made a difference to the
             outcome."


14.  In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at paragraph 10 there is set  out  the
    legal principles in considering the best interests of a child which are
    deemed to be  an  integral  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment.
    Paragraph 10 reads as follows:
         "In their written  case  counsel  for  Mr  Zoumbas  set  out  legal
         principles which were relevant in this case and which they  derived
         from three decisions of this court, namely ZH (Tanzania) (above), H
         v Lord Advocate 2012 SC (UKSC) 308 and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor  of
         the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC 338.  Those principles are not  in
         doubt and Ms Drummond on behalf of the Secretary of State  did  not
         challenge them.  We paraphrase them as follows:
         (1)  The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;
         (3)  Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;
         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;
         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an article 8 assessment; and
         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."
15.    In E-A (Article 8 - best interest of child) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  315
(IAC) it was     held that the correct starting  point  in  considering  the
welfare and best interests of a     young child would be that it is  in  the
best interests of a child to live with and be  brought  up  by  his  or  her
parents, subject to any very strong contraindication.  However absent  other
factors, the reason why a period of substantial residence  as  a  child  may
become a weighty consideration in the balance  of  competing  considerations
is that in the course of such time roots are put down,  personal  identities
are developed, friendships are formed and links are made with the  community
outside the family unit.  The degree to  which  these  elements  of  private
life are forged and therefore the weight to be given to the passage of  time
will depend upon the facts in each case.  The authority goes on  to  suggest
that during a child's very early years he or she will be primarily  focussed
on self and the caring parents or guardian.  Long residence once  the  child
is likely to have formed ties  outside  the  family  is  likely  to  have  a
greater impact on his or her wellbeing.  This  authority  also  goes  on  to
suggest that those who have their families with  them  during  a  period  of
study in the United Kingdom must do so in the light of  the  expectation  of
return.  The Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  was  not  ruling
that the ability of a young child  to  steadily  adapt  to  life  in  a  new
country was an irrelevant factor, rather that the adaptability of the  child
in each case must be assessed and is not a conclusive consideration  on  its
own.
16.  In the case of EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874
    paragraphs 58 and 60 which as follows:
         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent has no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has  a  right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?


         59.  On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.


         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen.  None has  the  right
             to remain in this country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
             father has no independent right to remain.  If the parents are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents.  Although it is, of course a question of fact for the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

17.  In that case is was argued by the appellants that  the  best  interests
    of their children would be to remain in the UK with their  parents  and
    continue their education here.  The court went on to find  in  relation
    to how a Tribunal should approach the proportionality  exercise  if  it
    has determined that the best interests of the  child  or  children  are
    that they should continue  with  their  education  in  England  and  at
    paragraph 33 the Tribunal stated as follows:-


         "33. ... Whether or not it is  in  the  interests  of  a  child  to
             continue his or her education in England may  depend  on  what
             assumptions one makes as  to  what  happens  to  the  parents.
             There can be cases where it is in the child's  best  interests
             to remain in education in the UK,  even  though  one  or  both
             parents did not remain here.  In the present case, however,  I
             take the FTT's finding to be that it was in the best interests
             of the children to continue their education  in  England  with
             both parents living here.  That assumes that both parents  are
             here.   But  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are  to  be
             determined by reference to the child alone  without  reference
             to the immigration history or status of either parent."

18.  The court went on to state the following at paragraph 35:-


         "35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens."


        Error of Law


19.   The Judge materially erred because he did not make  a  finding  as  to
    the children's best interests in accordance with the will of parliament
    and established jurisprudence.   His finding that removal would not  be
    detrimental to the children's general welfare or that they would not be
    adversely affected is a different test. In addition the Judge  did  not
    consider  the  children's  appeals  under  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
    respondents' own immigration rules (private life within the rules)  and
    did not consider reasonableness in this  context.    I  set  aside  the
    decision of the Judge. It was agreed by the parties that I could go  on
    to remake the decision without a further hearing  (in  accordance  with
    the directions of the  Tribunal).    There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    primary findings of fact and the evidence set out by the Judge.

Conclusion

20.      Whilst it is the case that the children are  not  British  citizens
    and their parents have no right to remain here, there  are  significant
    factors in this case which lead me to  conclude  that,  after  applying
    relevant jurisprudence  on  the  issue,  it  would  be  in  their  best
    interests to remain here in the UK. They have been here for eight years
    and they have spent a lengthy period of residence here (since  the  age
    of four). They have social and educational  ties  here.  Their  parents
    have been here legally.  The eldest child has embarked on an  A-  level
    course and the youngest child has just started  secondary  school.  The
    children's  best  interests   are   a   primary   and   not   paramount
    consideration.

21.  The decision maker should have considered the  children's  applications
    under paragraph 267ADE (iv).  I have considered reasonableness  in  the
    context of the fact that their parents have no legal right to  be  here
    and that they are being educated at the expense of  the  state,  but  I
    find that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK  at
    this stage of their education and in the light of the  time  they  have
    been here and their respective ages.

22.      It follows that their parent's appeals should  be  allowed  outside
    the rules.  There are good  grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the
    rules. It would not be reasonable  (or  in  their  best  interests)  to
    expect the children to return to Sri Lanka and this amounts exceptional
    and compelling circumstances.   The fact is  that  a  removal  decision
    would result in the children having to leave the UK  despite  the  fact
    they meet the requirements of the respondent's own  immigration  rules.
    The first three  questions  of  the  guidance  in  Razgar,  R  (on  the
    Application of) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 are answered in the  affirmative.
    The decision is necessary for the economic well-being  of  the  country
    through the maintenance of immigration control. The children are  being
    educated here at significant expense to the  state  (albeit  that  they
    meet the requirements of the rules), and their parents  are  unable  to
    satisfy the requirements of  the  rules.  I  must  consider  article  8
    through the prism of paragraph 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 and accordingly I acknowledge that the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest. The family has formed  a
    private  life  whilst  they  have  been  here  legally.   There  is  no
    suggestion that  they  cannot  speak  English  or  that  they  are  not
    financially independent. I have considered whether the  best  interests
    of the children are outweighed by  the  public  interest,  but  do  not
    consider that they are.


23.   I allow the appeals of the adult appellant's under Article 8  and  the
    appeals of the children under the Immigration Rules.



Signed         Joanna  McWilliam                         Date  20  September
    2014

Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge McWilliam

