
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/214/2020   |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |Riju Kannothukudy Raju                       |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell

HAVING considered all documents lodged and  having  heard  Rajiv  Sharma  of
counsel, instructed by Direct Access, for the applicant and  Zane  Malik  of
counsel, instructed by GLD, for the respondent at a  hearing  on  5  January
2021

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is granted for the reasons in the
       attached judgment.


    2) The respondent's decisions of 17 October 2019 and  22  November  2019
       are quashed.


    3) The respondent shall reconsider the applicant's application for leave
       to remain, together with any additional submissions  made  within  28
       days of the date of this order, within three months of  the  date  of
       this order.

    4) The Respondent shall pay two thirds  of  the  applicant's  reasonable
       costs from 2 September 2020, to be assessed on the standard basis  if
       not agreed.

    5) Permission to appeal is refused because it was not sought  and  there
       is, in any event, no arguable legal error in the judgment.


      Signed:     M.J.Blundell


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell


      Dated:           24 January 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


[pic]

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL (IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)




                                   Before:

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                             Between: THE QUEEN
                            on the application of
                           RIJU KANNOTHUKUDY RAJU

                                   - and -
                                                        Case No: JR/214/2020


                             Field House, Breams Buildings London,  EC4A 1WR

                                                             25 January 2021










Applicant

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               Mr Rajiv Sharma
              (instructed by Direct Access), for the applicant

Respondent

                                Mr Zane Malik
 (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the respondent Hearing
                            date: 5 January 2020
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    This judgment was handed down remotely by circulation to the parties'
    representatives by email and publication on the Courts and Tribunals
 Judiciary website. The date and time for hand-down is deemed to be 10am on
                               25 January 2021




Judge Blundell:

  1. The applicant is an Indian national who was born on 3 March  1987.  He
     seeks judicial review of  decisions  made  by  the  respondent  on  17
     October 2019 and 22 November 2019. By the first  of  those  decisions,
     the respondent refused his application for leave to remain as a Tier 2
     (General) Migrant. By the second of those decisions,  she  upheld  her
     earlier decision following an Administrative Review. The  sole  ground
     of refusal under the Immigration Rules  was  that  the  applicant  had
     worked in breach of the terms of immigration bail by working at a care
     home. The respondent  concluded  that  this  justified  refusal  under
     paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules,  on  the  basis  that  his
     conduct rendered it undesirable to permit him to remain in the  United
     Kingdom.

Background

  2. For reasons which will shortly become apparent, it is necessary to set
     out two chronologies in some detail.  The  first  is  the  applicant's
     immigration history. The second is the history of the dealings between
     the applicant's employer and the respondent, as regards  the  latter's
     sponsorship licence.

  3. The applicant entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 student in  2011.
     He held  leave in that capacity until April 2013. Before the expiry of
     his leave, he made  an  application  for  further  leave  outside  the
     Immigration Rules. That application was refused on 17 June 2013 but an
     appeal against the decision was allowed by a judge of  the  First-tier
     Tribunal. As a result of that decision, the applicant was  granted  60
     days' leave to remain, valid from 17 July 2014 to 15 September 2014.

  4. It was at this point that the applicant sought to 'switch' into Tier 2
     of the Points Based System ("PBS"). On 11 September 2014,  he  applied
     for leave to remain under that  tier  to  enable  him  to  work  at  a
     residential care home named Sunrise. The application was refused on 29
     October 2014 but an appeal was allowed in February  2015  and,  on  17
     July 2015, he was granted leave to remain under Tier 2 until  20  July
     2020.

  5. On 22 November 2016, however, the respondent decided  to  curtail  the
     applicant's leave to remain with effect from 27 January  2017  because
     Sunrise Residential Home had lost its sponsorship licence. On the  day
     before the expiry of his curtailed leave, the  applicant  applied  for
     leave to remain so that he could work for a different employer: Cedars
     Residential Care Home.

  6. That application was refused on 2 February 2018.  The  respondent  was
     not satisfied that the applicant had provided a valid  Certificate  of
     Sponsorship. Amongst the "hostile environment" rubric at  the  end  of
     that letter, there appeared the following warning:

          You will not be allowed to work in the UK. Immigration Enforcement
          Officers visit workplaces and any employer found to  be  employing
          an illegal immigrant may be liable for a civil penalty  of  up  to
          ï¿½20,000 per illegal worker.
  7. The applicant sought Administrative Review ("AR")  of  that  decision,
     however, and on 19 March 2018 the respondent upheld the  decision  but
     found that one or more of the original reasons for it were  incorrect.
     She therefore  amended  the  decision.  The  only  substantive  change
     concerned a part of the chronology which had been entered  wrongly  in
     the original decision. The  remainder  of  the  AR  responded  to  the
     applicant's complaint that he had  submitted  a  valid  CoS  with  his
     application  and had not been told that Cedars Residential  Care  Home
     had lost its licence. The respondent noted that the applicant had not,
     in fact, submitted any CoS with his  application.  The  CoS  had  been
     issued after the application had been made but the  sponsor's  licence
     had expired before the application was considered by  the  respondent.
     The respondent considered that to be an issue  between  the  applicant
     and his sponsor, and not to undermine the validity of the  conclusions
     she had reached on the application itself.

  8. Attached to the AR decision was an Enforcement Notice, also  dated  19
     March 2018. This stated that the applicant was liable to  removal  and
     that he had been granted immigration bail subject to  conditions.  The
     conditions (imposed under paragraph 2(1)(b)  of  schedule  10  to  the
     Immigration Act 2016) were that he was not allowed to work  or  study.
     Under the sub-heading 'Consequences of Illegally Staying in  the  UK',
     the applicant was given a number of warnings, one  of  which  repeated
     what had been said at the end of the 2 February 2018 refusal letter in
     respect of illegal working and the consequences thereof.

  9. It is not in dispute between the parties that the statutory  extension
     to the applicant's leave under section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971
     came to an end with the refusal of his AR application.

 10. The applicant then made two further applications. On 29 March 2018, he
     applied for leave on compassionate grounds. On 30 April 2018, he  made
     another application for leave to remain under Tier 2. That application
     was made in reliance on sponsorship from a third care  home:  Broadway
     Care Centre. The respondent treated the making of that application  as
     having voided the application on compassionate grounds. The  applicant
     submits that the second application was  a  variation  of  the  first.
     Nothing turns on the  point  for  present  purposes  but  Mr  Sharma's
     submissions in this respect align with what was said in JH  (Zimbabwe)
     [2009] EWCA Civ 78; [2009] Imm AR 499.

 11. On 23 January 2019, the respondent  refused  the  Tier  2  application
     because she did not consider the work undertaken by the  applicant  at
     Broadway Care Centre to meet the level stated in the relevant SOC code
     (Administrative Care Co-ordinator / Team Leader). The  respondent  did
     not accept that the applicant had the necessary  experience  from  his
     previous roles to operate at the  level  required  by  the  SOC  Code:
     National Qualifications Framework Level 6.

 12. The applicant made an  application  for  AR  of  this  decision  on  7
     February 2019.  There was a delay in considering  the  AR  application
     but it was finally decided on 2 May 2019. On that date, the respondent
     wrote to the applicant, accepting that her decision was in  error  and
     withdrawing it in full. She indicated that the applicant's application
     would be reconsidered but that the AR Team was unable to do so
     because further evidence was required. This letter was sent to the
     applicant under cover of a letter which contained, amongst other
     things, the following notification:

          Your existing leave and conditions of  leave  are  extended  under
          section 3C of the 1971 Immigration Act while your  application  is
          under consideration.

 13. The respondent then  undertook  investigations  into  the  sponsorship
     licence of Broadway Care Centre. I will describe those  events  below.
     For present purposes, it suffices to  state  that  the  applicant  was
     found to be working there. That fact was confirmed by  the  care  home
     itself in an email dated 13 September  2019,  which  stated  that  the
     applicant was indeed working there, for 20  hours  per  week,  "whilst
     waiting for a decision  on  his  application  to  become  a  full-time
     employee as per the COS conditions."

 14. This confirmation caused the respondent, on 3 October 2019, to issue a
     notice called a Bail 204. This notice bears  the  applicant's  details
     and his photograph and states that it had come to the attention of the
     respondent that the applicant had failed to comply with the  terms  of
     his immigration bail. Specifically, it was said that he had failed  to
     abide by the restriction on employment by working  for  Broadway  Care
     Centre from January 2019  onwards.  The  respondent  stated  that  the
     applicant had been informed by letters dated 23 January  2018  and  19
     March 2018 that he was not allowed to undertake any  employment.  This
     notice then spelt out several 'Consequences of Non-Compliance',  which
     included a warning that "Any unresolved application which you may have
     made for leave to enter may be refused". The notice sought a  response
     from the applicant. The invitation to respond  was  in  the  following
     terms:

          If there is [sic] reasonable excuse for  this  failure  to  comply
          with your immigration bail condition(s) then you must inform  this
          office using the attached notice. We must receive  your  completed
          notice within 10 working days of this letter being served  (deemed
          to be two days from date on postmark, if  posted)  -  we  may  not
          consider your response if we receive it after this date.

 15. The applicant duly completed the response notice and  returned  it  to
     the respondent so that  it  was  received  on  17  October  2019.  His
     response is central to my decision in  this  application.  I  make  no
     apologies, in those circumstances, for reproducing  it  in  full  (and
     verbatim):

          I wish to submit respectfully that I was not able to  comply  with
          my immigration bail conditions primarily due to my unawareness  of
          the Immigration Bail Condition imposed on 19/03/2018 and  to  some
          extent my personal stupidity and circumstances.


          I have entered to United Kingdom as student on 3rd  February  2011
          until 30/11/2012. Further leave as student until 30/4/2013.  Leave
          to  remain  in  UK  on  outside  rules  by  first  tribunal  until
          15/04/2014 and further
          leave was granted under Tier 2 (General) Migrant until 209/07/2020
          and this was curtailed to expire on 27/01/2017.


          Since January 2017 to January 2019 my personal circumstances  were
          incomprehensible, I have not worked on salary anywhere  in  UK.  I
          was surviving with support of Friends  and  relatives.  I  have  a
          dependant young family (consists of spouse and  young  child)  and
          found it very difficult to maintain them financially  without  any
          source  of  income  or  job.  Due  to  unexpected  delays  in   my
          application being processed by the Home Office I was not  able  to
          have normal life. A combination of stress and depression may  have
          clouded my judgement and I ended up in this predicament. In  these
          3 years I have received 3 refusals of  application  for  different
          reason on (02/02/18, 19/03/2018,  23/01/2019  and  one  successful
          Administrative  Review  on  2/5/2019  for  my   tier   2   General
          application which I have applied on 30th  April  2018.  After  the
          investigation from Home Office to the employer  on  November  2018
          and December 2018, Employer was confident  about  the  success  of
          application. After issuing the COS and waiting almost  11  months,
          the post was still vacant and employer offered  me  for  shadowing
          the post.


          The genuinity of the vacancy, learning opportunity, also  my  poor
          financial situation forced me to start the job  as  on  part  time
          basis, without entering to the main job roles, I was shadowing the
          manager. ON OTHER HAND I WAS COMPLETELY  UNAWARE  THAT  I  AM  NOT
          ALLOWED TO WORK. AFTER 2 YEARS OF WAITING AS A JOBLESS  PERSON  IN
          UNITED KINGDOM. MY  FINANCIAL  SITUATION  WAS  VERY  PATHETIC  THE
          SUPPORT I HAVE RECEIVED FROM FRIENDS AND FAMILY HAD STOPPED AT ONE
          STAGE AND I WAS STRUGGLING FOR FOOD AND SHELTER.


          AFTER STAYING 8 YEARS IN  UNITED  INGDOM,  IT'S  HARD  FOR  ME  TO
          BELIEVE THAT I HAVE BROKEN THE IMMIGRATION BAIL  WHEN  I  HAVE  NO
          INTENSION TO DO THAT. I AM SINCERELY APOLOGISE FOR  INCONVENIENCE.
          I AM PLEADING TO THE CASE WORKER/HOME  SECRATORY  TO  CONSIDER  MY
          PERSONAL CIRCUMSTANCES AS AN EXCUSE FOR THE  CONCERNS  AND  ISSUES
          RAISED AND I WOULD BE HIGHLY OBLIGED IF YOU COULD CONSIDER MY CASE
          AS GENUINE.


 16. On the same day (17 October 2019),  the  respondent  reconsidered  the
     application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2  Migrant  which  the
     applicant had made on 30 April 2018. She refused the  application  for
     reasons entirely different from those given on 23  January  2019.  She
     was satisfied that the applicant should  be  awarded  all  the  points
     claimed under the PBS. The single  ground  of  refusal  was  that  the
     applicant had  breached  the  terms  of  immigration  bail  by  taking
     employment  at  Broadway  Care  Centre,  as  a  result  of  which  the
     respondent considered that his ongoing presence in the United  Kingdom
     was undesirable. Having set out the relevant background, including the
     Bail 204 notice and the applicant's response  to  it,  the  respondent
     concluded as follows:

          You stated you were unaware of the bail  conditions  imposed  upon
          you. While it is accepted that the refusal letter  we  served  you
          with on 2 February 2018 does not  specifically  mention  the  word
          "Bail", the letter  does  inform  you  that  you  were  no  longer
          permitted to work in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  the
          decision to refuse your application for Leave to Remain.


          In response to our Bail 204 letter, you also  raised  issues  with
          your financial situation through being unable to  work.  While  we
          understand  your  current  financial  situation  may   bring   you
          hardship, the decision to refuse your application does not  permit
          employment until your immigration status in the United Kingdom  is
          resolved and you have been informed you are permitted to work.


          Therefore you are working illegally in the United Kingdom  because
          you do  not  have  permission  to  undertake  employment  and  the
          Secretary of State is satisfied it would be undesirable to  permit
          you to remain in the United Kingdom in the light of your conduct.


          In light of this the Secretary of State has deemed the refusal  is
          appropriate under paragraph 322(5) and is not prepared  to  accept
          exercise discretion in your favour.


          Alternatively, you may consider applying  to  extend  leave  under
          human rights and the family and private life categories.


 17. The applicant applied for AR of that decision. On  22  November  2019,
     the respondent refused the application for AR. The respondent was  not
     persuaded by anything said in the application for AR and the  original
     decision stood unamended.

 18. The relevant chronology in respect of the applicant's  sponsor  is  as
     follows. Broadway Care Centre held a sponsorship licence when  it  was
     visited by the Sponsor Compliance Unit on 9 May 2019. It was suspended
     from the register of sponsors as  a  result  of  information  gathered
     during that visit. The decision was communicated by  letter  dated  14
     June 2019. The letter noted that the care home had assigned a  CoS  to
     the applicant on 25 April 2018, for the  role  of  Team  Leader/Health
     Care Coordinator, under SOC Code 2219. During interviews conducted  at
     the premises, however, the Compliance Officers had been told that  the
     applicant occupied a role which was junior to the Home Manager and  it
     did not appear that he was carrying out all of the  duties  listed  in
     the CoS or in his job description. The  letter  also  noted  that  the
     applicant's CoS stated that he would be working for 39 hours per week,
     whereas the contract and the wage slips suggested that he was  working
     only twenty hours per week. The officers had been told that  this  was
     all that the applicant was allowed to  work.  The  fact  that  he  was
     working for only twenty hours per week suggested  that  the  full-time
     role detailed  on  the  CoS  was  not  required.  The  respondent  had
     concluded, in the circumstances, that the role on  the  CoS  had  been
     exaggerated. The respondent had also concluded that the role stated on
     the CoS was at a lower skill level than RQF Level 6 and that the
     applicant was paid at a lower rate than had been specified in the CoS.
     The respondent felt that the care home had failed to comply  with  its
     sponsorship duties in several respects, therefore,  and  that  it  was
     appropriate to suspend its licence accordingly.

 19. Representations against the suspension were made by  Ideal  Solicitors
     on 12 July  2019.  The  gravamen  of  their  complaint  was  that  the
     applicant was not a sponsored migrant worker  whilst  his  application
     for leave to remain was under consideration. Further submissions  were
     made in response to each  of  the  other  concerns  expressed  in  the
     suspension letter, including an  assertion  that  the  respondent  had
     overlooked aspects of the applicant's role in concluding that  it  was
     not at the required level.

 20. On 30 August 2019, the respondent's Sponsor Compliance Team reinstated
     Broadway Care Centre  to  the  register  of  sponsors  with  immediate
     effect. In respect of the main submission made  by  Ideal  Solicitors,
     the respondent held as follows:

          [27] Whilst Mr Raju has been assigned a CoS for the role  of  Team
          Leader / Health Care Coordinator  under  the  SoC  code  2219,  we
          accept that Mr Raju's leave to  remain  application  has  not  yet
          received a final outcome. Therefore, on  this  occasion,  we  will
          take no further action on this matter.

 21.  The  remaining  submissions  were  held  to  fall  away  because  the
     respondent accepted that  the  applicant  had  not  received  a  final
     outcome on  his  application  for  leave  to  remain.  The  respondent
     reinstated  the  licence  accordingly  but,  at  [52],  she  gave  the
     following emboldened warning:

          I would stress that the UK Visas & Immigration compliance officers
          continually monitor the compliance of licensed sponsors.  If  your
          client fails to comply with  their  sponsor  duties  and/or  rules
          about assigning certificates of  sponsorship  (CoS),  UK  Visas  &
          Immigration may revoke the licence, downgrade the licence to a  B-
          rating or, issue a civil penalty or, where  criminal  activity  is
          found, refer the case for prosecution.

The Application for Judicial Review

 22. This application for judicial review was issued on  20  January  2020.
     The grounds were settled by solicitors who were at that  stage  acting
     for the applicant. An Acknowledgement  of  Service  was  filed  on  11
     February 2020. Permission was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge  Hanson,
     who considered the respondent's decision to have been open to her.

 23. The applicant renewed the application  to  an  oral  hearing.  In  the
     meantime, he decided to dispense with the services of  his  solicitors
     and to instruct counsel directly. The oral  permission  hearing  which
     was listed on 18 June 2020 was vacated by consent and  Mr  Sharma  was
     duly instructed.

 24. In amended grounds for judicial review, Mr Sharma makes three  concise
     submissions. By the first, it is submitted that the  respondent  erred
     in adopting an
     unfair procedure, in that she failed to issue  a  'minded  to  refuse'
     letter  before  refusing  the  application  on  the  ground  that  the
     applicant's presence in the UK was undesirable.  By  the  second,  the
     applicant submits that the respondent failed lawfully or rationally to
     conduct the balancing exercise required by paragraph  322(5).  By  the
     third, it is submitted that Article 8 ECHR requires the Upper Tribunal
     to consider for itself whether the allegation made by  the  respondent
     is made out, rather than whether it was reached rationally.

 25. Permission to amend the grounds was  given  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
     Owens at an oral permission hearing on 2  September  2020.  UTJ  Owens
     considered all three grounds to be arguable and she gave permission to
     proceed.

Submissions

 26. In his skeleton argument and oral submissions, Mr Sharma develops  his
     grounds as follows. In relation to the first, he relies  on  what  was
     said by the Court of Appeal in R (Balajigari & Ors) v SSHD [2019] EWCA
     Civ  673;  [2019]  1  WLR  4647  about  the  respondent's   procedural
     obligations in cases of this nature. He submits that the applicant was
     not given a proper opportunity to respond to  the  allegation  against
     him. Nothing said or done by the  respondent  in  the  course  of  the
     events I have summarised above sufficed, he  submits,  to  negate  the
     need to give the applicant notice that the respondent  was  minded  to
     refuse his application under paragraph 322(5) because he had  breached
     his immigration bail conditions. In particular, Mr Sharma submits that
     the Bail 204 notice procedure did  not  comply  with  the  requirement
     described  at  [55]  of  Balajigari,  of  giving  the  applicant   "an
     opportunity to respond, both as regards  the  conduct  itself  and  as
     regards any other reasons relied on as  regards  "undesirability"  and
     the exercise of the second-stage assessment".

 27. As to his second ground,  Mr  Sharma  submits  that  the  respondent's
     'balancing exercise' is flawed for a number of reasons. He  refers  in
     this connection to what was said by Underhill LJ, giving the  judgment
     of the Court of Appeal, at [38]-[39] and [130]-[132] of Balajigari and
     also to what was said by Irwin LJ (with whom Simler LJ  and  Sir  Jack
     Beatson agreed) in Yaseen v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ  157;  [2020]  1  WLR
     1359. What did not suffice on the  unusual  facts  of  this  case,  he
     submits,  was  for  the  respondent  merely  to  state  that  she  had
     considered her discretion and decided not to exercise it.

 28. As to his third ground, Mr Sharma submits that  this  was  a  case  in
     which  the  remaining requirements of  the  PBS  were  satisfied   and
     that  the  Tribunal  is   obliged  to  reach  its  own  conclusion  on
     whether the interference with  the  applicant's  Article       8  ECHR
     rights is justified: Balajigari, at [92]. Although the respondent  had
     been asked to consider that question in the application  for  AR,  she
     had chosen to shut her eyes to it.

 29. In his written and oral submissions for the respondent, Mr Malik avers
     as follows. As to the first  ground,  he  submits  that  the  duty  of
     procedural fairness is context- specific and that the  respondent  was
     not obliged to give notice above and beyond the Bail 204  notice.  The
     position in the applicant's case is, he submits, similar to
     that which obtained in the case of one of the  cases  considered  with
     Balajigari, that of  the  appellant  Mr  Albert.  In  that  case,  the
     appellant had been alerted to the respondent's concerns by an  earlier
     decision and there was no need to issue a further 'minded  to  refuse'
     letter. This was not a case in which there was any dispute  about  the
     basic facts, which had been accepted in terms by the applicant. In any
     event, Mr Malik submits that Balajigari - which concerned  individuals
     being refused ILR - is  distinguishable  from  the  applicant's  case,
     given that he had no leave to remain beyond  the  refusal  of  his  AR
     application in March 2018. The refusal of his  application  would  not
     expose him to the 'hostile environment', as  he  was  already  without
     leave.

 30. Mr Malik submits that the second ground is not made  out  because  the
     respondent was clearly aware  of  her  discretion  and  took  it  into
     account in what he describes in his skeleton argument  as  a  'classic
     example of lawful decision making'. On proper analysis, it  cannot  be
     said that the respondent omitted relevant matters from  her  analysis.
     The respondent's exercise of discretion  may  only  be  challenged  on
     traditional public law grounds and her conclusion cannot  properly  be
     categorised as irrational. Mr Malik reminds me that it has  been  held
     in decisions of the highest authority that the balancing and  weighing
     of relevant considerations is a matter for the primary decision  maker
     and that it is not necessary for the  respondent  to  refer  to  every
     material consideration.

 31. As to the third ground, Mr Malik submits that the  applicant  made  an
     Article 8 ECHR claim after his PBS application had  been  refused  and
     that it is improper to attempt to raise that claim in this application
     for judicial review. The claim had been refused and certified  and  it
     amounts to an abuse of process to raise arguments against it  in  this
     forum. Balajigari concerned a distinguishable situation,  he  submits,
     in which there had been no separate  Article  8  ECHR  application  or
     decision.

 32. In any event, Mr Malik submits that this is a  case  in  which  it  is
     highly likely that the outcome for the applicant would not  have  been
     substantially different if the conduct complained of had not occurred.
     Relief should therefore be refused even if any of the grounds are made
     out.

Analysis

 33. It is not necessary to refer to  any  provisions  of  the  Immigration
     Rules other than paragraph 322(5). This ground of refusal  falls  into
     the "non-mandatory" section of paragraph  322,  in  respect  of  which
     leave  to  remain  (etc)  should  normally  be  refused   in   certain
     circumstances. The circumstances described in sub-paragraph (5)  read,
     at all material times, as follows:

          the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
          the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct  (including
          convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)), character
          or associations or  the  fact  that  he  represents  a  threat  to
          national security.
 34. The leading authority on this provision is undoubtedly Balajigari,  to
     which both  advocates  made  extensive  reference  in  their  skeleton
     arguments.  Mr  Malik  submits  that  Balajigari  was  concerned  with
     procedural fairness in a specific set of circumstances and that it  is
     either of no application or limited application to  the  circumstances
     before me. He notes, in particular,  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
     concerned in those cases with individuals who had extent leave and who
     faced the refusal  of  ILR,  with  all  the  consequences  which  that
     entails: [50]-[55] refers. The applicant, on the  other  hand,  is  an
     individual with no leave, since it is  accepted   that  the  statutory
     extension of his leave came to an end in March 2018, and he  does  not
     face the refusal of ILR but only the denial of limited leave to remain
     under the PBS.

 35. Similar submissions were made by leading counsel for the respondent in
     R (Karagul) v SSHD [2019] EWHC 3208. The applicants  in  those  linked
     cases were Turkish nationals whose applications for  leave  under  the
     standstill provisions in the Turkish Association  Agreement  had  been
     refused because their businesses were not thought by the respondent to
     be genuine. It was submitted by the respondent that Balajigari was  of
     limited effect and was relevant only in the context  of  the  specific
     facts of the several cases before the court: [98].

 36. Having reviewed the jurisprudence, including R (Citizens  UK)  v  SSHD
     [2018] EWCA Civ 1812; [2018] 4 WLR 123, Balajigari  and  Shahbaz  Khan
     [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC), Saini J rejected that submission, holding  that
     Balajigari was an application of well-established  general  principles
     and was not to be limited in the manner contended by the Secretary  of
     State: [102]. At [103], Saini J summarised what he  considered  to  be
     the general principles:

       1) Where a public authority exercising  an  administrative  power  to
          grant or refuse an application proposes to make  a  decision  that
          the applicant for some right, benefit  or  status  may  have  been
          dishonest in their application or has otherwise acted in bad faith
          (or disreputably) in  relation  to  the  application,  common  law
          fairness will generally require at least the following  safeguards
          to be observed. Either the applicant is given a chance in  a  form
          of interview to address the  claimed  wrongdoing,  or  a  form  of
          written "minded to"  process,  should  be  followed  which  allows
          representations on the specific matter to be made prior to a final
          decision.

       2) Further,  a  process  of  internal  administrative  review  of  an
          original  negative  decision  which  bars   the   applicant   from
          submitting new evidence to rebut  the  finding  of  wrongdoing  is
          highly likely to be unfair.

       3) The need for these common law protections  is  particularly  acute
          where there has been a decision by the legislature  to  remove  an
          appeal on the merits to an independent and impartial tribunal.

 37. Despite Mr Malik's  submissions  to  the  contrary,  I  reach  similar
     conclusions in this case. I consider that the respondent was  under  a
     duty to act fairly to the applicant and that she was obliged  to  give
     him notice of her concern and an opportunity to
     respond to it.   I reject Mr Malik's submission that such a duty  only
     arises  when all       of the circumstances set out by Underhill LJ at
     [50]-[54] of Balajigari are present. Whilst it is correct that he  set
     out four features of those cases  at  [50]-[54]  and  then  began  his
     assessment at [55] by stating '[f]or all of those reasons', Mr  Sharma
     is undoubtedly correct to submit that the duty  does  not  only  apply
     when all of those features are present. Insofar as Mr Malik  submitted
     that  the  decision  in  Balajigari was driven by the court's  concern
     that a fair procedure should be afforded to those who will be  exposed
     to the hostile environment  as  a   result   of   their   applications
     being refused, I disagree. To my mind,  the  real  driver  behind  the
     decision was the  potentially  long-lasting  consequences   of   being
     refused leave   to  remain   on  grounds   of  character,  conduct  or
     associations. A refusal on that  basis  is  likely  to  cause  serious
     difficulties in any future applications and it  is  imperative,  given
     those consequences and the absence of  a  right  of  appeal,  that  an
     individual such as the applicant is given notice of  the  respondent's
      concern  and  an  opportunity  to respond to it.

 38. It is quite plain, to my mind, that the respondent owed the  applicant
     a duty of procedural fairness in this case. Given the consequences  of
     a  decision  under paragraph 322(5) (even for  a  person  who  has  no
     leave), an applicant who is to be refused  on  that  basis  should  be
     given notice of the respondent's concern and an opportunity to comment
     upon it. The  real  issue, in  this case, is not whether   there   was
     such a duty. It is the  content  of  that  duty  and  whether  it  was
     discharged by the respondent by her Bail 204 notice.

 39. In that respect, Mr Malik notes (as did Saini J in Karagul) that these
     general principles are not to be applied by rote identically in  every
     situation and that what fairness demands is dependent on  the  context
     of the decision: R v SSHD ex parte Doody [1994] 1  AC  531,  per  Lord
     Mustill at 560E-F. He submits  that  the  relevant  context,  in  this
     particular case, is supplied by the events immediately  preceding  the
     decision of 17 October 2019. He notes that the applicant had,  just  a
     fortnight earlier, been sent the Bail 204 notice in which he had  been
     given notice of the allegation that he had been working in breach.  He
     had been told, in terms, that any unresolved application for leave  to
     remain might be refused and  he  had  been  given  an  opportunity  to
     respond. He did respond, and the respondent demonstrably  took account
     of what he said in his response of 17 October 2019 before she  reached
     her conclusion.

 40. Despite Mr Sharma's attempts to meet these submissions, I find them to
      be  well  made. I do not consider there to have been  any  need   for
     a  further  'minded  to  refuse' letter, over and above the  Bail  204
     notice which was  issued  to  the  applicant.        I  recognise,  of
     course, that the bail notice was addressed to  the  specific  question
     of  bail but it sought expressly to  elicit  from  the  applicant  his
     response to the  allegation  and  it   stated,  in   terms,  that  any
     outstanding application for leave to  remain  might    be affected  by
     the events  described.  The  applicant  confirmed  that  he  had  been
     working at the home, he gave his explanation for  his   conduct,   and
     he  made  reference to additional circumstances such as the length  of
     time that he had been awaiting a decision from the respondent and  his
     need  to  provide  food and  shelter for his wife and child.
 41. Mr Malik draws a parallel with the facts  of  the  fourth  appellant's
     case in Balajigari.  That appellant - Mr Albert - had previously  been
     refused under paragraph  322(5)  but his solicitors had  made  further
     representations  against  that   conclusion.   At   [210],  the  court
     noted that Mr Albert's case was 'unlike the others' in light  of  this
     history, and that a claim based on procedural fairness could not  have
     succeeded in circumstances such as this.  The  factual  similarity  is
     limited but the essential point  which  Mr  Malik  seeks  to  make  in
     reliance upon it  holds  good;  the  applicant  had  been given notice
     of the charge that he had breached his bail conditions and he had been
     given an opportunity, which he took, to answer that charge.

 42. Viewed objectively, I do not consider that procedural fairness - which
     ordinarily requires a 'minded to refuse'  letter  in  such  a  case  -
     required such a letter to be  issued on the facts of this  case.  This
     was, in short, a case in which  further  notice  of  the  respondent's
     concern would have been  superfluous  because  the  case  against  the
     applicant was already obvious, as  was  the  potential  impact  of  it
     (Citizens UK refers, at [73], citing what was said  in  R  v  SSHD  ex
     parte Fayed [1998] 1 WLR 763). Properly understood, Balajigari did not
     require  the  respondent  to  particularise  her   concerns   or   her
     inclination towards refusal in any greater detail. Nor did it  require
     her to provide anything more than an opportunity to respond  to  those
     concerns, and she was not  required  to  attempt  to  elicit  specific
     submissions from the applicant on the  balancing  exercise  which  she
     might perform under paragraph 322(5). She was required to identify the
     conduct  in  question,  to  provide  an  indication  of  the  possible
     consequences, and to give a reasonable opportunity to make submissions
     on both points. The Bail  204  notice  and  the  opportunity  to  make
     submissions upon it discharged  that  obligation  and  the  respondent
     complied, therefore, with her obligation to  act  fairly  towards  the
     applicant.

 43. I have not found it necessary to refer to any of the other authorities
     cited by Mr  Sharma in support of this ground. Ashfaq [2020] UKUT  226
     (IAC),  R (Mansoor)  v SSHD [2020] UKUT 126 (IAC), Pathan [2020]  UKSC
     41 and R  (Topadar)  v  SSHD  [2020] EWCA Civ 1525 concerned different
     circumstances altogether and  do  not  bear, in my  judgment,  on  the
     extent of the respondent's  duty  to  act  fairly  on   the  facts  of
     this specific case. I reject the first ground accordingly.

 44. Mr Sharma is on much more fertile ground when it comes to  his  second
     ground.  The complaint here is that the respondent failed to undertake
     any balancing exercise or that the balancing exercise  which  she  did
     undertake was legally insufficient. It is necessary to recall what was
     said in Balajigari and in  Yaseen  about  the  scope  of  respondent's
     obligation in this respect.

 45. At [38] of the Balajigari, the court emphasised the need - in a 322(5)
     case such as the present - to conduct a "balancing  exercise  informed
     by weighing all relevant factors". It would be necessary, Underhill LJ
     stated,  to  weigh  matters  such   as   'any   substantial   positive
     contribution to the UK made by the applicant' and also to consider the
     circumstances relating to the misconduct in question.  The  court  did
     not accept that it would 'always be an error of  law  for  a  decision
     maker to fail  to  conduct  the  balancing  exercise  explicitly'  but
     suggested that it  would  be  good  practice  for  the  respondent  to
     incorporate it in the formal decision-making process. The  failure  of
     the respondent to conduct any sort of balancing exercise in  the  case
     of
     Mr Balajigari was  one  of  the  reasons  that  the  court  found  his
     application for judicial  review  to  be  arguable,  contrary  to  the
     conclusion reached by the Upper Tribunal:
     [130] refers.

 46. Yaseen was also an earnings discrepancy case.  Having  concluded  that
     the   applicant  had  used  deception  in  relation  to  his  previous
     earnings, the respondent had noted that refusal under paragraph 322(5)
     was not a 'mandatory decision'. She considered that his actions  meant
     that 'refusal under paragraph 322(5) is appropriate': [9]  refers.  On
     appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  had  found  that  the  appellant  had
     'failed to act with integrity in his tax affairs' and that he fell  to
     be refused under the Immigration Rules accordingly. It  was  submitted
     by the applicant in that case  (represented,  as  it  happens,  by  Mr
     Malik) that a number of factors had been left  out  of  account,  such
     that there was in truth no lawful balancing exercise conducted by  the
     respondent or by the FtT.

 47. Irwin LJ gave the only full judgment in Yaseen.  He  noted,  at  [41],
     that the Ministerial Statement made about earnings  discrepancy  cases
     confirmed that 'the scale of the misstatement is relevant  [and]  that
     all information will be taken into account, each case being considered
     on its own merits'. There was a world of difference, Irwin LJ  stated,
     between deliberately false information  to  avoid  paying  significant
     amounts of income tax and minor tax errors. He went on,  on  [42],  to
     note what had been said  at  [34]  of  Balajigari:  that  a  balancing
     exercise 'was proper practice'. At [46], he  concluded  materially  as
     follows:

          In my  judgment  this  appeal  should  succeed  on  a  simple  but
          important ground. In all but the most  extreme  cases,  where  the
          conduct complained of is such that on any view  the  balance  must
          fall against an applicant, even where a  sufficient  character  or
          conduct issue is proved, a balancing exercise is required. In this
          instance there was at least some positive material. I would  remit
          the matter for a re-hearing to permit such an exercise.

 48. Mr Malik  submits  that  the  decision  letter  in  the  instant  case
     discharged that obligation; that  the  reasoning  in  respect  of  the
     balancing exercise might have been brief but it was legally  adequate;
     and that the conclusion reached was ultimately open to the  respondent
     in public law terms.

 49. I have reproduced the relevant part of the decision letter  above.  In
     my judgment, it is insufficient to support Mr Malik's submissions,  or
     to withstand  the  criticisms  levelled  by  Mr  Sharma.  Echoing  the
     submissions made by Mr Malik in Yaseen, Mr  Sharma  submits  that  the
     respondent left a number of material matters out  of  account  in  the
     balancing exercise she purported to conduct. His strongest points,  it
     seems to me, are as follows.

 50. Firstly, the respondent took no  account  of  the  complexity  of  the
     situation  in  which  the  applicant  found  himself.  He   had   been
     undoubtedly been told, when his application  was  refused  in  January
     2018 and when his AR application was refused in March  2018,  that  he
     did not have leave to remain; that he was not entitled to   work;  and
     that it was a condition of  his  immigration  bail  that  he  was  not
     permitted
     to work or study. When he responded to the Bail 204  notice,  however,
     he  stated  that  he  had  found  his   situation   'incomprehensible'
     thereafter and that he  was  'completely  unaware'  that  he  was  not
     allowed to work. When other aspects of the chronology are  taken  into
     consideration, the basis of that submission becomes quite clear.

 51. As Mr Sharma notes at [19] of his skeleton argument, the applicant was
     told, when the respondent withdrew her earlier decision in response to
     one of his AR applications, that his 'existing leave and conditions of
     leave are extended under section 3C of the 1971 Immigration  Act'  (my
     [12]  above  refers).  Mr  Sharma  accepts,  as  he  must,  that  this
     indication was legally wrong. The applicant's leave under  section  3C
     had come to an end some time before this letter and there was no leave
     - whether under section 3C or otherwise - for the  withdrawal  of  the
     decision to reinstate. Mr Malik submits that the applicant's  position
     was 'tolerably clear'. To a judge or a lawyer versed in this field, it
     was. But what was said in that letter must be considered  through  the
     eyes of the applicant and Mr Sharma is entitled to submit - as he does
     at [19](vi) of his skeleton - that this would have given the applicant
     'the distinct impression that his leave had been re-established'.

 52. It is interesting to note,  in  that  connection,  the  terms  of  the
     sponsor licensing correspondence which I have described at [18] above.
     The applicant's employer - which is now  accepted  to  have  conducted
     itself  perfectly  lawfully  -  proceeded  on the basis  that  it  was
     able to employ  the  applicant  for 20 hours  per week  because   that
     was what was permitted.  The  officers  who  visited  the   site   had
     been  told this by the staff, who appear to  have  assumed  that   the
     applicant  continued  to  enjoy  leave on the same terms as before.

 53. There is another aspect of the sponsor licensing correspondence  which
      it  is necessary to consider. The licence was   suspended   in   June
     2019.  As  I  have  explained above,  that  suspension  was  motivated
     entirely by concerns that the applicant was not undertaking work which
     fulfilled the job description given in the Certificate of Sponsorship.
     Representations were made against  the  suspension,  the  gravamen  of
     which was that the  applicant  was  not  working  under   a   CoS  and
     that  he was simply awaiting the decision on his Tier  2  application.
     Until he received the decision on that application, it  was  submitted
     that  the employer was  not bound  by the terms of  the  CoS.  Shortly
     after  these   submissions  were  made,   in    August    2019,    the
     sponsorship licence was reinstated, with  the   respondent   accepting
     that  there  had been no breach of the sponsor licencing requirements.

 54. On proper analysis, it seems to  me  that  the  situation  was  really
     rather more serious than the respondent had at first  thought.  Whilst
     Ideal Solicitors might have been correct in their assertion that there
     had been no breach of the sponsor licencing  provisions,  the  reality
     was that Broadway Care Centre had actually been employing a person who
     was not entitled to work at all. The care home was potentially liable,
     therefore, to a Civil Penalty under section 15(1) of the  Immigration,
     Asylum and Nationality Act  2006  or  possibly  to  prosecution  under
     section 35  of  that  Act  (offence  of  knowingly  employing  illegal
     worker).  The  respondent  took  no  action  under  either  provision,
     however, and simply reinstated the sponsorship  licence,  without  the
     imposition of sanction or condition.

 55. The applicant was clearly aware  of  the  respondent's  investigations
     into his employer as he made reference to those investigations in  his
     response to the Bail 204 notice. What, therefore, would he  have  been
     told about his employer's dealings with the respondent in  the  summer
     of 2019? He must, it seems to me, have been told that the licence  had
     been suspended because his job title had been exaggerated and he  must
     also have been told that it had been reinstated because they had  told
     the respondent that he was not employed under the CoS but only for  20
     hours per week.

 56. On the one hand, therefore, the applicant had been told  unequivocally
     that he was not entitled to work in early 2018. On the other hand,  he
     had subsequently been told (wrongly) that his leave under  section  3C
     had been extended and no action had been taken against  his  employer,
     who had told the respondent that he was working there for 20 hours per
     week. The applicant was perfectly entitled, in light  of  these  mixed
     messages, to state that his situation was 'incomprehensible'  to  him.
     In considering whether his conduct was sufficiently  reprehensible  to
     justify refusal under paragraph 322(5), this sequence  of  events  and
     the resulting confusion was a point which the respondent was  required
     to consider,  and  failed  to  do  so.  It  bore  on  the  applicant's
     culpability for breaching his immigration bail conditions and  on  the
     critical question of where this case lay on the spectrum envisaged  by
     Irwin LJ at
     [41] of Yaseen.

 57. Whether or not I am correct to consider that  the  applicant  and  his
     employer had been faced with 'mixed messages' about  his  status  over
     the course of 2018 and 2019, the respondent failed  in  any  event  to
     give  any  adequate  consideration  to   whether   his   conduct   was
     sufficiently reprehensible to justify refusal on the ground  that  his
     presence in the United Kingdom was undesirable.  There  was  no  prior
     history of deception or other adverse conduct. The applicant satisfied
     the remaining requirements for leave to remain.  There  was  (ongoing)
     breach of a single bail condition, which the applicant  attributed  to
     his inability to provide for his wife and young child without working.
     Of course, in Balajigari  itself,  the  court  had  no  difficulty  in
     agreeing with the conclusion reached in the Upper  Tribunal,  that  an
     earnings discrepancy will often be a serious matter which  will  prima
     facie justify refusal on conduct grounds. But the conduct in this case
     was arguably of a lesser order altogether, and I have  been  shown  no
     authority or guidance which suggests that a breach of immigration bail
     will, without more, begin to justify refusal under paragraph 322(5).

 58.  There  was,  in  truth,  no  balancing  exercise  conducted  by   the
     respondent. She did not demonstrably assess  the  seriousness  of  the
     applicant's conduct in light of the factors above.  And  she  did  not
     weigh that particular conduct against the aspects of  the  applicant's
     case which militated against a conclusion that  his  presence  in  the
     United Kingdom was undesirable. The applicant need not establish -  as
     Mr Malik sought to submit -  that  the  conclusion  of  the  balancing
     exercise was irrational. Mr Sharma did  not  advance  the  applicant's
     case on that basis. His submission, which must in my judgment succeed,
     was instead that the respondent failed to turn her  mind  to  material
     matters and failed to conduct a lawful balancing exercise accordingly.
     The applicant's second ground is therefore made out.

 59. Mr Sharma quite properly accepted that the third ground added  nothing
     to the first  two.  The  result  of  the  conclusion  I  have  reached
     immediately above is that the decision must be quashed in  any  event,
     and  the  respondent  will  have   to   reconsider   the   application
     holistically. It would not be appropriate, in these circumstances,  to
     embark upon consideration  of  the  competing  submissions  about  the
     impact of the certified human rights  decision  which  post-dated  the
     decision under challenge.

 60. I firmly reject the submission made at [40]  of  Mr  Malik's  skeleton
     argument, in reliance on s31(3C) of the Senior Courts Act  1981,  that
     it is highly likely that the outcome for the applicant would not  have
     been substantially different  if  the  respondent  had  not  erred  as
     alleged in the second ground. This is clearly  not  a  case  in  which
     relief should  be  refused  on  that  basis  because  there  is  every
     possibility that the respondent would conclude, when  considering  the
     breach of bail in its proper context,  that  the  applicant's  conduct
     does not render his presence in the UK undesirable.

 61. This  judgment  will  be  handed  down  by  email.  I  invite  written
     submissions from counsel on the terms of  the  appropriate  order  and
     other consequential matters

                                  ~~~~0~~~~

Supplementary Judgment

 62. This judgment was sent to the parties in draft in the usual way. I  am
     grateful to Mr Sharma for the typographical amendments suggested,  and
     to both counsel for their submissions on the form  of  the  order,  on
     which there was a good measure of  agreement.  Two  matters  were  not
     agreed, which I resolve as follows.

 63.  Mr  Sharma  contended  that  the  respondent  should  be  ordered  to
     reconsider the application within 28 days.  Mr  Malik  submitted  that
     this timescale was too tight, in  light  of  the  potential  need  for
     further evidence and the difficulties caused by the pandemic. I accept
     the submissions made by Mr Malik in this respect but I do  not  accept
     his further submission that there should be no timescale specified  at
     all. The applicant is in a difficult position and should  be  entitled
     to a decision within three months.

 64. Mr Sharma sought summary assessment of the applicant's  costs  in  the
     sum of
     ï¿½18,274. Mr Malik raised three  objections:  (i)  that  the  applicant
     should not be entitled to his costs for anything preceding the amended
     grounds; (ii) that the applicant had only met with success on  one  of
     three grounds; and (ii) that Mr  Sharma's  hourly  rate  of  ï¿½450  was
     'obviously excessive and disproportionate'. I  take  those  points  in
     turn:

       i) Mr Sharma notes that the applicant has not claimed  the  costs  of
          any work which preceded his advice to amend the grounds. I  accept
          that but the respondent should not, to my  mind,  be  put  to  the
          costs  of  anything  preceding  Judge  Owens'  decision  to   give
          permission to amend the grounds. The points taken in  the  amended
          grounds had not been properly identified in pre-action
          correspondence and the respondent's first real opportunity to take
          a view on their merits was at the  point  that  the  grounds  were
          formally amended on 2 September 2020.

      ii) The applicant has been largely successful in his claim but he  has
          not established that he was  entitled  to  a  further  'minded  to
          refuse' letter, as maintained in  ground  one.  And  I  accept  Mr
          Malik's  submission  that  the  respondent  has  herself  incurred
          unnecessary costs in meeting grounds one and three. The first  and
          second grounds were not interconnected, as Mr Sharma submits,  and
          the applicant clearly failed on the first and clearly succeeded on
          the second. The third ground, as noted in  my  judgment,  was  not
          even pursued. It is therefore appropriate for me  to  exercise  my
          discretion to reduce the hours claimed. I do not accept Mr Malik's
          submission that a reduction  of  two  thirds  is  appropriate.  On
          balance, I consider a fair order to be that the respondent  should
          pay two thirds of the applicant's costs.

     iii) As for the rate claimed, Mr Malik's submission is plainly correct.
          ï¿½450 per hour for junior counsel of 12 years'  call  is  obviously
          excessive and disproportionate for a short judicial review hearing
          in the  Upper  Tribunal.  Whilst  counsel  for  an  applicant  can
          properly command a higher rate than  Treasury counsel, the rate is
          nearly four times that of Treasury counsel  on  the  A  panel  (ie
          those of 10 years' call  or  more).  The  fact  that  the  current
          guideline rate for Queen's Counsel conducting a two day hearing in
          the Supreme Court only slightly exceeds  the  total  sum  claimed1
          equally sheds a good deal of light on the situation. At Mr Malik's
          invitation, however, I decline to fix upon a suitable rate by  way
          of summary assessment; that can be achieved by way  of  agreement,
          failing which there will have to be detailed assessment.

























1 Paragraph 15.9 of the Supreme Court's Practice Direction 13 refers

