
IAC-FH-CK-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                 JR/879/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            12 November 2018


                                  The QUEEN
               (ON The application OF GLORY UZOAMAKA DURUEKE)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr J Gajjar of Counsel, instructed by Direct Access appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr M Grandison of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE craig: The applicant is a national of Nigeria who was born on  15
    March 1980.  She first arrived in this country in January 2010,  having
    been granted leave to enter as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  until  30
    September 2011.  On 4 April 2011 she applied for  leave  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant which was granted until 10 June 2013.  Prior  to  the
    expiry of that leave on 17 May 2013 she applied to extend her leave  as
    a Tier 1 (General) Migrant and in order to do so she  was  required  to
    have an income at above a specified  level.   In  her  application  she
    claimed to have amongst other income a self-employed income of a little
    over �69,000.  The application is not contained within the file, so the
    precise details are not available but it  is  common  ground  that  the
    income of a little over �71,000 was claimed for  the  period  from  May
    2012 to 31  March  2013.   In  reliance  on  this  claimed  income  the
    applicant was granted further leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant until 13 June 2016.


On 7 June 2016 the applicant applied for indefinite leave to remain as a
Tier 1 (General) Migrant, having been in this country as a Tier 1 (General)
Migrant for five years and, other things being equal, being entitled to
indefinite leave to remain.  However, before granting any such application
the respondent now carries out checks and has regard to what is set out
within the Immigration Rules, in particular with regard to paragraphs 245CD
and 322, so far as 245CD(b) and 245CD(g) is concerned with reference to
Appendix A (Attributes) and paragraphs 19(i) and 19(j) Appendix A of the
Immigration Rules.  Paragraphs 19(i) and 19(j) set out that the respondent
must be satisfied that the earnings claimed are from genuine employment and
if the respondent is not so satisfied points for these earnings will not be
awarded and it is also provided (in (j)), again, that when considering
whether the earnings are from genuine employment the respondent will have
regard among other matters to the verification of an applicant's previous
earnings claims with declarations made to other government departments,
including declarations made in respect of earnings claimed by that
applicant in previous applications.

It is common ground that when making her income tax returns for the year
2012 - 2013, that is for the year ending 4 April 2013, the applicant only
declared income from self-employment amounting to a little over �7,000;
there is clearly a huge discrepancy between this figure and the income
which the applicant had claimed for the corresponding period in his
previous tier 1 application.

As is common with applications of this sort, after the respondent had
received the application the applicant was sent a tax questionnaire to
complete which she completed and returned to the respondent on 1 April
2017.  Within that tax questionnaire there were standard questions to which
the applicant was required to respond.  At question 12 the applicant was
asked as follows:

"12. Did you review, check and sign each tax return in the financial
year(s) stated in your answer to question 2 before it/they were submitted
to HMRC?  If not please list those you did not check and sign and provide
reasons why you did not do so".

The applicant had replied "yes" to that question.  Then at question 13 the
applicant was asked as follows:

"13. Are you satisfied that the tax return(s) submitted to HMRC in the
financial year(s) stated in your answer to question 2 accurately reflected
your income from self-employment, or that of your limited company?"

To this question, again, the applicant replied "yes" (in this case by
ticking the box in which yes was prestated).  Had the answer been "no" the
applicant would have had to answer the further question as to why she was
not so satisfied and what further action she had taken to address it.

At question 14 the applicant was asked whether she had ever needed to
correct or resubmit her tax returns for the relevant financial year, to
which she had answered that she had not.  This question is inserted to deal
with the regrettably common occurrence where applicants have apparently
discovered in between making the returns and then making an application for
further leave to remain that there are discrepancies of the sort that have
occurred in this case such that it would be necessary to correct the
position.  It is common ground in this case that the applicant did not take
any steps to correct this discrepancy prior to making the application for
ILR or indeed prior to that application being refused, which is what
happened next.

On 8 November 2017 the application was refused and the reasons were set out
by the respondent in the refusal letter, which was dated that date.  I set
out from the decision letter the relevant extracts contained under "Reasons
for Decision":

         "REASONS FOR DECISION

         We have considered your application on behalf of the Secretary of
         State and your application has been refused.  In making the
         decision to refuse your application, careful consideration has been
         given to the following:

         ...

         Immigration Rules

         To qualify for indefinite leave to remain, a Tier 1 (General)
         Migrant must meet the requirements in paragraph 245CD of the
         Immigration Rules and paragraphs 19(i) and 19(j) of Appendix A of
         the Immigration Rules.

         Paragraph 19(i) and 19(j) of Appendix A states:

(i)  The Secretary of State must be satisfied that the earnings are from
genuine employment.  If the Secretary of State is not satisfied, points for
those earnings will not be awarded.

(j)  In making the assessment in paragraph 19(i), the Secretary of State
will assess on the balance of probabilities and may take into account the
following factors:

(i)  the evidence which you have submitted;

(ii) whether the money appears to have been earned through genuine
employment, rather than being borrowed, gifted, or otherwise shown in your
financial transactions or records without being earned;

(iii)    whether the business from which the earnings are claimed can be
shown to exist and be lawfully and genuinely trading;

(iv) verification of your previous earnings claims with declarations made
to other Government Departments, including declarations made in respect of
earnings claimed by you in previous applications;

...

(vi) your immigration history and previous activity in the UK;

...

(ix) any other relevant information.

iv)  Verification of your previous earnings claims with declarations made
in respect of the applicant to other Government Departments, including
declarations made in respect of earnings claimed by the applicant in
previous applications.

When assessing your current Tier 1 (General) indefinite leave to remain
application we sent you a questionnaire to complete which asked you
questions about your previous self-employment and tax returns.  You signed
and returned the questionnaire on 1 April 2017.

With reference to questions 2 and 14 of the questionnaire you were asked:

Q2: Please confirm the financial years in which you were registered as self-
employed, or as the director of a limited company, in the UK?

Answer: 2012 for Limited till date.  Self-employed 1/5/12 to 30/09/12.

Q5: For the financial year(s) stated in your answer to question 2 in which
you have been registered as self-employed, or a director of a limited
company, in the UK, please confirm your turnover, net profit, gross profit
and expenses?  Please advise of the business name(s) (including both T/A
and Limited company names if these are different) for the financial years
stated in your answer to question 2.

Answer: See attachment.

Q12: Did you review, check and sign each tax return in the financial
year(s) stated in your answer to question 2 before it/they were submitted
to HMRC?

Answer: Yes.

In your previous Tier 1 (General) application dated 17 May 2013 you claimed
self-employed net profit of �69,487.22 for the period from 1 May 2012 to 31
March 2013.  This covers the tax year 2012/2013.

However, with your application you have provided as evidence a SA302 tax
calculation from HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) which shows you have declared
a total of �7,502.00 self-employed net profit for the tax year 2012/2013.
This therefore means there is a difference of �61,985.22 between what was
declared to the Home Office and what you have declared to HMRC.

In response to the questionnaire you have made no reason as to why the self-
employed net profit declared to HMRC is over �60,000.00 less than what was
claimed in your previous Tier 1 (General) application.  Having decided to
work as self-employed in the United Kingdom it is your responsibility to
ensure the correct declaration of earnings are made to HMRC at the correct
time, whether prepared by yourself or a third party.  The onus is on you to
ensure that the correct figures are submitted initially.  In response to
question 12 you stated you reviewed, checked and signed each of your tax
returns.  You have a responsibility to maintain accurate records of your
finances and tax liabilities.

In view of the clear discrepancies between the above earnings that you have
declared to HMRC and the earnings you had declared to UKVI for your
previous immigration application we are not satisfied that you have been
able to credibly account for why the earnings declared to HMRC were
significantly less than the earnings you had declared in your previous Tier
1 (General) application.

The Secretary of State is satisfied that the self-employed earnings you had
declared in your previous Tier 1 (General) application are not consistent
with your declarations made to HMRC in the relevant tax period.  The fact
that your declared earnings to UKVI in your Tier 1 (General) application
dated 17 May 2013 compared to what you declared to HMRC for a similar
period differ significantly, does not demonstrate that your declaration of
earnings to both UKVI and HMRC are consistent.

Had you declared earnings in your Tier 1 (General) application of 17 May
2013 which were consistent with your earnings declarations to HMRC, you
would not have scored sufficient points under the Immigration Rules for
leave to remain to be granted.

We are satisfied that, based on your actions in declaring different amounts
of income to HMRC and UKVI, you have either misrepresented your earnings to
HMRC in order to reduce your tax liability or provided false information
about your earnings to UKVI in order to obtain leave to remain, or both.

Furthermore the tax discrepancies outlined above concerning your previous
application leads us to question the credibility of the self-employed
earnings you have claimed in your subsequent Tier 1 (General) indefinite
leave to remain application and on the balance of probability for the
reasons outlined above, the Secretary of State is not satisfied that the
self-employed earnings you have claimed in your Tier 1 (General)
applications are genuine".

The respondent then continued by referring to paragraph 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules, which sets out that leave to remain or a variation of
leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused
where:

"322(5)  The undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including convictions which
do not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character or associations or the fact
that he represents a threat to national security".

The conclusion with regard to consideration of the discretionary ground of
refusal under paragraph 322(5) is then stated as follows:

"Your actions in declaring different amounts of income to HMRC and UKVI
lead to the conclusion that in light of your character and conduct it would
be undesirable to allow you to remain in the United Kingdom.  Your
character and conduct with regard to declaring your income would lead to a
refusal of your application under General Grounds paragraph 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules.  Whilst a refusal under paragraph 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules is not a mandatory decision, it is considered your
actions in declaring different income to HMRC and UKVI would mean that a
refusal under paragraph 322(5) is appropriate."

The respondent then set out the requirements under paragraph 245CD of the
Rules, which included under (b) that:

"The applicant must not fall for refusal under the general grounds for
refusal (except that paragraph 322(1C) shall not apply if the applicant
meets the conditions in (f)(i) - (iii) below), and must not be an illegal
entrant."

The respondent then listed the points that were required, which included a
requirement to be awarded points in respect of previous earnings, for which
the applicant had claimed 30 points.  Because of the discrepancy referred
to above the respondent considered on the balance of probabilities that he
could not be satisfied that her earnings were genuine and therefore awarded
no points in respect of that income.

The applicant applied for administrative review of that decision, as was
her right, and this application was made on 30 November 2017, which, I have
been told, was some twelve days after the decision had been received by
her.  She was required to make this application within fourteen days of the
date of receipt of decision.  When giving the details of her application
she stated that although the tax returns setting out her income for the
year 2012/2013 were not correct, this had been an innocent mistake and not
a deliberate fraud on her part.  I set out the relevant extracts from this
application as follows:

"I do not accept the fact that I gave a 'false information' as your
decision suggested.

The decision letter stated that the information relating to my previous tax
return for the tax year 2012/2013 were not correct but same was not false
as I did not made the information with the aim of deceiving or misleading
the Home Office or the HMRC but same is an innocent human error.

Upon critical review at the moment while same was also examined by my
accountant at that period, it has now been discovered that there was an
omission which was not a deliberate effort on our part to defraud or
mislead the Home Office or the HMRC.

This is not a deliberate act to deceive or mislead as it was a genuine
human error and communication between my accountant and HMRC.

As soon as I became aware of this omission, I took a pro-active step to
correct this mistake by instructing my accountant to amend the already
file[d] Returns with the HMRC immediately and this instruction has been
carried out with the HMRC.

Consequently, the error is not a deliberate effort to mislead but an
innocent mistake and my current application should not have been refused on
this ground and all human being[s] are prone to make mistakes and or
errors.

The HMRC realising that it is possible to make mistakes also makes
provision for correction of errors in filing of returns whenever same is
discovered by applicant.

It is therefore wrong to refuse my current application on this alleged
wrong grounds.

I confirm that I submitted the relevant and correct information and
documents at my disposal during the time I was submitting my application.

I have only just recently discovered the omission and error on my
previously filed Tax Returns with the HMRC and this is when my current
application was refused by the Home Office.

If I had known before now, I will have contacted the Home Office of the
relevant changes but I did not know since I am not a professional
accountant or tax experts.

Upon the fact coming to my knowledge, I immediately took proactive step to
have same corrected with the HMRC, who have confirmed receipt of the
amendment.

I therefore confirm that I did not deliberately withheld any information
from the Home Office and my current application should not have been
refused on the above grounds.

The decision on my application is wrong and same should be set aside.

...

This paragraph 322(5) does not apply to my application as I am not a person
of bad character or behaviour

After applying for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on 07/06/2016, I
received questionnaire from my caseworker on 14/03/2017, in it I stated my
business tax period with the evidence of 'cooperation' tax returns and
evidence of cooperation' tax payment which showed that I have been paying
my corporation tax till date.  I don't think that the caseworker had a look
at this piece of evidence.

If there is any act of deception I won't have been paying such huge tax.
Once my accountant work out my profit and dividend and send it to HMRC, I
follow it up with payment.  The confirmation of payment document sent to my
caseworker is an evidence.

The 2012 - 2013 dividend filing was done on paper and posted to the HMRC
but HMRC said they never received any self-assessment which created
omission in my SA302.  When this omission was not swept under the carpet
but pro-active action was taken to correct this.

I believe that paragraph 322(2) is meant for those who deliberately
provided false information with a mind to deceive the Home Office or the
HMRC.

I am not a person who will deliberately deceive the Home Office and or the
HMRC as it can be seen in my tax history that I have also previously
overpaid my tax and HMRC usually refunds me of the tax surplus paid.

I further believe that the Home Office should have considered my current
application on its own merits and the failure to do so is wrong in law.

...

Extensive documentary evidence was submitted with my application to prove
the above stated that there is nothing to hide.  The disappearance of tax
return in the post was due to circumstances beyond me.

My accountant said he is willing to give the Home Office evidence that this
tax return was sent when the [corporation] tax was sent to the HMRC if
requested.

That was why I was able to see what my income tax was and paid it off.

...".

The applicant then, again, claimed that this was a "genuine error which has
been pro-actively corrected" and the "genuine error is bound to happen
since it [is] human[s] that are carrying out these operations".

Although there was reference within the details given to evidence which
would be filed by the accountant this does not appear to have been done and
nor was any evidence submitted with regard to any refund that HMRC had by
that time been said to have made.  Also, it is not clear as to when it was
that the tax return was resubmitted with correct figures, but I am told on
behalf of the applicant that HMRC has given an amended tax demand in light
of the corrections that were made and this has resulted in the applicant
having had to pay something over �13,000 to HMRC, being made up of �11,173
tax which was underpaid, together with interest on this sum.

The respondent considered these representations which had been made but in
an administrative review decision made on 21 December 2017 the original
decision was maintained.  I set out the relevant extracts from this
decision as follows:

"We have carefully considered the points that you raised in the
administrative review application.  We have maintained the original
decision for the reasons given below.

...

You applied for indefinite leave to remain and the application was
therefore assessed under paragraph 322(5), and 245CD(b) and 245CD(g) with
reference to Appendix A (Attributes) and paragraphs 19(i) and 19(j) of
Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  Under those Rules, you were required
to demonstrate that on balance of probabilities you satisfy the Secretary
of State your income comes from genuine employment.

You begin your administrative review application claiming the discrepancy
between the income declared to the Home Office and HMRC was not deliberate.
 You claim the error was a human error and now it has been discovered you
took a pro-active step to correct this mistake.  You state you have now
approached an accountant in order to amend the tax documents with HMRC.

You confirm you have submitted the relevant and correct information at the
time you submitted your Tier 1 (General) application.  You claim you have
only recently discovered the omission and that was only when your
application was refused.  You affirm that you did not deliberately withhold
any information from the Home Office therefore the decision is wrong and
should be set aside.

Having decided to work as self-employed in the United Kingdom it is your
responsibility to ensure the correct declaration of earnings are made to
HMRC at the correct time, whether prepared by yourself or a third party.
The onus is on you to ensure that the correct figures are submitted
initially.  It is not credible that you would not realise such a
fundamental error had been made in misdeclaring your income to HMRC until
the refusal [of] your indefinite leave to remain application.  You have a
responsibility to maintain accurate records of your finances and tax
liabilities.  Consideration has been given to the explanations provided and
your explanation to account for the amendment is not accepted.

You claim your application should not be refused under paragraph 322(5) as
you did not fail to tell the Home Office this information.  You claim
paragraph 322(5) does not apply to you as you are not a person of bad
character or behaviour, to the contrary, you claim this paragraph applies
to those who deliberately provide false information.

Upon review of the original caseworker decision letter we are satisfied
that the correct Immigration Rules and policy guidance have been applied to
the circumstances of your case.  On this note, the original decision maker
highlights concerns over your character and conduct, essentially due to
your failure to report your tax liability accurately.  We are therefore
satisfied that paragraph 322(5) applies to your case and we conclude the
original caseworker has considered your case correctly.

...

You claim upon request from the original decision maker you received a
questionnaire stating your business tax period.  You claim you have
submitted evidence of corporation tax which proves you paid your
corporation tax.  You claim the original decision maker did not have a look
of this evidence.

In this regard we can confirm the original decision maker correctly
assessed your case together with the evidence submitted.  The original
decision maker did not raise any concerns in regards your corporation tax
matters rather than matters in regards to discrepancy between the income
declared to two government departments.  In this regard, we are satisfied
in your previous Tier 1 (General) application of 17th May 2013 you claimed
self-employed net profit of �69,487.22 which covers the tax year 2012/2013.
 It is noted that in your current application you have provided evidence, a
SA302 tax calculation from HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) which shows you have
declared a total of �7,502.00 self-employed net profit for the same tax
year.  This means there is a difference of �61,985.22 between what was
declared to the Home Office and what you have declared to HMRC.
Consequently, we are not satisfied you have provided sufficient evidence so
you can credibly account for why the earnings declared to HMRC were
significantly less than the earnings you had declared on your previous Tier
1 (General) application.

...

[With regard to paragraphs 19(i) and (j) of Appendix A of the Immigration
Rules]:

The Secretary of State has, therefore reasonable cause to doubt the
genuineness of your earnings claim made in the current application.  We
have maintained the decision to refuse your application under paragraph
322(5), 245CD(b) and 245CD(g) with reference to Appendix A (Attributes) and
paragraphs 19(i) and 19(j) of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules".

Subsequent to this decision, the applicant sent a pre-action Protocol
letter, which was responded to on 16 January 2018.  That letter was
apparently received by the respondent on 10 January, so the response was
made only some six days later.  In that letter the respondent noted the
discrepancies to which reference has already been made but (in a passage
which is now relied on on behalf of the applicant) stated as follows:

"As you may be aware, your application was not refused on deception
grounds, but rather on character and conduct grounds and therefore the SSHD
does not believe that there has been 'an unreasonable finding of deception'
as you alleged in your letter before claim.  It is conceded that the
decision letter of 08/11/2017 mentions 'false information' but, however,
that does not necessarily imply deception in the first place.  Rather,
'false information' is simply inaccurate information which is not correct
and which can be regarded by the SHHD as reflecting negatively on your
character and conduct.  Therefore the SHHD considers that her decision of
08/11/2017 to refuse your application under paragraph 322(5) was justified
as the onus was on you to provide accurate and correct information to the
SHHD in all dealings and applications".

It is not necessary to set out any further extracts from this letter.

The applicant commenced judicial review proceedings in February 2018.  She
appears to have settled the original grounds herself, and it is common
ground that these grounds were not pleaded with the cogency that they might
have been had they been professionally drafted.  Permission was refused on
the papers and consequently the applicant instructed Mr Gajjar, who renewed
the application orally.  By that time, he had himself settled amended
grounds and the applicant was given permission to rely on these amended
grounds, permission being granted at that hearing.

I accordingly do not have regard to the original grounds but consider this
application on the basis of the grounds settled by Mr Gajjar.  I have also
been assisted greatly both by the skeleton argument which he had prepared
and also by the Detailed Grounds of Defence settled by Zane Malik of
Counsel on behalf of the respondent in which he gives a thorough and
detailed response to the submissions made on behalf of the applicant and
also by the very thorough skeleton argument prepared for this hearing by Mr
Grandison on behalf of the respondent, who was instructed very late in the
day but nonetheless has been able to set out his cogent submissions in
writing prior to the hearing.  I also heard detailed submissions on behalf
of both parties.

Both parties in the course of this hearing and in the written documents to
which I have referred have put before the Tribunal a very large number of
authorities including some 21 substantive decisions, either of Upper
Tribunal Judges or of judges of the Administrative Court, in which they
have grappled with issues arising from this type of case.

It will not be necessary for the purposes of this decision for me to set
out in detail everything which was said to me during the course of the
hearing or indeed to refer to each and every authority that was placed
before me (in addition to the 21 authorities to which I have already
referred, I was also referred to a further four decisions).  However, I
have had regard to all the arguments which were advanced, whether in
writing or orally before me, and to all the documents contained within the
file, whether or not the same is referred to specifically below, although I
shall for the purposes of this decision refer only to such of these
arguments and such of what is contained within the file as is necessary.

Common Ground

At the outset of this hearing the Tribunal discussed with the parties what
common ground there was and it was agreed first that this and other cases
like this was not a precedent fact case in that the issue which this
Tribunal would have to consider was whether or not (setting aside for the
moment the issue of procedural unfairness, to which I will have to return)
the decision which was made by the decision maker was one which was open to
that decision maker.  In other words, it is not the function of this
Tribunal to seek to remake the decision but rather on ordinary Wednesbury
principles to determine whether or not this decision was one which properly
could have been made.  Secondly, it is common ground between the parties
that for a lawful decision to be made under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules,
the decision maker has to make that decision on the basis that the
applicant had been dishonest.  It is not, and Mr Grandison on behalf of the
respondent did not suggest that it would be, sufficient for the decision
maker to conclude that the applicant had been negligent in making her
income tax returns to HMRC.  The threshhold before a decision maker could
properly find that permission should be refused on grounds of character is
a sufficiently high one that nothing less than dishonesty will suffice.

I now turn to the essence of the applicant's claim both as pleaded but also
as advanced before this Tribunal.  There are two aspects to the claim.  The
first is that the decision was an irrational one because, the respondent
having stated in the response to the pre-action Protocol letter that he was
not relying on dishonesty (that is the way in which the case is put, but I
shall discuss this below), there was no proper basis upon which the
decision could be justified under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules.  As I have
already indicated above, if there is no allegation of dishonesty, then the
decision cannot be justified on that ground.

The second basis upon which the application is advanced is procedural
unfairness.  It is submitted that the applicant was not given a fair
opportunity of giving her explanation for the discrepancy before the
decision was made.  In particular, the Tribunal is asked to and indeed does
note that in the original refusal letter reference is made to the applicant
having failed to provide an explanation as to why the self-employed net
profit declared to HMRC was so much lower than what was claimed in the Tier
1 (General) application made in respect of the same period.  It is said on
behalf of the applicant that this is unfair, because it presupposes that
the applicant was at that time aware of the discrepancy, and as it is her
case that she was not, this was not a fair point which could be taken.

The applicant relies very strongly now on the statement within the reply to
the pre-action Protocol letter that "your application was not refused on
deception grounds".  I note that the word "dishonesty" does not appear in
this letter at all, but the applicant's case is advanced on the basis that
deception and dishonesty are to all intents and purposes interchangeable
words.  Mr Gajjar quite properly refers to the failure of the respondent at
any time within any of the correspondence to actually use the word
"dishonesty" and that frequently there is reference to "inconsistency" from
which, he says, it is not clear at all that the respondent was doing more
than maintaining that because the applicant had a responsibility herself to
ensure that her accounts were accurate her failure to do so was in itself
sufficiently negligent as to reflect negatively on her "character and
conduct".  As already indicated, Mr Grandison does not dispute that if this
was indeed the case, that would amount to an error of law.

With regard to the second ground Mr Gajjar essentially refers to the
wording of the first decision, from which it appears that in the initial
refusal the respondent was taking a bad point, which was that the applicant
had failed to take the opportunity she had been given to explain the
discrepancy, whereas at this stage she did not in fact appreciate that
there was a discrepancy because she had made a genuine mistake.  With
regard to the administrative review decision it is the applicant's case
that this was also unfair for four reasons which Mr Gajjar set out in
argument.  These are first that the applicant did not take account of the
fact that corporation tax had been paid for the same period by the company
which was in effect (or so it is said), a company controlled by the
applicant; secondly, there was only one tax year where discrepant figures
were apparently submitted, which would suggest that in the other year where
an application was made, which would have been 2011, there was no
discrepancy; thirdly, that on occasion, as she mentioned, the applicant had
overpaid tax and this is a matter which the respondent should have
investigated; and fourthly, the respondent failed to put into the mix when
considering whether or not the discrepancy was an innocent mistake rather
than being dishonest, that at about that time her mother had been suffering
from ill health and her twin sister had died.  The facts relating to her
mother and sister had been set out within the application which had been
made in November 2013, albeit in the context of whether there was a slight
variation in the income between different periods.

I will refer to the submissions advanced on behalf of the respondent where
necessary within my discussion as to the merits of this appeal.  I shall
also only refer below to such of the authorities as I consider to be
necessary.

Discussion

So far as the first substantive ground is concerned, I would agree with the
applicant (and Mr Grandison on behalf of the respondent did not seek to
persuade me otherwise) that it would have been preferable if within the
decisions themselves the respondent had stated in terms that he was aware
that a decision could only be justified under paragraph 322(5) where the
conclusion was that an applicant had been dishonest and that that was the
basis upon which this decision was being made.  It was also accepted that
the reference within the original decision letter which suggested that the
applicant had failed to take the opportunity which she had been given to
give an explanation for the discrepancy was, viewed in isolation, unfair.
However, in my judgment, this is not a matter which was material to the
decision, because it is quite clear that although the word "dishonesty" is
not itself mentioned in terms this is precisely the basis upon which the
decision was made.  I have regard in particular to that part of the
original decision, which has been set out above, but which I repeat in this
connection, as follows:

"We are satisfied that, based on your actions in declaring different
amounts of income to HMRC and UKVI, you have either misrepresented your
earnings to HMRC in order to reduce your tax liability or provided false
information about your earnings to UKVI in order to obtain leave to remain,
or both".

That statement is only capable of one meaning, which is that this applicant
is believed to have been dishonest.  If the representation of income to
HMRC was a "mistake" and not one which was made dishonestly it could not
have been done "in order to reduce [the applicant's] tax liability".  If,
as the respondent is stating in terms there, one of the two alternatives is
that the applicant misrepresented her earnings in order to reduce her tax
liability that could only have been done dishonestly.  If it was innocent
it would not have had that intention.  Similarly, with regard to the only
other possible explanation (so far as the decision maker believed), again,
if the declaration of earnings to UKVI had been an innocent mistake, that
could not have been made with the purpose of obtaining leave to remain.  It
is of course the applicant's case that there was no mistake about those
earnings because if there was a mistake then the application should have
been refused anyway on the basis that she should not have been awarded the
points she was in respect of those earnings.

Accordingly, albeit that the refusal letter could have been better
expressed, it is clear what the decision maker intended.

I therefore turn to consider the issue of whether or not there was
procedural unfairness with regard to the decision-making such that the
decision should be quashed.

As I already have indicated, I have been referred to a number of
authorities.  In particular, I have been asked to have regard to four
decisions, either of judges of this Tribunal or of the Administrative
Court.  The first of these which was relied upon by Mr Gajjar on behalf of
the applicant was a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins made in April
of this year in the case of Rahman JR/278/2017.  This, as with the other
decisions relied on, has not been reported, but as it is a substantive
decision in a judicial review application it is citable before this
Tribunal now.  In that decision Judge Perkins stated in terms that: "I have
no hesitation in saying that the system of refusing under paragraph 322(5)
without putting a party on notice is potentially procedurally unfair".  He
made this finding in reliance upon the well-known judgment in the Supreme
Court in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No. 2) [2013] UKSC 38 and [2013] UKSC
39.

At paragraph 16 of his decision Judge Perkins set out an extract from the
judgment in Bank Mellat, where at paragraph 178 Lord Neuberger, agreeing
with Lord Sumption, had stated as follows:

"As Lord Sumption says in paras 29 - 30, where the executive intends to
exercise a statutory power to a person's substantial detriment, it is well
established that, in the absence of special facts, the common law imposes a
duty on the executive to give notice to that person of its intention, and
to give that person an opportunity to be heard before the power is so
exercised.  While this has been described as a 'rule of universal
application ... founded upon the plainest principles of justice' (per
Willes J in Cooper v Board of Works for the Wandsworth District (1863) 14
CB (NS) 180, 190), it has more recently been expressed in somewhat more
measured terms.  In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex p
Doody [1994] 1 AC 531, 560, Lord Mustill said that 'fairness' will

'very often require that a person who may be adversely affected by the
decision will have an opportunity to make representations ... either before
the decision is taken ...; or after it is taken, with a view to procuring
its modification'".

Judge Perkins was satisfied that this type of decision refusing a person
indefinite leave to remain because a person was "unsuitable" "is a decision
taken to 'a person's substantial detriment'".

For this reason, Judge Perkins accepted that there was at least intrinsic
merit in the contention that the decision "should not have been made, and
certainly not maintained, until the applicant had been given notice of the
respondent's concerns" but he did state at the same time, at paragraph 19:
"It does not follow that the respondent acted unlawfully in not inviting
comment in this case or that even if the respondent had acted unlawfully
that any remedy is needed".

At paragraph 37 Judge Perkins accepted that there was strength in the
argument that the Secretary of State in that case ought to have given the
applicant an opportunity to respond and at paragraph 40 said that: "I have
no hesitation in saying that the system of refusing under paragraph 322(5)
without putting a party on notice is potentially procedurally unfair".
However, at paragraph 42 he went on to say that it was not established that
the procedure was unfair "because it is not established that the decision
would have [been] maintained if the applicant had anything worthwhile to
say".  This was because

"it is clear from the respondent's decision on administrative review that
the respondent was willing to consider that applicant's explanation before
maintaining the decision, even if the reason was outside the scope of the
Rules".

Accordingly, although finding at paragraph 56 that the decision on the
facts of that particular case which he was considering "might be open to
criticism because it did not allow a person an opportunity to answer the
point made", in the circumstances of this case the decision had not been
procedurally unfair because the Secretary of State had in fact considered
the explanations given but the case against that applicant was so strong
that his explanation was not fully accepted.  The other authority
specifically relied on by Mr Gajjar was a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge
Canavan in the case of Shaik JR/8324/2017, in which Judge Canavan had
considered the arguments with regard to paragraph 322(5) in light of
various other decisions that had been made, and in particular of the
guidance recently given by Spencer J in Khan JR/3097/2017, which as Judge
Canavan rightly said, although that case had not by then been reported was
nonetheless persuasive.  Judge Canavan in Shaik granted judicial review but
that was on the particular facts of that case.   In that case the Secretary
of State had been under an apparent misapprehension as to whether or not
more than one tax return had been amended; that is very far from the
position in this case, where (subject to the points made on behalf of the
applicant referred to above with regard to procedural irregularity) the
underlying facts are not really contested.

Insofar as Mr Justice Spencer's guidance is concerned, the relevant parts
of that guidance are set out within the respondent's skeleton argument and
are that:

Where an applicant has presented evidence to say that he or she was not
dishonest but careless, the respondent is presented with a fact-finding
task;

the Secretary of State is obliged to consider evidence pointing in both
directions to justify his conclusion;

the Secretary of State should call for evidence which he thinks ought to
exist before making a decision and may draw an unfavourable inference from
a failure to produce such evidence; and

the Secretary of State must articulate his reasons in the decision and set
out what matters he has taken into consideration.

That, at any rate, is how Mr Justice Spencer's conclusions are summarised
by Mr Gajjar.

In fact, as set out by Judge Canavan in Shaik at paragraph 22, the guidance
given by Mr Justice Spencer was more comprehensive than that and, as Judge
Canavan states (with which this Tribunal entirely agrees) he gave "common
sense guidance on the approach that should be taken by the Secretary of
State" which Judge Canavan considers, as she said at paragraph 22, should
be followed, and which she then set out.  I set it out below because it
would always be relevant in a case where similar issues are raised.  It is
as follows:

"(i) Where there has been a significant difference between the income
claimed in a previous application for leave to remain and the income
declared to HMRC, the Secretary of State is entitled to draw an inference
that the applicant has been deceitful or dishonest and therefore he should
be refused ILR within paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.  I would
expect the Secretary of State to draw that inference where there is no
plausible explanation for the discrepancy.

(ii) However, where an applicant has presented evidence to show that,
despite the prima facie inference, he was not in fact dishonest but only
careless, then the Secretary of State is presented with a fact-finding
task: she must decide whether the explanation and evidence is sufficient,
in her view, to displace the prima facie inference of deceit/dishonesty.

(iii)    In approaching that fact-finding task, the Secretary of State
should remind herself that, although the standard of proof is the 'balance
of probability', a finding that a person has been deceitful and dishonest
in relation to his tax affairs with the consequence that he is denied
settlement in this country is a very serious finding with serious
consequences.

(iv) However, for an applicant simply to blame his or her accountant for an
'error' in relation to the historical tax return will not be the end of the
matter: far from it.  Thus, the Secretary of State is entitled to take into
account that, even where an accountant has made an error, the accountant
will or should have asked the taxpayer to confirm that the return was
accurate and to have signed the tax return, and furthermore the applicant
will have known of his or her earnings and will have expected to pay tax
thereon.  If, realising this (or wilfully shutting his eyes to the
situation), the applicant has not taken steps within a reasonable time to
remedy the situation, the Secretary of State may be entitled to conclude
either that the error was not simply the fault of the accountant or,
alternatively, the applicant's failure to remedy the situation itself
justifies a conclusion that he has been deceitful or dishonest and
therefore he should be refused ILR within paragraph 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules.

(v)  Where an issue arises as to whether an error in relation to a tax
return has been dishonest or merely careless, the Secretary of State is
obliged to consider the evidence pointing in each direction and, in her
decision, justify her conclusion by reference to that evidence.  In those
circumstances, as long as the reasoning is rational and the evidence has
been properly considered, the decision of the Secretary of State cannot be
impugned.

(vi) There will be legitimate questions for the Secretary of State to
consider in reaching her decision in these cases, including (but these are
by no means exclusive):

i.   whether the explanation for the error by the accountant is plausible;

ii.  whether the documentation which can be assumed to exist (for example,
correspondence between the applicant and his accountant at the time of the
tax return) has been disclosed or there is a plausible explanation for why
it is missing;

iii. why the applicant did not realise that an error had been made because
his liability to pay tax was less than he should have expected;

iv.  whether, at any stage, the applicant has taken steps to remedy the
situation and, if so, when those steps were taken and the explanation for
any significant delay.

(vii)    In relation to any of the above matters, the Secretary of State is
likely to want to see evidence which goes beyond mere assertion: for
example, in a case such as the present where the explanation is that the
applicant was distracted by his concern for his son's health, there should
be documentary evidence about the matter.  If there is, then the Secretary
of State would need to weigh up whether such concern genuinely excuses or
explains the failure to account for tax, or at least displaces the
inference that the applicant has been deceitful/dishonest.  The Secretary
of State, before making her decision, should call for the evidence which
she considers ought to exist, and may draw an unfavourable inference from
any failure on the part of the applicant to produce it.

(viii)   In her decision, the Secretary of State should articulate her
reasoning, setting out the matters which she has taken into account in
reaching her decision and stating the reasons for the decision she has
reached".

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Grandison invited the Tribunal also to have
regard to decisions made by King J and Morris J (both sitting as Deputy
Upper Tribunal Judges) in the cases respectively of Vellanki JR/11008/2016
and Oladele JR/10935/2016.  In Vellanki, King J, referring to the relevance
of the administrative review procedure (which of course was not available
to the parties in the Bank Mellat case) stated as follows:

"39. However, I do not have to come to any concluded decision on this
matter.  This is because whatever the Rules say, the Secretary of State in
the course of these proceedings has had regard to the explanations put
forward by the claimant for his failure to file his tax returns.  The
response to the pre-action Protocol letter shows this.  It is therefore an
academic issue as to whether or not he should have been given the
opportunity to give these explanations before the original decision was
made because the Secretary of State has now had regard to those
explanations but has still maintained the decision.  In particular she has
still maintained the decision to refuse under the general ground of
paragraph 322(5)".

In Oladele, Morris J at paragraph 25, when regarding the issue of whether
or not the decision was procedurally fair, had stated as follows:

"25. ...  The applicant did have a sufficient opportunity to respond to the
allegation that she had been dishonest.  ...  Moreover, she had a further
opportunity to respond in the administrative review process, which again
she took up.  ...".

It is necessary to consider the issue of procedural unfairness in the
round, having regard to the totality of the decisions that were made, and
it is accordingly necessary, especially having regard to the authorities
put before this Tribunal, which are persuasive, to have regard to what was
decided within the administrative review decision.  As already set out
above, in her application for judicial review, the applicant had
essentially set out her case that she had not been dishonest and that her
failure to give accurate returns to HMRC was an innocent mistake.  A number
of explanations were put forward such as lack of communication between her
accountant and HMRC and also apparently some letters not arriving and so
on, but these have not been supported by any evidence, nor was any evidence
put before the Tribunal with regard to the suggested overpayment of some
tax to HMRC.  Furthermore, the representations that were made were clearly
considered by the respondent in the administrative review process, and that
decision was made having had regard to the suggestion made by the applicant
that she had not been dishonest.  What the respondent decided in terms, was
that

"it is not credible that you would not realise such a fundamental error had
been made in misdeclaring your income to HMRC until the refusal [of] your
indefinite leave to remain application".

That, again, is only capable of showing that the decision maker, having
regard to the explanation of innocent mistake, had decided that the failure
to submit accurate revenue returns was a dishonest failure.

Accordingly, in the judgment of this Tribunal, subject to the other points
advanced on behalf of the applicant as to why the decision is unfair, the
procedure overall cannot in any meaningful sense of the word be said to
have been unfair.

Regarding the four matters relied upon by Mr Gajjar as set out at paragraph
26 above which should have been taken into account, I deal with these in
turns.  First, it is suggested that because a company associated with the
applicant paid corporation tax this is a matter which would demonstrate
that her own failure to make accurate revenue returns was a mistake rather
than dishonest.  In my judgment, the respondent's response  that this was
not a matter which fell to be considered because it was never raised is a
fair one.  There is, moreover, no merit in this argument.  The fact that
the discrepancy was "only" a little over �60,000, and that the suggested
underpayment of tax was not even larger, could not realistically lead
anyone to conclude that this factor (that corporation tax had been paid by
the applicant's company) was a material factor.  Nor could the fact that
the respondent was aware of a discrepancy in only one tax year (the second
matter relied on by Mr Gajjar).  What was in issue was the applicant's
conduct in this year, and not any other year.  Also of course there has
been an almost total absence of evidence from the applicant supporting her
claims in this area as there was with regard to the third matter relied
upon by Mr Gajjar that there was some suggestion that in one tax year she
had overpaid her tax.  Even if she had (and there is no evidence before the
First-tier Tribunal that she had, or indeed evidence to the respondent in
the administrative review, as contrasted with her assertion to this
effect), it does not have any direct relevance to this particular
discrepancy.

So far as the fourth matter is concerned, again, there has been a complete
absence of evidence to support the applicant's claim that somehow her
"oversight" can be explained by the ill health and subsequent death of her
mother and the death of her twin sister.

With these factors in mind I consider this case, having regard to the
guidance given by Spencer J in Khan and note as follows.  First, there has
clearly been a very significant difference between the income claimed in
the previous application for leave to remain and the income declared to
HMRC.  As Spencer J indicated, a Tribunal would expect the respondent to
draw an inference of dishonesty where there is no plausible explanation for
the discrepancy.  In the judgment of this Tribunal the Secretary of State
was entitled to consider, as indeed he did within the administrative review
decision, that no plausible explanation had been given.

The second part of Mr Justice Spencer's guidance is not really applicable
in this case because the applicant did not present any meaningful evidence
capable of showing that she had not in fact been dishonest but only
careless and there is nothing in the evidence before this Tribunal, let
alone which had been before the respondent, capable of displacing the prima
facie inference of dishonesty.

Thirdly, as Spencer J rightly stated, the standard of proof is the "balance
of probability" and that remains the case even though the finding is a
finding which has serious consequences.

Fourthly, there is no evidence from an accountant explaining the error and
this of course is relevant because the explanation advanced by the
applicant in the administrative review application suggests there was a
lack of communication between the accountant and Inland Revenue, which is
clearly not the case here.  The fact is that the accountant filled in the
returns from information given by the applicant and that information was
simply incorrect.

Fifthly, of course the Secretary of State must consider evidence pointing
in each direction and justify his or her conclusion by reference to that
evidence, but having regard to the reasons set out not only within the
primary decision, but also within the administrative review decision in
light of the explanation tendered, it is clear that the evidence was
properly considered and in Mr Justice Spencer's words "the decision of the
Secretary of State cannot be impugned".

Sixthly, the Tribunal (as must the respondent in this case) must note first
that there has been no plausible explanation supported by an accountant,
secondly, that there has been no disclosure of any documentation supporting
such an explanation, thirdly, that no explanation has been given as to why
the applicant did not realise that an error had been made in circumstances
where her liability to pay tax was hugely less than she should have
expected and fourthly, that the applicant took on steps to remedy the
situation until she became aware that the respondent was aware of the huge
discrepancy.

Seventhly, the Tribunal must have regard to the fact that the respondent
was never shown evidence which went beyond mere assertion, in particular
(as highlighted as an example by Spencer J) in a case such as this where
the applicant says now that she was distracted because of her family
tragedy at the time.  There would doubtless have been documentary evidence
concerning this, which, again, was not put before the respondent and has
not been put before the Tribunal.

Eighthly and finally, this is a case where when one views the decision-
making in the round, and has regard to the substance of not just the
original decision but also the decision on judicial review, it is clear
that, albeit not expressed as precisely as might have been preferable,
nonetheless the respondent has set out the reasoning adequately to explain
quite clearly to any reasonable reader why the decision was reached.

Accordingly, I am absolutely in no doubt on the facts of this case that the
respondent was entitled to reach a finding that the applicant had either
been dishonest when making her application for leave to remain or she had
been dishonest in submitting her tax returns for the period 2012 to 2013
or, which is also possible, that there was dishonesty in the submission of
both figures.  It was unarguably open to a reasonable decision maker to
reach this conclusion.

For the sake of completeness I must also state that even had I considered
that procedurally there had been an error within the first decision in that
the respondent ought not to have had regard to the failure to provide an
explanation for the discrepancy at that time, not only do I consider that
overall there was no unfairness in the decision-making because the
applicant had had an opportunity of applying for administrative review but
I would also have refused to grant relief because in the judgment of this
Tribunal it is "highly likely" that the decision would anyway have been the
same.  In this regard I would be obliged to have regard to Section 15(5) of
the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, as amended, which provides
as follows:

"Upper Tribunal's 'judicial review' jurisdiction

...

(5)  In deciding whether to grant relief under subSection (1)(d) or (e),
the Upper Tribunal must -

(a)  in cases arising under the law of England and Wales apply the
principles that the High Court would apply in deciding whether to grant
that relief under Section 31(2) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 ... on an
application for judicial review ...

(5A) In cases arising under the law of England and Wales, subSections (2A)
and (2B) of Section 31 of the Senior Courts Act 1981 apply to the Upper
Tribunal when deciding whether to grant relief under subSection (1) as they
apply to the High Court when deciding whether to grant relief on an
application for judicial review".

The relevant part of Section 31 of the Senior Courts Act 1981 provides as
follows:

"31. Application for judicial review

(2A) The High Court -

(a)  must refuse to grant relief on an application for judicial review, and

(b)  may not make an award under subSection (4) on such an application,

if it appears to the court to be highly likely that the outcome for the
applicant would not have been substantially different if the conduct
complained of had not occurred".

In the judgment of this Tribunal and having regard to the guidance given in
particular by Spencer J in Khan, the discrepancy in this case, of over
�60,000 between what the applicant had claimed as her income when she
needed to show a high income for the purposes of obtaining further leave to
remain and the very low income she declared for the purposes of paying tax
was so enormous and her failure to correct this discrepancy for such a long
period of time until after her application for ILR was refused by reason of
the discrepancy so lacking in explanation as to lead to the overwhelming
conclusion that the only plausible explanation is that she had been
dishonest when stating her income either to HMRC or in her tier 1 visa
application or both.  In these circumstances, her claim could not possibly
have succeeded and accordingly, judicial review must be refused and I so
order.

Appeal to the Court of Appeal

I am refusing permission to appeal and the reason I am refusing permission
to appeal is because I do not consider an appeal would have any realistic
prospect of success.

Costs

The applicant must pay the respondent's costs to be assessed if not agreed.

                                  ~~~0~~~~


                                        Upper Tribunal Ref:   JR/879/2018

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                             Notice of Decision


           The Queen on the application of GLORY UZOAMAKA DURUEKE


                versus


            SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                    Application for judicial review: substantive decision


           Before Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


           Having  considered  all  documents  lodged  and  following  oral
           submissions on 12 November 2018   by  Mr  J  Gajjar  of  Counsel
           instructed by Direct Access, on behalf of the Applicant and Mr M
           Grandison  of  Counsel  instructed  by  the   Government   Legal
           Department, on behalf of the Respondent


              Decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


           The application for judicial review is dismissed


           Reasons (which were given ex tempore immediately  following  the
           hearing) accompany this decision notice.


           Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


           Permission is refused because an appeal would have no  realistic
           prospect of success.  I direct, pursuant to CPR 52.12(2)(a) that
           the period within which the applicant must file notice of appeal
           to the Court of Appeal is extended to 28 days after the date  on
           which this Order is sent to the parties.


           COSTS


           The applicant will pay the respondent's costs to be assessed  if
           not agreed.




                  Signed:


         [pic]

         Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

                        Dated: 11 April 2019


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).




