
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/670/2020   |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |AM                                           |              |
|              |(by his Litigation Friend, Roxanne Nanton of |              |
|              |the Refugee Council)                         |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |and                                          |              |
|              |WIRRAL METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL          |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having heard Ms.  A  Benfield  of
counsel, instructed by Osbornes Law, for the applicant and  Ms.  C  Rowlands
of counsel,  instructed  by  Legal  Services,  Wirral  Metropolitan  Borough
Council, for the respondent at a hearing held at Field House  on  2  and  11
December 2020

IT IS DECLARED THAT:

   1. The Applicant's date of birth is 15 December 2003


IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The interim relief order is hereby discharged on the basis  that  the
       Respondent will maintain support and accommodation to  the  Applicant
       under the Children Act 1989 in accordance with his age.


    2) The Applicant, and the witness MM, shall  not  be  identified  either
       directly or indirectly.

    3) The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's costs of the  claim,  to  be
       assessed if not agreed.

    4) There shall be a detailed  assessment  of  the  Applicant's  publicly
       funded costs.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated:    8 January 2021





The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                                    [pic]
                                                        Case No: JR/670/2020
In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                                 Field House
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                            8th January 2021

                                   Before
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN
                 ___________________________________________

                                   Between

                                     AM
                 (BY HIS LITIGATION FRIEND, ROXANNE NANTON)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                    -and-

                     WIRRAL METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent
              _________________________________________________

       Antonia Benfield (instructed by Osbornes Law) for the Applicant
    Catherine Rowlands (instructed by Legal Services, Wirral Metropolitan
                     Borough Council) for the Respondent

                    Hearing dates: 2 and 11 December 2020
                            ____________________

                                  JUDGMENT
                            ____________________

Judge O'Callaghan:

The Tribunal confirms the anonymity direction in the following terms:

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the applicant  or  the  witness  MM.  This  direction  applies  to,
amongst others, the applicant and the  respondent.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising to  the  applicant
and MM from the contents of their protection claims being publicly known.

Introduction

 1. By an order dated  21  January  2020  (CO/4712/2019)  Dan  Squires  QC,
    sitting as a Deputy Judge of the  High  Court,  granted  the  applicant
    permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  against  the  respondent's
    decision as to his age and transferred the claim to the Upper Tribunal.

Issues

 2. The applicant seeks a declaration that he was born on 15 December 2003.

 3. The primary issue for  me  to  resolve  in  these  proceedings  is  the
    applicant's age, which is in dispute between the parties. In  resolving
    this issue, I am required to identify the applicant's age at  the  date
    of both the respondent's age assessment, dated 19 August  2019,  served
    on 12 September 2019, and its addendum  assessment,  dated  8  November
    2019, served on 12 November 2019.

 4. The applicant asserts that he was born on 15 December 2003 and  so  was
    aged 15 at both the date of his entry into this country and at the date
    of assessment, aged 16 at the date of the  hearing  before  me  and  is
    presently aged 17. He has been consistent as to  his  claimed  date  of
    birth throughout.

 5. The respondent assessed the applicant to be aged over 18 and likely  to
    be aged 20.

 6. At the hearing in early  December  2020,  Ms.  Rowlands  confirmed  the
    respondent's position to be that the applicant was likely  to  be  aged
    21.

Anonymity


 7. By his order of January  2020,  Dan  Squires  QC  issued  an  anonymity
    direction and neither representative before me sought to set it aside.

 8. Being mindful of rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Guidance
    Note 2013, No.1 concerned with anonymity, I have decided  to  anonymise
    the witness MM, because he is a  young  person  who  has  been  granted
    international protection  and  further  his  identification  will  lead
    quickly to  the  identification  of  the  applicant.  I  consider  such
    interference with open justice is necessary and  proportionate  in  the
    circumstances: A v. BBC [2015] AC 588, at [29]-[30].

 9. I confirm the direction in relation to both the applicant and MM above.

Litigation Friend

10. Upon proceedings being commenced an application was made on  behalf  of
    the applicant that a Litigation Friend, Ms. Roxanne Nanton, an employee
    of the Refugee Council, act on his behalf consequent  to  him  being  a
    minor. Ms. Nanton continues to act as the applicant's Litigation Friend
    and attended the hearing before me.

Background

11. The applicant states that he is ethnically Aranga and so a member of an
    African identity ethnic group  primarily  located  in  western  Darfur,
    Sudan. His primary language is Aranga, and he speaks Arabic as a second
    language. I observe that the applicant required a North Sudanese Arabic
    Darfur interpreter for the purpose of the hearing before me and I find,
    on balance, that he is of Aranga ethnicity, hails  from  Darfur,  Sudan
    and is a Sudanese citizen.

12. He asserts that his mother informed him as to his age and date of birth
    when he was aged 5. He recalls sitting together with his mother at home
    and discussing family life when she informed him of these facts.

13. He asserts that he left his village in 2015, when  aged  11,  following
    attacks by the Janjaweed, a Sudanese Arab  militia.  He  was  aided  in
    leaving the village by his maternal uncle and  travelled  initially  to
    Libya, where he was captured  and  required  to  work  on  a  farm  for
    approximately 6 months. Upon his release he then proceeded to  work  on
    another farm for  3  months.  He  then  travelled  by  boat  to  Italy,
    proceeding to travel  onwards  to  Spain,  France  and  Belgium  before
    entering the United Kingdom on 7 February 2019.

14. Consequent to his entry into this country, the applicant was issued  by
    the Home Office with a form IS.97M recording that he had  detailed  his
    date of birth as being 15 December 2003. The Home Office  disputed  the
    applicant's age, recording it as 1 January 1996 for the purpose of  his
    asylum claim, thereby identifying him to be aged 23 in February 2019. I
    observe that such assessment was undertaken by means of the application
    of a policy detailed at para. 55.9.3.1 of the Home Office's Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance that was later  confirmed  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal to be unlawful: BF (Eritrea) v. Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 872, [2020] 1 All E.R. 396.

15. The applicant was referred to the respondent as  a  putative  child  in
    their area seeking support and accommodation  under  the  Children  Act
    1989 ('the 1989 Act').

'August decision'

16. An age assessment was conducted on behalf  of  the  respondent  by  two
    social workers, Mr. Noon and Mr. Rooney, over the course  of  a  single
    session on 12 July 2019  ('the  July  meeting').  The  purpose  of  the
    assessment was to establish the applicant's chronological age.

17. The appropriate adult at the meeting on 12 July 2019 was  Ms.  Crockett
    who was employed by Active 8 Support  Services,  an  organisation  that
    works in partnership with local authorities to help  young  people  and
    families.

18. An Arabic speaking interpreter attended the meeting. They have not been
    identified by the respondent as being conversant with Darfur dialect.

19. The meeting lasted two hours, with a ten-minute break.

20. An assessment decision was completed on 19  August  2019  ('the  August
    decision') and was provided to the applicant's solicitors by  email  on
    30 August 2019.

21. The assessors were satisfied that the applicant understood the  concept
    of the passage of time as well as  the  concept  of  days,  months  and
    years. The assessment records that the applicant did not go  to  school
    in Darfur, though he attended a mosque where he was  taught  about  the
    Qur'an. It is recorded that the applicant could not read  or  write  at
    the date of assessment.

22. The applicant was identified, inter alia, as being 5' 5" in height  and
    weighing 59 kg (9 st 2 lbs), which was said to be an appropriate weight
    for a male of such height. As to  physical  appearance  the  assessment
    observed that the applicant 'has features  which  are  associated  with
    post-pubescent  males'  identified  as  'strong  and  developed  facial
    features',  'developed  and  'worn'  hands'  and  'Adam's  apple'.  The
    assessors  adversely  relied  upon  the  applicant's   appearance   and
    demeanour.

'September meeting'

23. Mr. Noon shared the outcome of the age assessment with the applicant on
    12 September 2019 ('the September meeting'). Mr. Rooney did not  attend
    this meeting. Ms. Geggie, from Active 8,  attended  and  acted  as  the
    appropriate adult.

24. An Arabic speaking interpreter attended the meeting. Again,  they  have
    not been identified as being conversant with Darfur dialect.

'November decision'

25. A letter before action was  sent  to  the  respondent  challenging  the
    lawfulness and procedural fairness of  the  age  assessment,  observing
    that there had been a failure to put adverse matters to  the  applicant
    by means of a 'minded-to process'.

26. The respondent agreed to conduct a further interview  with  a  view  to
    permitting the applicant to address inconsistences within his account.

27. A follow-up meeting with the applicant was  held  on  7  November  2019
    ('the November meeting') with Mr. Noon and Mr.  Rooney  attending.  Ms.
    Crockett acted as the applicant's appropriate adult.

28. Again, the Arabic speaking interpreter who attended the meeting has not
    been identified as being conversant with Darfur dialect.

29. The meeting last one hour and fifteen minutes.

30.  The  respondent  maintained  its  decision  on   age   by   means   of
    supplementary,  or  addendum,  reasons  dated  8  November  2019  ('the
    November decision'), which was provided to the applicant at  a  meeting
    held on 12 November 2019. Adverse reliance was again  placed  upon  the
    applicant's appearance and demeanour. The assessors  also  relied  upon
    inconsistencies in the applicant's account  of  his  personal  history,
    identified as a changing story.

Referral to the NRM

31.  The  respondent  referred  the  applicant  to  the  National  Referral
    Mechanism ('NRM') observing that he may be a victim of modern  slavery.
    Upon  undertaking  the  preliminary  sift,  the   Competent   Authority
    determined by a decision dated 15 May 2020 that there  were  reasonable
    grounds to believe that the applicant  has  been  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery. The second stage of identification has not been undertaken and
    the applicant awaits a conclusive grounds decision.

The legal framework

32. Thornton J observed in AB  v.  Kent  County  Council  [2020]  EWHC  109
    (Admin), [2020] P.T.S.R. 746, at [18]:

         'The law requires a wholly  different  treatment  of  young  asylum
         seekers depending on whether  they  have  passed  their  eighteenth
         birthday. This is of course in itself an  entirely  artificial  and
         inflexible dividing line,  bearing  little  relationship  to  human
         reality but it is built into the structure of not only domestic law
         but international law in this area and it has to be applied as best
         as can be (Underhill LJ in BF (Eritrea) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 872 at �52). Thus: a number  of
         rights and obligations under  the  Children  Act  depend  upon  the
         distinction.  Local  authorities  are  under  a  general  duty   to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children within their area who
         are  in  need  (section  17).  This  includes  the   provision   of
         accommodation (s20). 'Child'  means  a  person  under  the  age  of
         eighteen (s105). It is unlawful  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
         detain asylum seeking children.'

33.  There  is  no  statutorily  prescribed  way  identifying   how   local
    authorities are obliged to carry out age assessments. As  confirmed  by
    the Court of Appeal in BF (Eritrea), at [53], the law proceeds  on  the
    basis that the most reliable means of assessing the age of a  child  or
    young  person  in  circumstances  where  no  documentary  evidence   is
    available is by the so-called 'Merton compliant' assessment:  R  (B)  v
    Merton London Borough Council [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin), [2003] 4 All ER
    280 ('Merton'). Relevant requirements have been considered  in  several
    judgments, including VS v. Home Office [2014] EWHC 2483  QB,  at  [78],
    and were recently summarised by Thornton J in AB v. Kent, at [21].

34. Lady Hale confirmed in R (A) v. London Borough of Croydon  [2009]  UKSC
    8, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 2557, at [51], that the question whether a person is
    a child for the purposes of section 20 of the 1989 Act is a question of
    fact which must ultimately be decided by the Tribunal and  the  process
    must be one of assessment. This involves the application of judgment on
    a variety of factors and however difficult it may  be  to  resolve  the
    issue it admits of only one answer.

35. As it is a question of fact, ultimately the question must be  a  matter
    for  the  Tribunal.  This  requires  me  to  effectively  act   in   an
    inquisitorial  role  determining,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whether the applicant was or was not a child for the  purposes  of  the
    1989 Act at the date of the age assessment. The approach  to  be  taken
    and the burden of proof to be applied were confirmed by Stanley Burnton
    J in Merton, at [37] - [38].

36. The Court of Appeal held in R (CJ) v Cardiff County Council [2011] EWCA
    Civ 1590, [2012] 2 All E.R. 836, at [21] and [23], that once a court or
    tribunal is invited to make a decision upon jurisdictional fact it  can
    do no more than apply the balance of probability to the  issue  without
    resorting to the concept of discharge  of  a  burden  of  proof.  I  am
    therefore required to decide whether, on a balance of probability,  the
    applicant was or was not at the material time a  child.  Consequent  to
    the claimed age, I proceed to consider  whether  the  applicant  was  a
    young person aged under 18 at the date of assessment.

37. I proceed on the basis that it may well be inappropriate to expect from
    the applicant conclusive evidence of age in circumstances in  which  he
    has arrived unaccompanied and without original identity documents.  The
    nature of the evaluation of evidence depends upon the particular  facts
    of the case. In the absence of any corroborative  documentary  evidence
    as to age, the starting point is the credibility of the evidence placed
    before the Tribunal, as confirmed by Aikens LJ  in  R  (AE)  v.  London
    Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547, at [23].

38. The Tribunal is therefore not confined to choose between the  positions
    of the parties: R (W) v. London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWHC 1130, at
    [3]. The nature of my inquiry under the 1989 Act is inquisitorial and I
    must decide the applicant's  age  on  the  balance  of  probability.  I
    observe that the purpose of the assessment is to establish  a  person's
    chronological age based on information derived from  the  young  person
    and an assessment of the credibility and plausibility of that evidence.
    If  the  chronological  information  is   consistent,   plausible   and
    believable then no apparent observation  about  chance  appearance  and
    demeanour is likely to tip the balance against the age  stated  by  the
    child or young person: R (FZ) v. London Borough of Croydon [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 59; [2011] P.T.S.R. 748.

39. The application of the benefit of the doubt in an age assessment matter
    is nothing more than an acknowledgement that age assessment  cannot  be
    concluded with 100% accuracy, absent definitive  documentary  evidence,
    and as in the case of unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  who  may
    also have been traumatised, unlikely to be supported by other evidence.
    On such basis, its proper application is that where, having  considered
    the evidence, it is concluded that there is  doubt  as  to  whether  an
    individual is over 18 or not, then in those circumstances, it should be
    concluded that the applicant is under 18.  Thus,  the  benefit  of  the
    doubt is not of use where a specific date or age has to  be  determined
    except insofar as it requires a sympathetic assessment of the evidence:
    R (AS) v. Kent County Council [2017] UKUT 446 (IAC), at [20] - [21].

Analysis of the evidence

Consideration of evidence

40. The parties  filed  four  lever  arch  files  with  the  Tribunal.  The
    respondent sought for two files, '3' and '4', not to be admitted on the
    grounds of relevance. Having considered their  contents  and  observing
    that a holistic approach  was  to  be  taken  to  the  question  to  be
    answered, I admitted the evidence contained within those files  on  the
    first day of the hearing.

41. I have had the benefit of considering the totality of the evidence upon
    which the parties seek to rely, whether expressly referred to me or not
    at the hearing. The applicant attended the hearing on the first day  of
    the hearing and gave evidence. Mr. Noon, Ms. Geggie, Ms. Wenton and  MM
    gave oral evidence before  me  remotely.  I  have  considered  the  two
    witness  statements  of  Mr.  Taylor,  the  applicant's  solicitor.  In
    addition, I have considered copies of various care and  pathway  plans,
    Looked After Child reviews and  a  needs  assessment  relating  to  the
    applicant.

42. I have also been aided by the  very  helpful  submissions  provided  by
    counsel who attended Field House on both days of the hearing.

43. The applicant is presently seeking international protection and so I do
    not detail the substance of the claim in my decision, nor do I make any
    findings or observations upon the core of the claim. That is  a  matter
    to be considered by the Home  Office  by  application  of  a  different
    standard of proof to that which is to be applied in this  matter.  Such
    approach was identified to the representatives at the  hearing  and  no
    complaint was made.

44. For the avoidance of doubt, before I embark  upon  the  search  for  an
    answer to the question now to be addressed as to  the  applicant's  age
    and date  of  birth,  I  confirm  that  I  have  done  so  without  any
    'predisposition' that the applicant is or is not a young person.

Vulnerability

45. When assessing the  applicant's  credibility,  I  have  had  particular
    regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2  of  2010:  Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance,  and  my  assessment
    has been considered in the round, taking due account  of  the  evidence
    presented and giving due allowance for the fact that many child  asylum
    seekers and victims of trafficking will have problems in  presenting  a
    coherent account of their personal history and travel to this country.

46. I note that the respondent,  through  Ms.  Rowlands,  accepted  at  the
    hearing that there was no reason to doubt that the applicant  had  been
    ill-treated and trafficked in Libya. Such acceptance was appropriate in
    the circumstances, as the applicant  has  been  consistent  as  to  the
    events that occurred in that country.

Age assessment

47. The respondent relies upon the two decisions identified above  and  the
    evidence of Mr. Noon, contained within three  witness  statements.  Mr.
    Noon presented oral evidence at the hearing. No witness statement  from
    Mr. Rooney has been provided by the  respondent,  though  I  have  read
    copies of notes authored by him in relation to the  July  and  November
    meetings.

48. I observe in passing that whilst there is no set format for  a  written
    decision in an age assessment, the use of paragraph  numbers  would  be
    beneficial for those reading it.

ADCS Guidance

49. The 'Age assessment guidance to social workers and  their  managers  on
    undertaking  age  assessments  in  England'  was   published   by   the
    Association of Directors of Children  Services  in  October  2015  (the
    'ADCS guidance'). Section 7 of the Local Authority Social Services  Act
    1970 is not applicable to this document, but as observed by Lavender  J
    when considering its relevance to local authorities in the  conduct  of
    age assessments in R (S) v. London Borough of Croydon [2017]  EWHC  265
    (Admin), at [41] and  [50],  the  authors  of  the  guidance  possessed
    considerable experience in the field.

Fairness of the age assessment process

50. The applicant has challenged the fairness of the age assessment process
    undertaken by the respondent in his matter, noting the confirmation  by
    the High Court in AS v. London Borough  of  Croydon  [2011]  EWHC  2091
    (Admin), at [19], that the procedural safeguards set out in Merton  and
    FZ are the 'minimum standards' of fairness.

      i) Experience of the assessing social workers


51. Mr. Noon is an advanced social worker and  has  been  working  in  this
    field for approximately 8  years.  By  email  correspondence  dated  28
    November 2019 the respondent confirmed to  the  applicant's  solicitors
    that Mr. Noon  had  completed  a  day's  training  in  respect  of  age
    assessments prior to the applicant's assessment and that he had  worked
    or been involved with five asylum-seeking individuals over  the  course
    of the previous 24 months.

52. I observe the summary grounds of defence and  to  the  extent  that  it
    asserts that Mr. Noon has carried out age  assessments  throughout  his
    time as a social worker. I find such assertion to  be  contradicted  by
    Mr. Noon's own evidence at the hearing where he confirmed that this was
    the first age assessment he had conducted.

53.  There  is  no  written  statement  from  Mr.  Rooney   detailing   his
    professional  background.  The  correspondence  of  28  November   2019
    confirms that he completed age assessment training in February 2018 and
    had undertaken two previous age assessments  prior  to  conducting  the
    applicant's assessment.

54. The applicant accepts that  Mr.  Rooney  has  some  experience  in  age
    assessment but complains that Mr. Noon was clearly inexperienced as  to
    the process. I am satisfied that the respondent was  entitled  to  rely
    upon Mr. Rooney's experience and that  the  process  permits  a  social
    worker who has experience of working  with  young  asylum  seekers  the
    opportunity to participate in an assessment for the first time  with  a
    colleague experienced in undertaking age assessment. There is no  merit
    to the applicant's challenge to the overall assessment on this ground.

55. However, I address below Mr. Noon's decision to conduct  the  September
    meeting on his own.

     ii) Adherence to the minded-to process

56. The August decision runs to 16 pages and  covers  topics  ranging  from
    'physical  appearance  and  demeanour'  and   'social   and   emotional
    presentation' to the applicant's family history and his journey to this
    country. Consideration is given to the applicant's health  and  whether
    he  possesses  independent  living  skills.  The  assessors   expressly
    consider documentary evidence and other sources of information.

57. Several adverse observations were drawn, for example upon demeanour and
    emotional presentation. The applicant  was  not  informed  as  to  such
    observations during the course of the meeting. This is not unusual,  as
    assessors will discuss views  and  observations  after  a  meeting  and
    through such process their opinions will coalesce.

58. Neither assessor signed the August decision  to  formally  confirm  its
    contents. The same approach was subsequently adopted with the  November
    decision.

59. It is not said by the respondent that the assessment was  a  short-form
    assessment, namely  one  where  a  point  had  been  reached  where  an
    experienced social worker  considered  they  had  conducted  sufficient
    inquiries to be confident that the person in front of them  was  either
    an adult or a child and in such circumstances, it would be pointless to
    nevertheless require the continuation of the inquiry process to achieve
    full 'Merton' compliance simply for the sake of form:  AB  v.  Kent  at
    [35]. Such decision is usually, but not always,  reached  on  the  sole
    basis of appearance.

60. As a short-form assessment  was  not  undertaken,  the  respondent  was
    required to permit the applicant a fair opportunity to respond  to  the
    assessor's provisional view. I observe Stanley Burnton  J's  conclusion
    that such step is mandatory in Merton, at [55]:

         '55. ... If the decision maker forms the view, which must  at  that
            stage be a provisional view, that the applicant is lying  as  to
            his or her age, the applicant must be given the  opportunity  to
            address the matters that have led to that view, so that  he  can
            explain himself if he can. In other words, in the present  case,
            the matters referred to [above] should have been put to him,  to
            see if he had a credible response to them ...'

61. The High Court confirmed in VS, at [78 (13)]:

         '(13) It is "axiomatic that an applicant should be given a fair and
            proper opportunity, at a stage when a possible adverse  decision
            is no more than  provisional,  to  deal  with  important  points
            adverse to his age case which may weigh against him": FZ per Sir
            Anthony  May  P  at  [21].  It  is  not  sufficient   that   the
            interviewing social workers withdraw to consider their decision,
            and then return to present the applicant "with their conclusions
            without first giving  him  the  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
            adverse points": [22]. See also J per Coulson J at [15]; AAM per
            Lang J at  [94(c)];  and  Durani  per  Coulson  at  [84-87]  (in
            particular, at [84]:  "Elementary  fairness  requires  that  the
            crucial points which are  thought  to  be  decisive  against  an
            applicant should be identified, in case  the  applicant  has  an
            explanation for them").'

62. A question for  me  is  whether  the  August  decision  identified  the
    'provisional' view of the assessors, or whether a conclusive, or final,
    decision had been reached as to the applicant's age. The  decision  was
    shared with the applicant's solicitors on 30 August  2019,  though  not
    shared with the applicant at this time. Having read the August decision
    with care I note that it is written  in  a  manner  consistent  with  a
    conclusive opinion having been reached, rather than a provisional view,
    as evidenced by the  approach  adopted  in  the  concluding  'analysis'
    section, which is written in the first person:

         'I do not believe that [the applicant] is the age he claims to  be.
         He looks older. Further, his account of coming to  the  UK  is  not
         coherent, detailed or entirely credible. There are gaps. Given  his
         demeanour, and his ability to answer other  questions,  these  gaps
         suggest selective, rather than lost, memory.


         It is possible that [the applicant] left Sudan as a child (that is,
         under 18), that his journey took the length of time he claims,  and
         that it took in the countries and the route he describes.  However,
         it is odd that, if he was an unaccompanied child  in  each  of  the
         countries where he was encamped, that he has  not  previously  been
         assessed and documented as a child. I  do  not  believe  that  [the
         applicant] left Sudan at  the  age  he  said  he  did,  or  in  the
         circumstances he described. I believe it more likely that  he  left
         Sudan when  he  was  older,  closer  to  16.  This  will  put  [the
         applicant's] age at 20, which is more consistent with his  physical
         appearance and demeanour.' [Emphasis added]

63. I observe the confused approach adopted on behalf of the respondent  by
    the  assessors  both  in  the  run-up  to  the  September  meeting  and
    thereafter.  Mr.  Noon  informed  me  that  he  'wrote  the  assessment
    primarily for internal discussion' though this evidence  is  undermined
    by the fact that it was sent to the applicant's solicitors eleven  days
    later. It is not the respondent's case that the decision was served  in
    error.  Importantly,  such  service  was  not  accompanied   by   clear
    confirmation that it was a provisional view. Rather,  confirmation  was
    given to the solicitors that the outcome of the assessment had not  yet
    been shared with the applicant. This  is  suggestive  of  a  conclusive
    decision having been reached.

64. What was the purpose of the September meeting? Mr. Noon  provided  very
    confused evidence before me as to the purpose of the meeting, which was
    held in the absence of Mr. Rooney. Mr. Noon explained to me that  there
    was no requirement for Mr. Rooney's attendance because the  purpose  of
    the September meeting was to see the applicant  again  and  'to  secure
    further information, to inform him of the conclusion'. When seeking  to
    expand upon his answer, Mr. Noon detailed that 'the meeting was more to
    share information than information gathering'.  The  latter  answer  is
    suggestive of the meeting being  one  where  the  decision  was  to  be
    conveyed to the applicant, rather than the adoption  of  the  minded-to
    process. However, the expanded answer sits ill-at-ease with  the  notes
    authored by Mr. Noon in respect of the  September  meeting.  The  first
    page of the handwritten notes details the  'agenda'  for  the  meeting.
    Included are the following eight questions:

         1) Map of Sudan - point to where from
         2) Scarification - tribal scars
         3) Have you ever been to Belgium
         4) Tell me again when and how you left Sudan
         5) Tell me again what abuse you suffered
         6) Where [Were] you tortured in Libya
         7) Are your parents still in Sudan
         8) Are you on Facebook?

65. On the note a tick has been placed after the first seven questions.

66. The subsequent  handwritten  notes  of  the  September  meeting  detail
    answers given by the applicant  to  the  questions  identified  by  Mr.
    Noon's agenda and, in addition, as to his  attendance  and  studies  at
    college in this country. A confirmatory note that a map  of  Sudan  was
    shown to the applicant is accompanied by a tick. There is reference  to
    the answer 'no' in relation to a question as to whether  the  applicant
    had ever been to Belgium.  Information  was  provided  as  to  how  the
    applicant travelled from Sudan to Libya and his  subsequent  detention.
    Details were also given by the applicant as to  the  torture  inflicted
    upon him in Libya, as to his parents continuing to reside in Sudan  and
    as to his scarification. The applicant was asked questions  as  to  his
    presence on social media.

67. This is suggestive that despite the appearance of a conclusive approach
    having been adopted in the August decision, accompanied by the  failure
    to confirm to the applicant's solicitors  that  it  was  a  provisional
    view, Mr. Noon intended for the September  meeting  to  be  a  form  of
    minded-to meeting but conducted  in  the  flawed  manner  by  which  he
    understood such process to be undertaken. He  was  unaware  as  to  the
    basic procedural requirements of such process.

68. I find that the approach identified by the  notes,  and  the  questions
    asked at the September meeting, establish  to  the  requisite  standard
    that Mr. Noon had sought at the meeting to  secure  clarification  from
    the applicant in respect of certain issues but intended  to  serve  the
    August decision in any event, as  confirmed  by  the  contents  of  his
    handwritten agenda note following his questions:

         '+ copy of assessment:


             My opinion is that you are not the age you claim to be.


             I believe you are older


             I believe you are probably older than 18


             That is the outcome of my assessment


         Interpreter read conclusion


         Advise right to complain or challenge


         Copy sent to solicitor?

         Notify Home Office'

69. Such approach is not consistent with the requirement that the applicant
    be fairly permitted the opportunity to deal with the adverse points.

70. I find, on balance, that the failure to identify the August decision as
    being a provisional view, both by its content and when  it  was  served
    upon the applicant's solicitors, was because an agreed  conclusion  had
    been reached as to the applicant's age by the assessors in their August
    decision. I am satisfied that Mr. Noon understood  that  the  applicant
    could be asked to clarify identified issues at the meeting when he  was
    informed as to  the  decision  but  lacked  sufficient  experience  and
    understanding of the process to comprehend that the meeting was part of
    the assessment process and any information provided  by  the  applicant
    was to be fairly considered. His lack of understanding that the meeting
    was part of the assessment process is evidenced by his belief that  Mr.
    Rooney was not required to attend when further questions were asked  of
    the applicant for clarification purposes.

71. I further find that by means of his evidence before me Mr. Noon  sought
    to downplay the substance and nature of  the  meeting  because  he  was
    subsequently aware that he ought not  to  have  conducted  a  minded-to
    meeting on his own. I find that Mr. Noon was not being accurate  to  me
    when asserting that the meeting was 'more  to  share  information  than
    information gathering'. I find that preparation was undertaken to  seek
    clarification prior to service of the decision  at  the  same  meeting.
    Indeed, the questions identified  above  are  grouped  under  the  sub-
    heading 'clarifications'. The approach adopted by Mr. Noon was  a  very
    confused one. He  sought  by  his  agenda  to  ask  questions  but  had
    predetermined that he was going to  inform  the  applicant  as  to  the
    conclusion arrived  at  in  the  August  decision.  I  find  that  such
    confusion was  rooted  in  his  inexperience  as  to  the  process.  He
    exhibited an understanding of some elements relevant to various  stages
    of the process, but the  absence  of  detailed  knowledge  resulted  in
    significant irregularity.

72. At the September meeting Mr. Noon proceeded to ask  the  applicant  his
    clarification questions, in the absence of Mr. Rooney. Such action  was
    undertaken by a social worker inexperienced in age assessment,  in  the
    absence of his more experienced colleague, contrary  to  the  mandatory
    requirement that assessments, including meetings, be undertaken by  two
    social  workers.  The  September  meeting  cannot  properly  have  been
    considered by Mr. Noon, or the respondent, to  meet  lawful  procedural
    requirements in circumstances where Mr. Noon had sole  conduct  of  the
    minded-to meeting. I find that the approach adopted  at  the  September
    meeting was impermissible and constituted material irregularity.

73. I conclude that the subsequent service of the August  decision  at  the
    September meeting was intended to confirm the respondent's decision  as
    to  age,  despite  the  second  social  worker  not  having  heard  the
    applicant's observations at the meeting and  therefore  not  considered
    them. Such process was fundamentally unfair as it failed to comply with
    the minimum standards of fairness established by Merton.

74. The next question is whether the November meeting  and  the  subsequent
    November decision cured the identified procedural failings.  I  observe
    that following an exchange of pre-action correspondence, the respondent
    offered to conduct a further meeting for the purpose of  're-addressing
    inconsistencies within [the  applicant's]  account'  and  to  give  the
    applicant 'a further interview in order to clarify any matters he  says
    were not sufficiently dealt with historically'.

75. The November decision records several questions asked by the  assessors
    and the answers provided. Upon reading the questions  I  conclude  that
    they closely followed Mr. Noon's agenda for the September meeting.  The
    same issues were again covered, save for on this occasion no  questions
    were asked as to scarification.

76. The November decision details not only the information provided at  the
    November meeting, referred to as the 'follow-up meeting', but also that
    provided at what is identified as the 'follow-up  visit'  in  September
    2019. The purported difference  between  the  two  terms  used  is  not
    explained, but I am satisfied that it was an effort not to identify the
    September meeting as constituting a flawed minded-to meeting.

77. The decision itself is candid as to the  information  provided  by  the
    applicant to Mr. Noon at the September meeting being relied upon by the
    assessors, despite it having been secured by means  of  a  procedurally
    unfair meeting.

78. Before me, Mr. Noon explained that he could not recall a specific  date
    or time as to when he first doubted  the  applicant's  age,  though  he
    confirmed  that  doubts  started  to  exist  'after'  the  initial  age
    assessment meeting. I find that he  was  not  being  accurate  on  this
    issue. Upon considering his evidence with care, I am satisfied that  he
    had  strong  doubts  as  to  the  applicant's  age  consequent  to  his
    observation over time as to the applicant's  appearance  and  demeanour
    and such doubts existed prior to the July meeting.

79. I am satisfied that Mr. Noon sought by his written evidence to diminish
    the  adverse  effect  of  his  early  assessment  of  the   applicant's
    appearance and demeanour so as to project  to  the  Tribunal  that  his
    position was one of open-mindedness during the assessment  process.  As
    observed above, through inexperience he drafted the August decision  as
    conveying the assessors' conclusion rather than  identifying  it  as  a
    preliminary view. I observe that before  me  Mr.  Noon  was  candid  in
    accepting that by the time of the September meeting, he did not believe
    the applicant to be the age asserted. Virtually the  same  topics  were
    covered with the applicant at the November meeting and I find  that  by
    the time of this meeting he did  not  have  an  open  mind  as  to  the
    applicant's age.

80. Mr. Rooney has provided  no  evidence  as  to  how  he  approached  the
    information presented by the applicant at the September meeting,  which
    he did not attend, nor as to  how  he  engaged  with  Mr.  Noon  having
    concluded at the September meeting that the applicant was aged over 18.
    In the absence of any evidence beyond that of Mr. Noon, I find that the
    'minded-to' meeting in November 2019, in which the applicant was  asked
    to provide answers to broadly the same questions that had not persuaded
    Mr. Noon at the September meeting, was simply a  rubber-stamp  exercise
    in approving the August decision and not  a  genuine  exercise  of  the
    minded-to process. There was no genuine, open-minded, consideration  of
    the applicant's information or explanation.

81. In the circumstances, the further action undertaken by  the  respondent
    of holding the November minded-to meeting and the subsequent issuing of
    the addendum November decision  did  not  result  in  a  genuine  fresh
    decision that can be considered to have been reached by  fair  methods.
    Consequently, the identified procedural impropriety was not cured.

82. I conclude that the age assessment undertaken by the respondent by  its
    decisions of August and November is unlawful by application  of  unfair
    procedure in respect of the minded-to process.

    iii) Interpreter


83. The ADCS Guidance details as to the provision of an interpreter  at  an
    assessment meeting, at page 20:

         'Social workers should check thoroughly that the interpreter speaks
         the correct language and dialect and that the child or young person
         and the interpreter understand one another properly ...'  [Emphasis
         added]

84. The applicant confirmed by means of his witness statement that  he  had
    difficulty understanding the interpreter provided at the  July  meeting
    because 'he spoke Arabic but his dialect was not clear  to  me  and  it
    certainly was not Sudanese. Sometimes I was not sure what he was asking
    me and I am unsure if [he] understood me properly either. I remember at
    the time of the interview, I was asked to sign a form, which  I  signed
    because I was asked to  by  the  social  workers  interviewing  me.  My
    solicitors have since then told  me  that  this  was  a  consent  form,
    confirming that I understood the interpreter. This was not  made  clear
    to me at the time and had I understood this I  would  not  have  signed
    it.'

85. Having considered the evidence before me and heard the oral evidence of
    Mr. Noon I am concerned that insufficient consideration  was  given  by
    the assessors to  the  fact  that  Arabic  is  the  applicant's  second
    language and that there was evidence  before  the  assessors  that  the
    applicant was not fluent in the language.  I observe that whilst it  is
    possible for local authorities, as well as the Tribunal, to  call  upon
    the services of a wide range of  professional,  qualified  interpreters
    with skills in many languages, it is not always possible to locate  and
    secure the skills of interpreters in particular languages or  dialects.
    Consequently, in such circumstances it is fair and reasonable  to  seek
    to conduct an interview in a second or  third  language  if  sufficient
    competence in that language is exhibited by  an  interviewee.  However,
    when working in a second language care must be taken to ensure that  an
    interviewee  sufficiently   understands   the   interpreter   provided.
    Consequent to the duty to act fairly and noting that at age  assessment
    meetings an interviewee will be asserting that they  are  a  child,  or
    young person, it is not sufficient  for  assessors  to  state,  without
    more, a simple belief that an applicant understands a  second  language
    well  enough  to  communicate  and  proceed  on  this   basis.   Though
    communication in a second or third  language  may  be  adequate  as  to
    general everyday conversation it may prove to  be  inadequate  when  an
    interviewee is pressed upon for precision  in  answers  or  to  address
    technical matters. Such responsibility  to  consider  the  adequacy  of
    interpretation falls upon the assessors  throughout  the  interview(s),
    not simply at the outset. Consideration should properly be given to the
    possibility that  a  child  or  young  person  may  confirm  that  they
    understand the interpreter in a second language at the  outset  of  the
    interview through a sense of being willing to help the process proceed,
    or  because  general  everyday  conversation  was   utilized   in   the
    introductory conversation and  may  afterwards  be  reticent  to  cause
    difficulties when problems in interpretation arise during a meeting.

86. In this matter there was potential  for  the  applicant  to  experience
    difficulties  in  conveying  information  at  the  assessment  meetings
    because the interpreters booked did  not  detail  themselves  as  being
    competent in the Darfur dialect.  I am satisfied from hearing Mr.  Noon
    address this issue before me that he did  not  at  the  relevant  times
    comprehend the variation in dialect that arises in different  areas  of
    the  Arabic  speaking   world,   with   varying   degrees   of   mutual
    understanding. I take judicial note that geographically  modern  Arabic
    varieties  are  classified  into  five  groups:   Egyptic,   Levantine,
    Maghrebi, Mesopotamian and Peninsular, and that Arabic spoken in  Sudan
    is similar to Egyptian Arabic, but with some particularities.

87. I observe that the respondent has not taken issue with the  applicant's
    assertion that the interpreter at the July meeting is understood to  be
    an ethnic Kurd, who speaks native Gorani (or Hawrami) as well as Sorani
    and Arabic. Such  linguistic  expertise  is,  on  balance,  capable  of
    identifying the interpreter as originating from Iraq and a  speaker  of
    Mesopotamian Arabic.

88. Upon careful consideration, I find that the  applicant  did  experience
    difficulties in understanding the interpreter  provided  at  the  first
    meeting and, in such circumstances, it is more likely than not that the
    interpreter also had difficulties in understanding the applicant. I  am
    mindful, for the reasons detailed below, that the applicant was  not  a
    credible witness before me on several issues  when  aided  by  a  North
    Sudanese Arabic Darfur interpreter. However,  neither  party  has  been
    able to confirm as to whether the interpreter used at the July  meeting
    was competent in Darfur dialect, Mr. Noon was not alert to the  problem
    at the time of the meeting so as to be aware of any potential  problems
    and I have not been provided with any notes from the appropriate adult.
    Being mindful as to the ADCS guidance, observing the difficulties  that
    may arise between Arabic-speakers who  do  not  converse  in  the  same
    dialect and observing that  the  interpreter  was  an  ethnic  Kurd,  I
    accept, on balance, that the applicant did experience the  difficulties
    of which he complains at the July meeting.

89. I find that the respondent's conduct of the July meeting was subject to
    unfairness in respect of an unsuitable interpreter being  used  and  so
    care  is  to  be  applied  when  considering   any   discrepancies   or
    inconsistencies identifiable between the information provided  at  this
    meeting by the applicant and that provided by other  means.  Such  care
    was not undertaken by the assessors when relying upon discrepancies and
    inconsistencies flowing from information provided at this meeting, when
    considered  with  other  evidence,  and  such   procedural   unfairness
    unlawfully infected the July and November decisions.

     iv) Failure to address all issues with the applicant


90. A further concern that arises as to November decision is as to  whether
    all relevant concerns were fairly presented to  the  applicant  at  the
    November meeting.

91. An example of such concern is that despite the August decision  clearly
    relying within its 'analysis' or conclusion section that it  was  'odd'
    that if the applicant  was  an  unaccompanied  child  in  each  of  the
    countries where he asserts that he was placed in a  camp,  he  had  not
    previously been assessed and documented as a child, the  applicant  was
    not asked about this issue at the  minded-to  meeting.  Despite  weight
    being placed upon it in the  August  decision,  the  question  was  not
    identified within Mr. Noon's agenda for the  September  meeting,  which
    was adopted at the November meeting.

92. The November meeting concluded upon the applicant  indicating  that  he
    had a headache. It is not  said  in  the  November  decision  that  the
    assessors were satisfied that all  inconsistencies,  discrepancies  and
    other issues that could potentially be clarified had been  put  to  the
    applicant at this point of time. I observe that no questions  had  been
    asked as to scarification, though it was noted on the  agenda.  If  all
    relevant questions had not been asked, fairness dictated that a  second
    minded-to meeting be held.

93. To meet the required  procedural  safeguards  in  this  matter  it  was
    axiomatic that the applicant be given a fair and proper opportunity  to
    deal with important points adverse  to  his  age  which  the  assessors
    thought weighed against him. Such points include those identifiable  as
    being relied upon in the 'analysis' section  of  the  August  decision.
    Both issues addressed above were considered adverse to the  applicant's
    assertion as to age, and so fairness required that he be  permitted  an
    opportunity to address them. Such opportunity  was  not  provided.  The
    adoption of such approach was not consistent with  required  procedural
    safeguards.

94. In evidence before me Mr. Noon confirmed that he had conducted a search
    and located the applicant's Facebook account prior to the July meeting,
    and asked the applicant as to whether he had an account at the meeting.
    Mr. Noon relied upon the applicant answering 'no'. He  detailed  to  me
    that he had revisited the account consequent to the hearing to look for
    photographs exhibited by Mr. Taylor. The account appeared to  Mr.  Noon
    to be the same as when he first accessed it. By means  of  his  witness
    statement, dated 27 March 2020, Mr. Noon detailed, at �13:

         '13.  ...  Below  are  photographs  taken  from  [the  applicant's]
            Facebook account. The dates  they  were  posted  accompany  each
            photo. I do not know who the other  people  are  in  the  second
            photo. The photos are included here  to  demonstrate  the  long-
            standing existence of the Facebook page, and show  his  physical
            appearance from an earlier date. I have not had  an  opportunity
            to ask [the applicant] about these photos.'

95. Mr. Noon has considered it appropriate  to  present  three  photographs
    taken from the applicant's Facebook account by  means  of  his  witness
    statement, two of which were uploaded  onto  the  account  in  May  and
    August 2018, as establishing the applicant's physical appearance  'from
    an earlier date'. I am satisfied that Mr. Noon was aware of the May and
    August 2018 photographs at the time  of  both  the  July  and  November
    meetings and they were images upon which he placed adverse weight  when
    considering the applicant's stated age, but he took no steps  to  place
    them before the applicant and seek his  observations  upon  them.  Such
    approach is not consistent with required procedural safeguards.

96. I am satisfied that the identified failures  are  consistent  with  Mr.
    Noon's inexperience in conducting  an  age  assessment  accompanied  by
    insufficient supervision being provided by Mr. Rooney. The effect  upon
    a child or a young person of being assessed to be an adult is  serious.
    It is therefore essential that assessments  are  made  by  experienced,
    trained social workers and that all safeguards to ensure  fairness  are
    in place. Such safeguards as were put in place in this matter have been
    found wanting. I conclude that too great a  responsibility  was  placed
    upon Mr. Noon in his first  age  assessment,  without  the  benefit  of
    adequate supervision. The consequence is that I find the age assessment
    in the applicant's matter to have failed to  abide  by  the  procedural
    safeguards  set  out  in  Merton  and  FZ,  establishing  the  'minimum
    standards' of fairness, and so was conducted unlawfully.

97. Whilst  observing  that  Mr.  Noon  undertook  the  process  with  good
    intentions, I am satisfied that he exhibited such  inexperience  as  to
    the conduct of an age  assessment,  particularly  by  his  decision  to
    conduct part of it on his own, as to clearly exhibit the reasons as  to
    why an assessment should always involve the continued involvement of  a
    social worker  experienced  in  age  assessments  to  ensure  that  the
    fairness requirements of a Merton compliant assessment are met.
Respondent's evidence

98. The fact that I have found the age assessment to  have  been  conducted
    unlawfully does not mean, per se, that the  applicant  succeeds.  I  am
    required to consider the question posed in my inquisitorial  role,  and
    so consider the rest of the evidence placed before me.

99. In addition to the age assessment, the only  evidence  upon  which  the
    respondent relies is that presented by Mr. Noon. As  such  evidence  is
    entwined with the  assessment  decisions  of  August  and  November,  I
    consider it in the round, being mindful of the  procedural  flaws  that
    underpin the assessment decisions.

Demeanour and appearance

100. The assessors addressed the applicant's  appearance  and  demeanour  in
    their August decision, identifying several  characteristics  associated
    with  post-pubescent  males:  strong  and  developed  facial  features,
    developed and 'worn' hands, and Adam's apple. As the applicant detailed
    that he was aged 15  at  the  date  of  this  decision,  and  so  post-
    pubescent, such characteristics are not determinative of his age.

101. Without any adequate reasoning, these 'features  which  are  associated
    with post-pubescent males' are elevated in the  'analysis'  section  of
    the decision, where  the  assessors  conclude  their  belief  that  the
    applicant, 'looks older than  his  claimed  age.  He  has  defined  and
    developed facial and bodily features - his cheek bones, forehead lines,
    his hands and skin, his Adam's apple.'

102. An Adam's apple develops during male puberty, usually between the  ages
    of 9 and 14, and so is an unreliable indicator that a person is not, as
    claimed, aged 15 or that they are  aged  over  18.  The  reliance  upon
    'worn' hands fails to expressly engage with  the  applicant's  evidence
    that he hails from an  agrarian  community  and,  as  accepted  by  the
    respondent before me, had worked for a period of time in Libya  on  two
    farms for some nine months. No explanation is given  as  to  why  cheek
    bones establish the reaching of adulthood in a male or denotes  that  a
    young person cannot be aged 15. Such observations, individually or when
    taken together, are insufficient to aid in an assessment as to  whether
    someone is aged 15, as claimed, or is aged over 18  and  could  not  by
    themselves enable the  assessors  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    applicant looked older than his claimed age.

103. The development of lines on a forehead  may  be  an  indicator  of  the
    aging  process,  often  identifying  a  loss  of  skin  elasticity   in
    adulthood. However, they can be formed consequent to  spending  lengthy
    periods of time in harsh sunshine and the assessors were aware that the
    applicant hails from Darfur. It is clear from their decision  that  the
    assessors have not  considered  alternative  reasons  for  such  lines.
    Indeed, no further detail as  to  these  lines  is  provided  elsewhere
    within the decision, such as their depth and extent. Little weight  can
    therefore be placed on this observation  due  to  the  lack  of  detail
    provided, and the failure of the assessors to address  the  issue  with
    the applicant at the November meeting.

104. Reliance was again  placed  upon  the  applicant's  appearance  in  the
    November decision, though no additional reasons were provided save that
    the Home Office  had  documented  the  same  view  as  reached  by  the
    assessors in their August decision, namely that the  applicant  was  an
    adult.

105. Mr.  Noon  confirmed  by  means  of  his  witness  statement  that  the
    applicant's facial features, their definition and his hands all suggest
    that he is an adult rather than a child.

106. Senior courts have regularly  reminded  decision-makers  that  physical
    appearance  is   a   notoriously   unreliable   basis   for   assessing
    chronological age. It is particularly so when based upon conjecture  as
    to what attributes may or may not be possessed  by  a  child  or  young
    person hailing from a different region of the world, as it may well  be
    influenced by unintentional confirmation bias. I further  observe  that
    the applicant's appearance was not considered to be  so  marked  as  to
    justify a short-form age  assessment.  I  conclude  that  the  evidence
    relied upon by the respondent  as  to  the  applicant's  appearance  is
    wholly incapable of sustaining the weight placed upon it.

107. Consideration is given by the assessors to  the  applicant's  demeanour
    in both decisions. In the August decision the following is observed:

         '[The applicant] is quietly spoken, and has  a  pleasant  and  mild
         demeanour ...


         He reciprocates smiles and  makes  good  eye  contact.  He  is  not
         particularly effusive in  his  speech  (a  man  of  few  words)  or
         expressive with his facial expressions or body  language.  He  will
         sit still during meetings, often clasping hands (out of comfort  or
         habit, rather than anxiety).


         He does not fidget or twitch but is able  to  sit  calmly.  He  was
         happy to continue the age assessment without a break (although  one
         was taken).


         He has always presented as emotionally calm - no negative  emotions
         were observed. There were no signs of distress or upset. There were
         no signs of fear or anxiety. There were no signs of frustration  at
         any questioning.'


         ...


         '[The  applicant]  does  not  profess  any  negative  feelings   or
         emotions. He describes himself to be well. He does not recount  any
         part of his journey with negativity (whether verbally or by  change
         of demeanour). He describes the journey to the  UK  and  his  early
         life freely (although with limited narrative description). There is
         little or no darkness to his accounts or description. They  contain
         little detail.


         [The applicant's] presentation does not suggest any active grief or
         similar emotion as regards his experiences. He says he  left  Sudan
         when he was 11 without his parent's knowledge, matter-of-factly. He
         showed no emotion (whether  verbally  or  by  his  demeanour)  when
         recounting the separation. When asked if he was abused,  mistreated
         or exploited during his journey, he said no.


         His health assessment identifies the possibility of  post-traumatic
         behaviour but  there  is  no  evidence  of  this  in  presentation,
         demeanour, or interactions to date. If anything, he presents  as  a
         pleasant, balanced and well-adjusted individual.'

108. I have found above that the July meeting  was  affected  by  procedural
    unfairness consequent to the use  of  a  Mesopotamian  Arabic  speaking
    interpreter.

109. In the analysis section of the July decision, the assessors detailed:

         '[The applicant] was relaxed when answering questions. He shows  no
         signs of  nervousness  or  anxiety.  However,  he  is,  perhaps,  a
         naturally shy person. He gave  few  specific  details  or  detailed
         factual accounts. This could be poor memory; it  being  noted  that
         trauma is believed to affect memory. That said, he did not  present
         as unduly inhibited (by shyness, for example)  or  unduly  impaired
         (by reason of trauma  or  other  impact).  He  is  able  to  recall
         information. The lack of  detail  undermined  the  cogency  of  his
         account. It was vague.


         ...


         I do not believe that [the applicant] is the age he  claims  to  be
         ... Further, his account of coming  to  the  UK  is  not  coherent,
         detailed  or  entirely  credible.  There  are   gaps.   Given   his
         deameanour, and his ability to answer other questions,  these  gaps
         suggest selective, rather than lost, memory.'

110. In the November decision, the assessors again  relied,  in  part,  upon
    the applicant's demeanour observing, inter alia:

         'His demeanour suggests that he is older:  he  possesses  a  placid
         personality, making good eye contact. he shows no sign  of  nerves,
         anxiety or stress - he  has  a  calmness  which  is  suggestive  of
         maturity, rather  than  the  awkwardness  and  labile  emotions  of
         adolescence.  This  impression  of  [the  applicant]  has  been   a
         consistent one through 5 months or so of interaction with him.'

111. By means of his witness statement Mr. Noon details, at ��6-10:

         '6.  However, it was not just his physical features  that  made  me
            believe he was an  adult.  His  demeanour  was  not  that  of  a
            teenager - typical signs of  which  might  be  (amongst  others)
            independence   and   identity   seeking,   variable    emotions,
            conflictual, rebellious, boundary testing,  impulsive,  sexually
            curious, social curiosity and experimentation. He shows no signs
            of any of  these.  On  the  contrary,  he  is  placid  and  non-
            conflictual. Perhaps these  characteristics  are  indicative  of
            immaturity, however, if so, I would associate them more with pre-
            adolescence (the 8-12 age group, say).


         7.  He is, it would appear, a  naturally  respectful  person.  This
            could  be  indicative  of  being  young  -  respecting   elders,
            'speaking when spoken to' - but the way he  holds  himself  with
            adults, his body language, eye contact,  tone,  pitch,  pace  at
            which he speaks, vocabulary, suggest some  self-assuredness.  On
            balance, I believe him to  be  a  shy  adult,  who  can  conduct
            himself  appropriately  in  formal   settings,   without   being
            overwhelmed or panicked (as a child might be).


         8.  I am also struck by how little his journey from Sudan, and  his
            experiences along the way, appear to have affected him,  or  how
            little (at least) they show on the surface. If he was the age he
            said he was when he left Sudan, and the ages he would then  have
            been along his journey, I would expect.  A  greater  impact.  He
            says he was aged between 11 and 15 along this journey  -  a  key
            time of development for young people,  especially  in  terms  of
            psychosocial maturity.


         9.  [The applicant] appears to have taken his  experiences  in  his
            stride. [The applicant] rarely shows any emotion -  in  fact,  I
            cannot recall any single example. Even when talking about  being
            separated from his family, there is little emotion. No tears  or
            other signs of sadness,  no  anger,  outbursts  or  evidence  of
            emotional strain.


         10. [The applicant] might have remarkable  resilience,  his  trauma
            and emotions might be hidden, buried or dormant, he  might  have
            strong  personal  or  cultural  inhibitions   about   expressing
            feelings. However, he has shown no signs of any frailty  or  ill
            effect  on  him.  I  find  this   surprising.   An   alternative
            explanation might be that he was older when he left Sudan,  well
            on his way to being an adult (if not  already  an  adult),  more
            emotionally developed and resilience, therefore better  equipped
            to take on the journey he did.


112. I observe that in the initial health assessment, dated  25  June  2019,
    Dr. Vardak records the applicant as confirming that he  was  abused  on
    his journey to  the  United  Kingdom  and  having  stated  in  previous
    interviews that he was very much disturbed by the abuse. The respondent
    has accepted that the  applicant  was  ill-treated  and  trafficked  in
    Libya.

113. I find that Mr.  Noon  has  adopted  a  very  narrow  approach  in  his
    consideration of the applicant's expression of emotion.  In  answer  to
    examples of disgruntlement and complaint identified  by  Ms.  Benfield,
    Mr. Noon explained that these were verbally expressed frustrations, not
    emotional ones. I considered the effort to  forensically  differentiate
    such  acts  to  be  informative  when  undertaking  my  assessment,  in
    circumstances where frustration is identifiable as a  common  emotional
    response related to anger and disappointment.

114. Mr. Noon's effort to shore up his assessment as to  the  applicant  not
    showing emotion in his presence was consistent in his  evidence  before
    me. Ms. Benfield gently pushed Mr. Noon  as  to  the  accuracy  of  his
    general observation and asked him as to an interview  preparation  note
    completed in relation to the July meeting in which the answer 'Yes' was
    circled in response to the question 'Is  the  interviewee  showing  any
    signs of distress, anxiety or  discomfort?'  I  note  that  'distress',
    'anxiety' and 'discomfort' are emotions. I was  informed  by  Mr.  Noon
    that the wrong answer had been circled. Even though some 16 months  had
    elapsed from the July 2019 interview  he  informed  me  that  he  could
    remember the scene and if the applicant was experiencing  distress  and
    discomfort this would have caused discussion and  subsequent  delay  in
    the interview. I remind  myself  that  Mr.  Noon  and  Mr.  Rooney  are
    experienced social workers who understood the importance of undertaking
    their interview preparation checklist with care. I  find,  on  balance,
    that I prefer the note taken by the assessors on the day of the meeting
    as being accurate.  Whilst  the  applicant  may  not  have  shown  such
    distress or anxiety as to delay the start of the meeting, or cause  the
    appropriate  concern,  I  am   satisfied   that   he   was   exhibiting
    understandable discomfort, anxiety and/or distress which was  noted  by
    the assessors on the day. I further find that  Mr.  Noon  is  prone  to
    shaping his evidence as to events to adapt to his general view  of  how
    he believes things to be.

115. I  have  considered  Mr.  Noon's  evidence  with  care,  observing  his
    professional expertise  as  a  social  worker.  It  is  a  professional
    observation made during the course of several meetings and I  therefore
    place some weight upon his observation as to demeanour, though for  the
    reasons detailed above it does not enjoy significant weight. I  further
    observe his acceptance in answer to questions from  Ms.  Benfield  that
    persons who survive torture may not show emotion and that children  can
    adopt avoidance behaviour which can be interpreted as  being  vague  or
    evasive.

Scarification

116.  The  August  decision  observed   scarification   present   upon   the
    applicant's face:

         'According to a support worker at Active 8 (the  organisation  that
         is currently accommodating and supporting [the applicant])  he  has
         markings to his face: 'I have probably only noticed them  as  I  am
         aware of other young Sudanese boys we  have  with  them  and  these
         different markings can often distinguish between tribes.  They  are
         what looks like horizontal  slice  marks  down  the  sides  of  his
         temples next to his eyes, there appears to be about 8 and they  are
         approx. � cm in length, but this varies. [The  applicant's]  mother
         tongue/ tribal language is Aranga so this must be the tribe  he  is
         from, there is very little online about this specific tribe or  its
         customs, although it does confirm  that  this  is  a  tribe  within
         Darfur.'


         This is possibly  evidence  of  'scarification',  the  practice  of
         scratching, etching, burning/ branding,  or  superficially  cutting
         designs, pictures, or words into  the  skin  as  a  permanent  body
         modification. This is not uncommon practice  in  certain  parts  of
         Africa (including Sudan) and is often associated  as  part  of  the
         ritual progression into 'manhood'.'

117. The applicant informed the assessors at the November meeting  that  the
    markings on his face were tribal, and he received them when  he  was  a
    baby, aged under 1. He did not know what they signified.

118. The parties agreed that the applicant's scarification was not a  matter
    that could positively help me in my assessment because the parties  had
    been  unable  to  locate  any   evidence   identifying   the   cultural
    circumstances in which the Aranga undertook scarification. This was  an
    appropriate approach to adopt at the hearing. However, when reading the
    August decision, I observe that adverse reliance was  placed  upon  the
    scars, insofar as they suggested the applicant's evidence as to when he
    left Sudan was not accurate. The 'possibly evidence' identified earlier
    in the assessment decision is elevated within the analysis  section  as
    follows:

         'He has what appeared  to  be  tribal  scars  on  his  face.  Their
         existence likely corroborate his place of origin. Scarification  is
         a  practice  is  varied  but  is  often  used  to  mark  a  child's
         progression into manhood. This would likely be around the age of 12
         to 13.'

119. Whilst being placed in the  analysis  section  no  firm  conclusion  is
    expressly drawn as to when the applicant's  scarification  occurred.  A
    general observation is made. However, I find  that  upon  reading  this
    section of the analysis it is implicit that adverse reliance is  placed
    upon the existence of the applicant's scars because it is noted that it
    'would likely be' that scarification occurs 'around the age  of  12  to
    13'. It can reasonably be read  that  this  observation  forms  one  of
    several bases for the finding later in the section that  the  applicant
    left Sudan at an age much older than 11. I observe  that  the  approach
    adopted in the analysis section is  singularly  unhelpful  where  clear
    reasoning is expected  to  be  provided  as  to  whether  an  issue  is
    relevant, or not, to the assessment.

120. The approach adopted to this issue is of concern because  it  is  based
    upon a narrow understanding  of  scarification.  I  am  satisfied  that
    scarification is linked by the assessors with ritual  progression  into
    manhood, with no consideration being given to other basis for  scarring
    in sub-Saharan Africa. Consequently, the  assessors  proceeded  on  the
    assumption that it is a rite of  passage  ritual  identified  as  being
    likely to have occurred around the ages of 12 to 13.  Scarification  is
    an issue that is on occasion considered by this Tribunal in respect  of
    establishing tribal affiliation in international protection claims  and
    I take judicial note that amongst some  sub-Sahara  African  indigenous
    groups, it is inflicted upon young children as a means  of  'hardening'
    consequent to a belief that any physical and emotional  stress  exerted
    on young children will allow them  to  withstand  physical  and  mental
    strain in later life. This process is undertaken  early  in  a  child's
    life. Amongst other  groups,  scarification  is  a  process  undertaken
    during puberty  or  when  entering  adulthood.  Many  groups  use  such
    scarring to exhibit tribal allegiance.  Consequently,  the  applicant's
    evidence that he  was  scarred  when  a  baby  is  as  consistent  with
    established practice as instances  of  members  of  some  groups  being
    subject to scarring as a rite of passage.

121. Both parties accept that  there  is  presently  no  available  evidence
    written in the English-language as to the use of scarification  by  the
    Aranga. In the circumstances, I find that the applicant is truthful  as
    to the scars being inflicted whilst he was a baby, and  so  applied  in
    the south-Saharan societal manner of 'hardening' a young child  to  the
    stresses of life, rather than as a rite  of  passage  accompanying  the
    transformation and progression from one developmental phase to another,
    which I take judicial note usually occurs at puberty in several  south-
    Saharan societies. His evidence as to such scarification, identified as
    being horizontal slice marks down the sides of his temples next to  his
    eyes, being consistent with those of his  fellow  villagers,  and  such
    marks not being highly visible or  noticeable,  strongly  suggest  that
    they  were  tribal  markings  cut  when  he  was  very  young.  In  the
    circumstances, the failure  of  the  age  assessment  to  lawfully  and
    adequately consider the issue  of  scarification,  and  to  proceed  to
    consider  it  adversely  when  considering  the  applicant's   personal
    history, is  a  factor  that  is  placed  into  my  assessment  of  the
    respondent's evidence.

Applicant's evidence

122. Ms. Rowlands cross-examined the applicant  with  considerable  forensic
    skill and several  inconsistencies  arose  during  the  course  of  his
    evidence. However, as previously observed the respondent  has  accepted
    that the applicant was ill-treated and trafficked in  Libya  and  I  am
    mindful that young asylum seekers as well  as  victims  of  trafficking
    will have problems in presenting a coherent account of  their  personal
    history and travel to  this  country,  and  such  difficulties  may  be
    exacerbated when cross-examined skillfully by experienced counsel.

123. The applicant relied upon a witness statement dated 29  November  2019.
    His personal history, in summary, is that he left Sudan  in  2015  when
    aged 11, without the knowledge of  his  parents,  joining  a  group  of
    persons who were leaving his home area.  It  took  him  four  years  to
    arrive in this country, during which time he  was  forced  to  work  in
    Libya, lived in several refugee camps in Italy, and resided  in  Spain,
    France and Belgium.

124. He has remained consistent as to his mother informing him of  his  date
    of birth when he was aged 5. This is the primary source as to  his  age
    and the weight I give to it as  part  of  the  holistic  assessment  is
    addressed below.

125.  There  were  significant  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in  the
    applicant's evidence as to his journey to this country. I observe  that
    following  his  arrival  he  underwent  a  short  interview   with   an
    immigration officer and an  Initial  Contact  and  Asylum  Registration
    Questionnaire was completed on 8 February 2019. He  confirmed  that  he
    was fingerprinted in Italy and Spain. As to his journey he detailed, 'I
    left Sudan in August 2017. I travelled  through  Libya.  I  crossed  to
    Europe and landed in Italy. I was fingerprinted and  stayed  there  for
    approximately 3 months. After Italy I travelled to Spain  by  train.  I
    was fingerprinted in Spain. I did not claim asylum there, and I  stayed
    for about 2 months. After Spain I travelled to France. I was in  France
    until I came to the UK yesterday in a lorry.'

126. In his witness statement he details that he left his  village  in  2015
    and travelled to Libya. He was captured and forced to work  on  a  farm
    for six months where he was ill-treated. Consequent to his  release  he
    worked  on  another  farm  for  approximately  three  months.  He  then
    travelled to the coast of Libya and paid an agent to secure passage  on
    a boat to Italy. He makes no reference to working whilst on  the  coast
    but factoring in a short period of time in which to secure an agent and
    arrange passage, on his evidence he remained in Libya for approximately
    ten months.

127. He arrived in Lampedusa, an Italian island in the Mediterranean,  where
    he was placed in a refugee camp for approximately  one  month.  He  was
    then transferred by the authorities to a refugee camp in  Sicily  where
    he remained for around a month, before  being  transferred  to  another
    refugee camp on the Italian mainland where he  stayed  for  around  two
    months. He then travelled to Ventimiglia, in  the  region  of  Liguria,
    northern Italy where he states that he slept under a bridge for  around
    a month with other asylum seekers. By means of his written evidence  he
    remained in Italy for five months.

128. The applicant then travelled by  train  through  France  to  Spain.  He
    details by means of his statement, 'In Valencia, we were under the care
    of the Government, but we  were  not  treated  very  well.  We  weren't
    beaten, but it  was  uncomfortable  being  there.  I  remember  when  I
    arrived, the authorities caught us and put us in  a  camp.'  He  stated
    that he remained in the camp for two months before deciding  to  leave.
    He was therefore in Spain for two  months  and  left  the  country  for
    France seventeen months after leaving Sudan. Being  favourable  to  the
    applicant, if he left Sudan on the day before his  stated  birthday  in
    December 2015, on his evidence he would have left Spain in May 2017.

129. He details that he travelled  to  Paris  by  car  where  he  joined  an
    unofficial camp that was situated under a bridge. He stayed there for a
    little over two months and then travelled to Lille where he stayed  for
    around two months. He then returned to Paris by train and straight away
    took a train to Belgium where he slept  in  gardens  for  around  three
    months, before heading to the United Kingdom. Taking into  account  the
    seven months the applicant is  said  to  have  resided  in  France  and
    Belgium and being favourable to  the  applicant  as  to  his  timeline,
    whilst observing his previous acceptance  that  he  travelled  to  this
    country from France and not Belgium, he  would  have  arrived  in  this
    country in December 2017. It is officially recorded that he arrived  in
    this country  on  7  February  2019.  On  its  face,  this  account  is
    inconsistent.

130. At the hearing before me, the applicant stated that he  left  Sudan  in
    2015 but did not know in which month he left. He was consistent  as  to
    the time spent in Libya. He was also consistent  as  to  travelling  to
    Lampedusa and the time he spent there. However, he stated that he spent
    three or four months in Sicily before being taken to another  camp.  He
    was consistent as to  then  travelling  to  Ventimiglia  where  he  was
    released and able to  move  around.  He  stated  that  he  remained  in
    Ventimiglia for two to three months, before  travelling  to  Spain.  He
    informed me that he was present in Spain for three months.

131. Being favourable to the applicant as to his timeline and proceeding  on
    the basis that he left Sudan on the day before his stated  birthday  in
    December 2015, his evidence  at  the  hearing  results  in  his  having
    arrived in Spain in the summer of 2017. However, he informed me that he
    arrived in Valencia in 2018 and stayed in a camp in that city for three
    months. He is internally inconsistent in this version, which is  itself
    inconsistent with previous versions.

132. The applicant confirmed that he travelled to  France  and  remained  in
    Paris for three months, before residing in Lille for a month.  He  then
    returned to Paris where he stayed for a  month,  before  travelling  to
    Brussels. This version of his travel history is inconsistent with  that
    stated in his witness statement.

133. I am satisfied that the applicant is not being truthful as to  when  he
    left Sudan, or as to the time it took him to travel  to  this  country.
    His stated timeline is wholly inconsistent with his having  left  Sudan
    in 2015. I am satisfied that he is numerate and understands the concept
    of months and years. I am further satisfied  that  he  understands  the
    concept of seasons, hailing from a farming family in an area  that  has
    dry and rainy seasons, and so would be able to identify which season he
    left his village to commence his  journey.  I  therefore  find  to  the
    requisite standard that he  has  been  deliberately  misleading  as  to
    elements of his journey to this country.

134. I am not required to make findings of fact  on  all  issues  concerning
    his journey, that is primarily a matter to be considered  by  means  of
    his  international  protection  claim.  However,  I  observe  that  the
    applicant has been consistent as to events in Libya and the  respondent
    accepts that applicant was ill-treated and trafficked in that  country.
    I therefore find that he spent in the region  of  ten  months  in  that
    country.

135. I further find that he claimed asylum in Italy,  and  for  the  reasons
    detailed below conclude that he was placed in several reception centres
    and State approved accommodation, receiving  appropriate  care,  whilst
    present in that country.

136. I take judicial note that the primary  route  for  refugees  travelling
    from Libya to mainland Europe in  recent  years  has  been  across  the
    Mediterranean and the Italian authorities have been using the island of
    Lampedusa as a primary reception centre before dispersing those seeking
    international protection elsewhere in the country. I note the  detailed
    consideration of the  Italian  asylum  process  and  the  provision  of
    accommodation undertaken by the Tribunal in R (on the application of SM
    & Others)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Dublin
    Regulation - Italy) [2018] UKUT 00429 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  considered
    the use of first-line reception facilities (CARA or  CDA),  second-line
    reception facilities (SPRAR)  and  extraordinary  reception  facilities
    (CAS). Hotspots, such as Lampedusa, with high numbers of migrants  have
    at various times utilized 'first aid and reception centres' (CPSA)  and
    the Tribunal accepted that asylum seekers could spend days or weeks  at
    such centres. I therefore find, to the  requisite  standard,  that  the
    applicant did arrive in Italy and contrary to his  evidence  did  claim
    asylum on  arrival.  It  is  consistent  with  the  objective  evidence
    considered in SM & Others that he would  have  spent  some  time  in  a
    reception centre on the island of Lampedusa before being transferred to
    another camp, on his evidence by sea to Sicily. It is  also  consistent
    with objective evidence considered by the Tribunal that he  would  more
    likely than not have been transferred to the  mainland  and  placed  in
    SPRAR accommodation, a network of local authorities which  set  up  and
    run reception projects. The system draws upon  the  National  Fund  for
    asylum policies and services managed by the Ministry of the Interior. I
    therefore find, on balance, that the applicant was  relocated  to  such
    accommodation in the Region of Liguria, in the north-west of Italy. The
    city of Ventimiglia is relatively  small  and  overshadowed  by  Genoa,
    which is close by, and is unlikely to be known to an asylum-seeker from
    Darfur unless he resided in the city.

137. I observe that Ventimiglia is situated close to the French  border  and
    being mindful that there is corroborative evidence as to the  applicant
    having resided in Spain, I am satisfied  that  he  is  truthful  as  to
    having journeyed across France to reach Spain.

138. The applicant's evidence as to how long he spent in Italy  ranged  from
    three months in his screening interview, five  months  in  his  witness
    statement and over eight months  in  evidence  before  me.  Other  than
    finding that the applicant did arrive in Lampedusa and was subsequently
    accommodated in camps in Sicily and somewhere on  the  mainland  before
    being transferred to Ventimiglia there is insufficient cogent  evidence
    before me to enable a finding to be made as to how long he  resided  in
    Italy, though I find that it is more likely than  not  he  was  in  the
    country  in  late  2017  or  early  2018  as  there  is   corroborative
    photographic evidence taken from the applicant's Facebook page that  he
    was in Valencia by at least May 2018 and there was no challenge by  the
    respondent that this was the next stage of his journey.

139. I observe that there is corroborative evidence that the  applicant  was
    in Valencia, Spain, from a date before 1 May 2018  until  at  least  12
    August 2018. I agree with the respondent that the photographs show  the
    applicant to be clean, happy, and well-groomed. The photographs clearly
    evidence that he was not sleeping rough  and  unable  to  secure  basic
    provisions. I therefore find  that  he  claimed  asylum  in  Spain  and
    consequently received care  and  accommodation  in  that  country.  The
    applicant is inconsistent in his evidence as to how long he resided  in
    Valencia, and the photographic evidence strongly suggests that  he  was
    present in the city for longer than the two  or  three  months  he  now
    claims, as they confirm that  he  had  established  friendship  by  the
    beginning of May 2018.

140. I find on balance that the applicant  travelled  to,  and  resided  in,
    France and Belgium before  travelling  to  this  country.  I  find  the
    applicant to be untruthful before me as to not having received  medical
    treatment in Belgium and not having been prescribed sleeping pills. The
    applicant's initial health assessment dated 25 June 2019,  records  his
    confirmation that he had disturbed sleep and had been treated for  this
    when in Belgium, receiving a sleeping aid. The applicant  has  provided
    no cogent reason as to why a medical doctor would err as  to  recording
    such information. I am satisfied that the applicant has sought to  hide
    the care he received in Belgium from the respondent, and to  present  a
    picture of being homeless and sleeping  rough  in  that  country.  Upon
    careful consideration, I am satisfied that such efforts to mislead  are
    part of a crude attempt to prevent a  true  understanding  as  to  what
    route(s) he took to this country, who aided him on his journey  and  as
    to where he had previously claimed asylum.

141. I have found  that  the  applicant  spent  time  in  the  care  of  the
    authorities in Italy and Spain. I also find, to the requisite  standard
    that he claimed asylum in Belgium.  I  accept  the  submission  of  the
    respondent that the applicant did seek and receive medication  for  his
    difficulties in sleeping whilst in Belgium and I find  that  such  care
    was much more likely to have been secured through being in the care  of
    the authorities as an asylum seeker rather than as an  illegal  entrant
    who was homeless.

142. It was not disputed by the respondent  that  the  applicant  has  spent
    time in France, and he has been consistent to residing in that country.
    I therefore  find  that  he  spent  time  in  France,  latterly  before
    travelling to this country. I have insufficient evidence before  me  to
    conclude that he claimed asylum in that country. It is more likely than
    not that he travelled through the  country  on  occasions,  seeking  to
    reach other countries.

143. As corroborative evidence said to  establish  his  age,  the  applicant
    relies upon his Facebook account which is said  to  have  been  created
    whilst he was present in Spain. His date of birth is identified  as  15
    December 2003. I am satisfied that his evidence as to the  opening  and
    running of this account is not accurate. He stated that he could recall
    the account being set up by a friend in Spain, but he could not  recall
    the friend's name. I find that the applicant is not being  truthful  as
    to not being able to recall who set up the account for him. This  event
    took place two years ago and the description 'friend' strongly suggests
    that the applicant spent more than a  short  period  of  time  in  this
    person's  company.  The  applicant  accepts  that  the  rest   of   the
    information provided on the 'about' page is wrong. He has not worked at
    Engineering & Technology Company (ETC) since 4 April 2020. He  did  not
    study at Watford Football Club. He is  not  from  Tendelti,  Darfur.  I
    observe that some of this information clearly  postdates  his  time  in
    Spain, yet he informed me that it was placed onto his  account  by  his
    unnamed friend in Spain. I find the applicant not  to  be  truthful  on
    this issue.

144. Further, I do not accept the applicant's evidence that  someone  simply
    gave him a phone which he subsequently used  to  set  up  his  Facebook
    account. No cogent reasons were provided as to why  an  unnamed  person
    would be so generous. This Tribunal is experienced as to  methods  used
    by human traffickers when seeking to transport people around Europe and
    is aware that phones are regularly provided to migrants  so  that  they
    can remain in contact with traffickers when crossing national  borders.
    In the circumstances  arising  in  this  matter  the  evidence  of  the
    applicant's stated date of birth being placed on his  Facebook  account
    enjoys no corroborative value.

145. There was confused evidence as to whether the applicant  knew  the  age
    difference between  his  siblings  and  himself.  His  original  answer
    suggested that there was 20 years difference between him and his  elder
    brother, 17 or 18 years between him and his elder sister and  11  years
    between him and his younger brother. However,  he  subsequently  stated
    that these were the  ages  of  his  siblings  and  as  I  informed  the
    representatives at the hearing,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  applicant
    simply misunderstood the initial question.

146. I therefore find the applicant to be truthful on some  aspects  of  his
    history, but to have deliberately misled on  several  others.  However,
    when undertaking my holistic assessment, I am mindful  that  there  are
    complex reasons for migrants not being wholly truthful as  to  the  aid
    they received from human traffickers. Whilst such reasons may arise  in
    the context of the applicant's securing his mobile phone, and as to his
    vagueness as to how he was  able  to  leave  Italy  and  enter  several
    countries thereafter, I am satisfied that such reasons had no  part  to
    play in the applicant's significant inconsistency in his timeline  from
    leaving Sudan and arriving in this country.

Third party evidence

147. My primary focus is on the  credibility  of  the  applicant's  evidence
    concerning his age, but I am permitted to have  regard  to  credibility
    more generally, provided that my primary focus is not forgotten.

148. I found Ms. Wenton to be an honest and  reliable  witness.  She  taught
    the applicant four times a week between September 2019 and the national
    lockdown in late March 2020. The applicant's class consisted of between
    18 and 19 students, and so I am satisfied that Ms. Wenton was  spending
    several hours a week over several months teaching the  applicant  in  a
    classroom where she  would  be  able  to  observe  him  carefully.  She
    continues to see him at the college and remains of the opinion that  he
    is his  stated  aged.  I  note  her  evidence  that  the  applicant  is
    'physically changing. He is growing and becoming more muscular.  He  is
    changing.'

149. Having considered Ms. Wenton's evidence, I accept that a  decision  was
    taken for the applicant to be registered with his college detailing his
    date of birth to be 1 January 2003 simply as a  mechanism  of  securing
    his enrollment at a time when he was an age disputed asylum-seeker, and
    consequently this is not  an  example  of  the  applicant  providing  a
    different date of birth.

150. Ms. Geggie is a social worker employed by Active  8  Support  Services.
    She commenced working with the applicant in May 2019 and  continues  to
    do so. She spends  around  four  hours  a  week  in  contact  with  the
    applicant, and such time was not affected by lockdown save that 50%  of
    the  contact  was  undertaken  virtually.  She  identified  his  visual
    presentation as being  similar  to  the  Sudanese  boys  with  whom  he
    resides,  who  are  under  the   care   of   Liverpool   City   Council
    ('Liverpool'). She confirmed that Liverpool has raised no  safeguarding
    concerns as to children in its care residing with  the  applicant.  She
    identified the applicant's emotional maturity as  being  in  line  with
    other 16- to 18-year-olds from Sudan supported by Active 8.

151. I found Ms. Geggie to be  an  honest  and  reliable  witness,  who  was
    thoughtful in presenting  her  evidence.  I  observe  her  professional
    experience and the amount of time she has spent with the applicant over
    the last 18 months.

152. MM is in the care of Liverpool and resides at the same property as  the
    applicant. They attend the same college but are in  different  classes.
    MM is aged 17 and his age has been accepted by the local authority.  He
    gave his evidence in a straightforward, honest matter  confirming  that
    he was informed by the applicant as to his age and he has  accepted  it
    as correct. They spend a lot of time together, both  at  home,  through
    shopping together and their attendance at a mosque. He observed in  his
    witness statement, 'I have never thought that [the applicant] is  older
    than me. He acts the same age as me ... I  know  [the  applicant]  very
    well and he is a kind, helpful and honest person who I trust fully.  In
    my opinion, he is not someone who would lie about something.  We  spend
    most of our time together and he has never lied to me.'

153. Regarding the evidence of these three witnesses, I  observe  that  when
    assessing the core elements of the applicant's account I am required to
    adopt a holistic approach and so am to consider evidence in the  round.
    I am mindful that when considering the evidence of the  third  parties,
    none of them are able to expressly  confirm  or  deny  the  applicant's
    evidence as to his date of birth. However,  all  three  witnesses  have
    spent lengthy periods of time in the  company  of  the  applicant  over
    several months, and two are able to rely upon professional expertise in
    their evaluation. In giving  weight  to  their  evidence,  I  note  the
    decision in R (AM) v. Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council [2012] UKUT
    00118 (IAC), at [20]-[21]:

         '20.   The asserted expertise of  a  social  worker  conducting  an
             interview is not in our  judgement  sufficient  to  counteract
             those difficulties. A person such  as  a  teacher  or  even  a
             family member, who can point to consistent  attitudes,  and  a
             number of supporting instances over a considerable  period  of
             time, is likely to carry weight that observations made in  the
             artificial surroundings of an interview cannot carry.


         21.    Reactions from the individual's peers are also likely to  be
             of assistance if they are available. We do  not  suggest  that
             other young people are qualified specifically to give evidence
             about the age of a colleague of theirs,  nor  should  they  be
             encouraged to do so. But those who work with groups  of  young
             people see how they react with one another and it seems to  us
             likely that evidence of such interaction,  if  available,  may
             well assist in making an age assessment, particularly  if  any
             necessary allowance for cultural differences can be made.'

Physiological evidence

Growth spurts

154. As noted above, the applicant underwent an  initial  health  assessment
    with Dr. Vardak on  25  June  2019  and  his  height  was  recorded  as
    165.4cms. He was measured for a second time in  December  2019  by  Mr.
    Noon and his height recorded as 165.5cms. Before me Mr. Noon  explained
    that the measurement had been taken by  the  unsophisticated  means  of
    marking a wall with a pencil using a ruler. An email from Alderhey  NHS
    dated 6 January 2020 identifies the applicant height  as  166.5cms.  By
    email dated 1 October 2020  Ms.  Geggie  informed  Mr.  Noon  that  the
    applicant's height had been recorded as 171cms. In evidence  before  me
    Ms. Geggie explained that she had accompanied the  applicant  to  a  GP
    surgery where his height was recorded  by  a  'representative'  of  the
    surgery. She confirmed that it was not recorded by a doctor.

155. The applicant has therefore  been  recorded  as  growing  5.6cms  in  a
    little over 15 months, from 5 feet 5 inches to 5 feet 7 inches.

156. The respondent submitted that no reliance should  be  placed  upon  the
    height recorded in October 2020  because  its  accuracy  could  not  be
    relied upon. Two tentative arguments were advanced. The first that  the
    measurement was not taken by a doctor and secondly  that  there  was  a
    possibility that the  measurement  erroneously  included  part  of  the
    applicant's Afro haircut. Neither submission enjoys any merit. I accept
    Ms. Geggie's evidence that the applicant attended a GP surgery and  was
    measured by a member of staff. It will be expected  that  a  member  of
    staff at a surgery conducting such a role would be adequately  trained.
    The argument is unfortunate in being advanced at the same time as I  am
    asked by the respondent  to  rely  upon  the  accuracy  of  Mr.  Noon's
    measurement using a wall, pencil and ruler. I  am  satisfied  that  the
    latter is a more  unsophisticated  method  of  measurement  than  being
    measured at a GP surgery. As to the second contention, I  am  asked  to
    find that Ms. Geggie's evidence  that  when  the  applicant  was  being
    measured 'his hair was pushed down  to  measure  but  not  with  force'
    establishes  that  the  measurement  included  additional  height  that
    belonged to an Afro haircut. I have no evidence before me in  the  form
    of a photograph as to the nature  of  the  applicant's  haircut  at  or
    around 1 October 2020, but I am satisfied  to  the  requisite  standard
    that a professional at a GP surgery when seeking to  take  an  accurate
    measurement of height would ensure that a measuring device reached  the
    scalp of the patient. I am satisfied that the  applicant's  height  was
    correctly measured at the GP surgery in October 2020.

157. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that the increase  in  the
    applicant's height should enjoy no proper  role  in  my  assessment  as
    people develop at different ages and in  different  ways.  Reliance  is
    placed upon the judgment of Collins J in A v Croydon  LBC  [2009]  EWHC
    939 (Admin), [2010] 1 F.L.R. 193, at [25]:


         '25.  Dr  Stern  is  a  most  distinguished  paediatrician.  He  is
            consultant paediatrician emeritus to the Guy's  and  St  Thomas'
            Hospitals Trust. Measurements of height and weight  are  in  his
            view not completely reliable unless carried out  by  a  properly
            trained paediatric auxologist.  In  any  event,  assessments  of
            growth and maturity are in  his  view  unacceptably  unreliable.
            Height is particularly difficult to use as a reliable indication
            since much will depend on the height of each parent. There is in
            his view no reliable scientific basis for the estimation of age.
            That is a view which is entirely in accordance with the guidance
            given by the RCPCH. A contrary view has no  scientific  support.
            Further, as Dr Stern says,  and  again  this  accords  with  the
            general medical opinion, all the factors relied on to assess age
            in  reality  can  only  assess   maturity   and   maturity   and
            chronological age are two different things. He makes what  seems
            to me to be a cogent point when he says this in  paragraph  10.4
            of his report:-


               'The large majority ... are asylum  seekers  from  developing
               countries. Many of them have been  subjected  to  deprivation
               and some to severe, psychological stresses.  I  would  expect
               these  adverse  events  to  have  significant  effects   upon
               development, tending to  delay  it.  Such  effects  would  be
               particularly marked with respect to  psychological  maturity.
               The consequence of this would be  that  those  clients  would
               have  both  younger  psychological  profiles  and/or  earlier
               measures of physical maturity than their  true  chronological
               age.'


           It is Dr Stern's view that a paediatrician  is  unlikely  to  be
           able to reach a conclusion which is superior to that reached  by
           an experienced social worker,  provided,  of  course,  that  the
           social worker is properly trained.'

158. Dr Stern also presented his expert opinion  in  R  (R)  v  Croydon  LBC
    [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin), [2012] 3 F.C.R. 555.

159. The respondent further relies upon the decision of the  Tribunal  in  R
    (RK) v. Birmingham City Council [2013] UKUT 00307 (IAC), at [46]

         '46. Although Dr Birch has an impressive curriculum vitae  relating
            to her work with children, she is not  a  paediatric  auxologist
            nor  does  she  claim  to  possess  the  expertise  of  such   a
            specialist. Her measurements of height should  be  given  weight
            for the reasons I have stated above and they are, perhaps,  more
            reliable than any other measurement we  have  for  RK  but  they
            still fall short of the "gold  standard"  provided  by  clinical
            auxology. Moreover, even if we had measurements of RK  taken  by
            an auxologist, then, as the judgment in A indicates, the rate of
            his growth would still not provide a reliable indicator  of  his
            chronological age. As with the  eruption  of  molar  teeth  (see
            below), perhaps the most that can be  said  of  an  individual's
            growth in height as an indictor of  chronological  age  is  that
            proof  of  the  cessation  of  growth  tends  to  indicate   the
            achievement of a physical  maturity  generally  associated  with
            adulthood. However, even so it is clear  that  some  individuals
            continue to grow after they have reached the age  of  18  whilst
            others have stopped growing before they achieve legal  majority.
            Further, the rate of growth (in  height  and  weight)  of  young
            asylum seekers may be distorted by their having access  to,  for
            example, a better diet in the United Kingdom. In the case of RK,
            the fact that he continued to grow between the two  measurements
            taken by Dr Birch offers some support for his  claimed  age  but
            that the value of  that  support  is  severely  limited  by  the
            caveats I have indicated. Those same caveats  apply  equally  to
            what Mr. Singh (see paragraph 48 et seq below) says in  his  age
            assessment as they do to the evidence of Dr Birch.'

160. I  am  not  being  asked  to  assess  age  solely  by  considering  the
    applicant's height. The folly of seeking to identify the age of a young
    person by sole reference to whether someone  is  5  feet  2  inches  or
    alternatively 6 feet tall may be established simply  by  looking  at  a
    class photograph of any  secondary  school  particularly  from  Year  8
    onwards. Rather, I am required to consider  the  issue  of  adolescence
    growth spurt for which height and weight  are  indicators  as  to  such
    spurt having occurred.

161. In R (AM) v.  Solihull  Metropolitan  Borough  Council,  at  [17],  the
    Tribunal observed:

         '17.   We have  used  the  word  "mostly"  in  those  observations.
             Looking at the authorities and the literature as we  have,  it
             appears to us that there are two physical indicators which may
             be of some assistance, but only at the very  top  end  of  the
             range. The first is general growth. As an individual  matures,
             he increases in height, and then his body  fills  out,  so  he
             increases in weight. When his body  is  mature,  the  rate  of
             increase of both height and weight  drops  very  considerably.
             Unless he is becoming obese, there comes a point when there is
             little change in either. That  is  a  matter  that  cannot  be
             assessed by a single measurement. Nor do we  think  that  very
             much assistance can be gained  by  attempting  to  assess  any
             perceived difference or  levelling  off  in  the  individual's
             increase in height  or  weight.  Where,  on  the  other  hand,
             accurate measurements of the claimant's height and weight  are
             available extending back over a considerable  period  of  time
             (say 18 months or  more)  and  show  no,  or  no  significant,
             change, we think that that is likely to be  a  sign  that  the
             individual is now over about 18.'

162. It is trite that human beings grow at various  paces  during  childhood
    with particular developments in physical growth during  adolescence.  I
    was not taken to any medical or expert evidence directly concerned with
    growth spurts but indicated at the hearing that it was a matter that  I
    was being asked to make a finding upon. Neither party demurred. I  take
    judicial note that adolescent growth spurt  is  the  fast  and  intense
    increase in the rate of growth in height and weight that occurs  during
    the adolescent stage  of  the  human  life  cycle.  Whilst  changes  in
    adolescents' bodies occur, they do so gradually and over  time,  rather
    than as a single event, hence the general reference to 'spurt'.  Growth
    spurts occur later for boys than girls, and may commence around the age
    of 12, but there is  considerable  variation  between  individuals  and
    populations. I note the intensity and duration  of  the  spurt  is,  on
    average, greater for boys than for girls, and  this  accounts  for  the
    average sexual dimorphism of 11-13 cm in height between adult  men  and
    women. I further note that it  is  relatively  unusual  for  growth  in
    height to continue in a male at 20 years of age and  beyond,  though  I
    observe this may occur consequent to hormone-related disorders.

163. When considering  this  issue,  I  am  mindful  that  late  growth  can
    possibly occur where a person has had inadequate nutrition during their
    youth. Such circumstances may possibly apply to a person who has  grown
    up in Darfur and arrives in this country to be met with a healthy  diet
    and good accommodation. I observe in this matter that  the  applicant's
    weight was measured by Dr. Vardak during the initial health  assessment
    in June 2019, some four months after his arrival in  this  country,  as
    being 59kgs (9.3 stone) which placed him in the  53  centile  which  is
    close  to  average.  This  is  not  strongly   suggestive   of   recent
    malnutrition. I have accepted above that the applicant  spent  time  in
    Italy, Spain and Belgium, much of  which  was  in  the  care  of  those
    respective States. I have accepted that Ms.  Rowlands  was  correct  to
    observe that the applicant looked well-groomed, fit and healthy in  the
    photographs taken in Valencia in 2018. Consequently, for a time  before
    his arrival in this country the applicant was either being cared for by
    a State or able to look after himself to such extent that  he  was  fit
    and healthy when arriving in this country. In the circumstances,  I  am
    satisfied that there is simply insufficient basis  for  concluding,  on
    balance, that the identified growth is consistent with late growth in a
    male aged between 19 and 21, consequent to an improved  diet.  In  such
    circumstances, and being mindful of the requisite standard of proof,  I
    am satisfied that the increase in height and weight since June 2019  is
    the result of an adolescent growth spurt and not  a  rare  instance  of
    growth as a 20+ year-old.

164. Though not determinative of the question I am required  to  answer,  on
    the facts arising in this matter I can appropriately place weight  upon
    the applicant having recently experienced an  adolescent  growth  spurt
    leading to an increase in height, and as observed by  Ms.  Wenton  such
    growth  being  accompanied  by  the  applicant  becoming  visibly  more
    muscular.

Conclusion

165. I am mindful as to the caution that is to be exercised  in  respect  of
    the applicant's evidence, as noted by Stanley Burnton J in  Merton,  at
    [28]:

         'Given the impossibility of any decision maker being able  to  make
         an objectively verifiable determination of the age of an  applicant
         who may be in the age range of, say, 16 to 20, it is  necessary  to
         take a history from him or her with a view to  determining  whether
         it is true. A history that is accepted as true  and  is  consistent
         with an age below 18 will enable the decision maker in such a  case
         to decide that the applicant is a child.  Conversely,  however,  an
         untrue history, while relevant, is not necessarily indicative of  a
         lie as to the age of the applicant. Lies may be  told  for  reasons
         unconnected with the applicant's case as to his age, for example to
         avoid his return to his country of  origin.  Furthermore,  physical
         appearance and behaviour cannot be isolated from  the  question  of
         the veracity  of  the  applicant:  appearance,  behaviour  and  the
         credibility of his account are all matters  that  reflect  on  each
         other.'

166. I have reminded myself that the applicant  has  been  accepted  by  the
    respondent to be a victim of trafficking and to  have  previously  been
    subjected to harm. I have found the applicant to be  truthful  on  some
    aspects of his history. I further observe that he has  been  identified
    above as having deliberately sought to deceive as to several aspects of
    his journey from Italy to the United Kingdom.

167. I observe that the applicant has been consistent as to his claimed  age
    throughout and consistent to the  circumstances  in  which  his  mother
    informed him as to his age.

168. I have given weight to Mr. Noon's  observations  as  to  demeanour,  as
    addressed above, but note that Ms. Geggie  and  Ms.  Wenton,  who  have
    spent significantly longer periods of time with the applicant, hold the
    opinion that his  appearance  and  demeanour  is  consistent  with  his
    claimed age.

169. I place into my assessment my finding that the applicant has  undergone
    an adolescent growth spurt resulting in his both growing taller, and as
    observed by Ms. Wenton, becoming more muscular.

170. In the circumstances and being aware  that  an  assessment  as  to  age
    cannot be concluded with 100% accuracy I find,  on  balance,  that  the
    applicant is a young person aged under 18 and that he is truthful as to
    his date of birth.

171. To the requisite standard I find the following findings of fact:

          i. The applicant is of Aranga ethnicity, hails from Darfur, Sudan
             and is a Sudanese citizen.


         ii. The applicant was informed as to his age by his mother when he
             was aged 5.


        iii. The applicant's mother was being truthful to the applicant  as
             to her recollection of his date and year of birth.


         iv. The applicant was born on 15 December 2003.


          v. The applicant was aged 15 when he entered the  United  Kingdom
             on 7 February 2019


         vi. The applicant was aged 15  at  the  date  of  the  August  and
             November decisions


        vii. The applicant was aged 16 at the date of  the  hearing  before
             the Tribunal.


       viii. The applicant is now aged 17.

Summary of Decision

172. It is declared that the applicant's date of birth is 15 December 2003.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 8 January 2021

