
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/177/2020   |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |Noor Sultan Siddiqui                         |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Entry Clearance Officer                      |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

HAVING considered all documents lodged  and  having  heard  Mr  M  Biggs  of
counsel, instructed by My Legal Solicitors,  for  the  applicant  and  Mr  Z
Malik of counsel, instructed by GLD, for the respondent at a hearing  on  12
October 2020

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is granted in  limited  part  for
       the reasons in the attached judgment.


    2) The respondent's reliance on paragraph  320(7A)  of  the  immigration
       rules is unlawful because  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  was
       dishonest was arrived at in a procedurally unfair manner and because,
       even though the respondent was "not clear" as to the reasons for  the
       applicant's answers in his interview, she concluded that he had  been
       dishonest in circumstances  indicating  she  only  suspected  him  of
       dishonesty, contrary to Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 (at  [42]  and
       [129]).


    3) The respondent's assessment of whether Sufi Naat singing  constitutes
       the performance of religious duties, by reference to paragraph 111(d)
       of Appendix A of the immigration rules, is unlawful as she failed  to
       take the previous grant of entry  clearance  to  the  applicant  into
       consideration in her assessment and because she failed  to  give  any
       explanation, in circumstances where one was called for, for  treating
       this aspect of the two applications differently.


    4) The respondent was lawfully entitled to conclude that  the  applicant
       did not genuinely intend  to  undertake  his  role  recorded  by  the
       Certificate  of  Sponsorship  Checking  Service,  with  reference  to
       paragraph 245ZO(i). This finding was not infected by  any  procedural
       unfairness and is separate  from  and  independent  of  the  unlawful
       elements of the  decision  identified  above.  For  these  reasons  I
       decline to quash the decision.

    5) Having considered the written submissions made by  Mr  Malik  and  Mr
       Biggs on the issue of costs, both received on 2  February  2021,  and
       the further oral submissions from Mr Biggs  on  8  February  2021,  I
       consider that both parties have  been  partially  successful  in  the
       judicial review challenge and in these  circumstances,  and  applying
       the authorities considered in M v Mayor and Burgesses of  the  London
       Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 595 and the principles  enunciated
       in that authority and Bhata & Ors v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  895  and  R
       (Munyua) v SSHD (Parties responsibility to agree costs)  [2017]  UKUT
       78 (IAC), I consider it appropriate to make no order as to costs.

    6) Permission to appeal is refused because the Tribunal did not arguably
       err in law in concluding that the applicant had a  procedurally  fair
       opportunity to address the respondent's concerns in  respect  of  the
       applicant's  intentions,  despite  finding  that   there   had   been
       procedural unfairness in respect  of  the  respondent's  reliance  on
       paragraph 320(7A), or in its decision not  to  quash  the  challenged
       decision. The respondent's assessment of the  applicant's  intentions
       under 245ZO(i) was separate from  and  independent  of  the  unlawful
       elements of the decision. Given the absence of any probative evidence
       relating to the nature of Sufi Naat singing,  the  Tribunal  did  not
       arguably err in law in concluding that  the  respondent's  assessment
       was one rationally open to her, subject to the unlawful  elements  of
       her decision summarised at (3) above.




      Signed:     D.Blum


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


      Dated:           8 February 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
08/02/2021

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                 JR/177/2020


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





            The Queen on the application of Noor Sultan Siddiqui
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has  not
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr M Biggs of Counsel, instructed  by  My  Legal
Solicitors, on  behalf  of  the  applicant  and  Mr  Z  Malik,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a remote hearing at Field House, London on 12 October 2020.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is  granted  in  limited
part

Background


   1. The applicant, a male national of Pakistan born on  29  October  1981,
      challenges  the  respondent's  decision  of  22  October  2019   ("the
      Decision") refusing him entry clearance as a Tier 5 (Religious Worker)
      Migrant, a category within the Points Based System (PBS) part  of  the
      immigration rules.


   2. On 6 October 2016 the applicant applied for entry clearance as a  Tier
      5 (Religious Worker) Migrant to work as a Sufi Naat singer employed by
      the International Naat Association, based in Manchester. The nature of
      Sufi Naat singing is a matter in  dispute  but  it  can  generally  be
      described as religious singing, and  this  was  a  term  used  by  the
      applicant in his  application.  Entry  clearance  was  granted  on  19
      October 2016, valid until 14 November 2018. The applicant entered  the
      UK pursuant to this entry clearance and returned  to  Pakistan  on  23
      February 2017. On 23 May 2018 the respondent curtailed  the  grant  of
      leave to enter so as to expire on 8 July 2018. The  applicant's  leave
      was curtailed because he ceased to be employed  by  the  International
      Naat Association.


   3. On 7 November 2018 the applicant applied for entry clearance as a Tier
      5 (Religious Worker) Migrant. He was interviewed on  5  December  2018
      and the application was refused on 13 December 2018. The basis of  the
      refusal included a finding that the applicant denied having a Facebook
      page in his December 2018 interview when it was believed he  did  have
      one. In  his  interview  the  applicant  also  stated  that  he  never
      attempted to  get  married  in  the  UK,  but  this  was  said  to  be
      inconsistent with chat logs seen on the relevant Facebook  account  (a
      public link was provided in respect of the relevant messages found  on
      a Facebook page). In  his  interview  the  applicant  was  also  asked
      whether he had ever declared employment in any other field,  to  which
      he said "no, I haven't." In a previous visit visa application made  in
      2016, which had been refused, the applicant declared his profession as
      "Project Development Manager".  The  respondent  considered  that  the
      applicant had made misrepresentations and the application was  refused
      under paragraph 320(7A) of the immigration rules.


   4. On 15 January 2019 the  applicant  submitted  a  combined  Pre-Action-
      Protocol Letter and request for Administrative Review challenging  the
      13 December 2018 decision. On 7 February 2019 the respondent agreed to
      reconsider the application. A further interview took place on 11 April
      2019. The application was refused on 28 August  2019.  The  respondent
      noted that the applicant's Certificate of Sponsorship (COS) was issued
      in the Tier 5 (Religious Worker) category. The COS  detailed  his  job
      title as "Sufi Naat Singer" and the relevant  Job  Type  used  in  the
      application, as detailed in Appendix J of the immigration  rules,  was
      '3413 Actors, entertainers and presenters'. The respondent noted  that
      paragraph 111(d)(i) of Appendix A of the  immigration  rules  (dealing
      with the attributes for Tier 5 (Temporary  Worker)  Migrants,  and  in
      particular,  the  requirements  for  a  valid  COS  reference  number)
      required the COS to have been issued to  perform  'religious  duties',
      but the  Job  Type  detailed  in  the  application  did  not,  in  the
      respondent's view, relate to anything covered by  'religious  duties'.
      Whilst the respondent accepted that Sufi Naat singing was  devotional,
      given the job code and job description  provided  by  the  applicant's
      sponsor she was not satisfied that the work the sponsor  intended  the
      applicant to do could be described as "religious duties" as opposed to
      working as a cultural performer, which would require a COS  issued  in
      the Tier 5 (Creative) category.


   5. The respondent additionally found that the applicant had not submitted
      any financial documentation in order to evidence that he had  been  in
      possession of funds equivalent to �945 for 90 consecutive days.


   6. The respondent also maintained that, during the applicant's  interview
      on 11 April 2019, the answers he gave regarding his  proposed  working
      hours were vague and he appeared  to  be  unclear  about  his  working
      pattern and location  of  work  until  his  arrival  in  the  UK.  The
      respondent was not satisfied that the applicant  demonstrated  how  he
      proposed to work his contracted 30 hours per  week  given  his  answer
      that there would be one program every 12 days. The respondent expected
      that a genuine Tier 5 Religious Worker would have a wider knowledge of
      his working times and work locations before accepting  the  role.  The
      respondent further noted that the applicant had been employed by Ascon
      Engineers in 2012, even though he stated in his 2019 interview that he
      had been employed by them from 2015 to 2016. The respondent found that
      the applicant had not been honest about his previous work history  and
      this left the respondent in doubt that the  applicant  was  accurately
      presenting his personal circumstances in Pakistan, and  therefore  his
      intentions concerning his entry to the UK.


   7. The respondent then noted that in his  2019  interview  the  applicant
      said he had previously worked in the UK as a Tier 5  Religious  Worker
      with the International Naat Association, that he worked for  them  for
      just 2 months and that when the work finished he returned to  Pakistan
      and "... they were never back in touch with  me."  The  applicant  was
      then asked why the Association cancelled his  visa.  He  answered,  "I
      don't know I had no contact with them after that." He was then  asked,
      "did you try and get in contact with them?"  The  applicant  answered,
      "No I didn't try I had  time  and  work  here  so  I  felt  it  wasn't
      necessary." The interviewer then asked,  "so  what  happened  after  2
      months did you return after your own accord or did they tell you  they
      no longer need you?" The applicant answered, "I returned from work  as
      we do routinely then they never got back in touch with me."  According
      to checks  undertaken  by  the  Home  Office  the  International  Naat
      Association made contact with the applicant and informed  him  of  the
      reasons why they were not inviting him back to the UK. The  respondent
      maintained  that  the  applicant  had  been  given  opportunities   in
      interview to explain the background to this but that he chose not  to.
      The respondent considered  the  applicant's  answers  to  be  a  false
      misrepresentation.


   8. The respondent  additionally  considered  there  to  be  discrepancies
      between the job advert for the position occupied by the applicant  and
      the applicant's employment contract with his new sponsor in respect of
      the annual salary, the nature of the advert (which indicated that  the
      job was permanent and did not state that it was  accepting  applicants
      from overseas), and  in  respect  of  the  job  location  (the  advert
      indicated that the  job  location  was  in  London  but  the  contract
      indicated that the applicant would perform at "mosques  all  over  the
      United Kingdom"). These discrepancies led the respondent to doubt  the
      credibility of the proposed employment. The application was  therefore
      refused under paragraph 245ZO(i) of the immigration  rules  (requiring
      an applicant to genuinely intend to undertake the role recorded by the
      COS Checking Service) because the respondent was  not  satisfied  that
      the applicant was genuinely seeking to undertake the proposed role.


   9. On 20 September 2019  the  applicant  served  a  combined  Pre-Action-
      Protocol Letter and application for Administrative Review  challenging
      this decision. On 22 October 2019 the respondent amended the reasoning
      in the 28 August 2019 decision, which was otherwise in the same  terms
      as the decision dated 28 August 2019, by adding a sentence relying  on
      paragraph 320(7A) of the immigration rules at the end of the paragraph
      dealing with the answers given by him in  interview  relating  to  his
      previous employment with the International Naat Association.


  10. At the end of the Decision the respondent stated,


           If you believe that the decision made  by  the  Entry  Clearance
           Officer was incorrect you may apply for an Administrative Review
           of your case.


  11.  The  Decision  then  provided  information  about  the   process   of
      Administrative Review, the options available to the applicant and  how
      to explore those options.


  12. It is the respondent's position that her decision attracted a  further
      right to Administrative Review. The applicant did not submit a further
      application for Administrative Review and instead served a Pre-Action-
      Protocol Letter on the respondent dated 24 November  2019  challenging
      the lawfulness of the Decision, and subsequently lodged this  judicial
      review claim.

Summary of legal challenge

  13. The applicant's legal challenge can be summarised as follows.


              i) Ground 1: The Decision was  procedurally  unfair,  both  in
                 respect of the respondent's reliance on  paragraph  320(7A)
                 and in respect of  the  respondent's  conclusion  that  the
                 applicant provided  false  information  in  evaluating  the
                 genuineness of his proposed employment generally.


             ii) Ground 2:  The  respondent  acted  Wednesbury  unreasonably
                 and/or failed to  provide  legally  adequate  reasoning  in
                 concluding that the  applicant  fell  for  refusal  without
                 adequately considering whether the applicant was  dishonest
                 in providing incorrect information when  relying  paragraph
                 320(7A).


            iii) Ground 3: The respondent misinterpreted or  misapplied  the
                 relevant  immigration   rules   (paragraph   245ZO(i)   and
                 paragraph 111(d)(i) of Appendix A),  and  acted  Wednesbury
                 unreasonably in  concluding  that  the  applicant  was  not
                 entitled to any points for the Certificate  of  Sponsorship
                 (COS) because the job code and description provided by  his
                 employer were for the creative sector and not in respect of
                 religious duties.


             iv) Ground 4: The respondent acted Wednesbury  unreasonably  by
                 concluding that she was not "satisfied on  the  balance  of
                 probabilities that [the applicant was] genuinely seeking to
                 undertake" his proposed employment for the reasons given in
                 the Decision.


  14. The applicant maintains that relief  should  not  be  refused  in  the
      Tribunal's  discretion  because  Administrative  Review  was  not   an
      adequate alternative remedy.


  15. In granting permission at the hearing of the renewed  application  for
      permission on 11 June 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Keith stated,


           The respondent arguably erred in law in treating the applicant's
           application  as  not  complying  with  paragraphs  245ZO(i)  and
           paragraph 111(d)(i), based on  her  view  that  the  role  of  a
           performer reciting devotional poems  dedicated  to  the  Prophet
           Mohammed could not properly fall within the  Tier  5  (Religious
           Worker) scheme; and in arguably failing  to  put  the  issue  of
           alleged deception to the applicant during interview. While there
           does not appear to be any 'sound recording' of  the  interviews,
           the respondent arguably erred in failing  to  provide  him  with
           evidence from her records, said to relate to correspondence from
           International Naat Association, without which  he  was  arguably
           unable to meet the allegations, beyond a  bare  denial.  I  also
           regard as arguable, at this stage of permission, that the avenue
           of Administrative Review would not provide  an  adequate  remedy
           where the applicant would be  seeking  to  overturn  a  decision
           already made about deception; and  in  circumstances  where  the
           respondent has made no disclosure of its records relating to its
           investigations. While I have granted permission on all  grounds,
           it remains open to the respondent to argue  at  the  substantive
           hearing that administrative review was an adequate  remedy.  All
           grounds will be considered at the substantive hearing.

  16. The Detailed Grounds of Defence were accompanied by a  statement  from
      Laura Barrett dated 29 July 2020. Ms Barrett  is  an  Entry  Clearance
      Officer. Her statement refers to a telephone call she had on 17  April
      2019 with Mr Muhammad Khushtar of the International Naat  Association,
      the applicant's former employer. Exhibited to her statement is a  note
      of that telephone call. The note indicated that Mr Khushtar  contacted
      the applicant after he returned to Pakistan following  the  first  two
      months of his employment with the International Naat  Association.  Mr
      Khushtar informed the applicant that, as a result of his  conduct,  he
      was not welcome back and was asked to return his BRP card. Mr Khushtar
      said he sent the applicant a letter and told him about  concerns  that
      the applicant may be planning to marry in the UK.


  17. The applicant was granted limited permission to amend his  grounds  to
      reflect the concerns of Judge Keith in granting permission to  proceed
      with the judicial review challenge and to engage with the issue of the
      availability of an alternative remedy, and to serve a statement  dated
      17 August 2020. He was refused  permission  to  the  extent  that  the
      amended grounds challenged the lawfulness of the Administrative Review
      procedure as this could not be pursued in the  Upper  Tribunal[1].  In
      his  statement  the  applicant  asserted,  inter  alia,  that  he  had
      indirectly received a message in 2017 from Muhammad Khushtar to return
      his BRP (Biometric Residence Permit) as this was required as  part  of
      the  employers  responsibilities,  and  he  denied  having  ever  been
      informed that his employment was  being  terminated  due  to  concerns
      regarding his character and intentions.  The  applicant  claimed  that
      Muhammad Khushtar had lied in an effort to tarnish his reputation.


The applicant's submissions

  18. I summarise the applicant's submissions,  as  detailed  in  Mr  Biggs'
      skeleton argument and his oral submissions.

Alternative remedy

  19. The applicant contends that the availability of Administrative  Review
      was not an adequate/effective/suitable  (all  of  which  are  used  as
      synonyms) alternative remedy to judicial  review  (relying  on,  inter
      alia, Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, at [3], [35], [82], [91], and
      [95] - [98]; R (on the application of Cart) & R (on the application of
      MR (Pakistan) (Appellant) v The Upper  Tribunal  &  SSHD  (Respondent)
      [2011] UKSC 28, Kay v Lambeth LBC [2006] UKHL 10, and R(SSHD) v First-
      tier Tribunal (IAC) (Litigation Privilege; First-tier Tribunal) [2018]
      UKUT 00243 (IAC), at  [26]).  In  evaluating  whether  an  alternative
      remedy is 'adequate' or effective it is necessary to  ask  whether  it
      provides a procedure for determining the disputed issues in  a  manner
      compatible with the applicant's common law constitutional  entitlement
      to access  justice,  the  demands  of  procedural  fairness,  and  the
      procedural demands of any human rights  in  play.  I  was  invited  to
      consider whether an adequate remedy existed in respect of each of  the
      substantive issues in contention. If  some  of  the  issues  could  be
      adequately considered by way of  an  alternative  remedy,  but  others
      could not, I was invited to consider whether it would  be  appropriate
      in all the circumstances to allow all the issues to be  determined  in
      the judicial review proceedings.


  20. In respect of  the  Administrative  Review  procedure,  the  applicant
      contends that it is a "limited and flawed system". He contends,


           a) that the system posits the respondent as  judge  in  her  own
              cause and therefore lacks sufficient independence;


           b)  the  Administrative  Review  decision  maker  has  no  legal
              training or knowledge and it  is  not  appropriate  for  this
              decision-maker to determine issues  that  depend  upon  legal
              arguments;

           c) the grounds that  must  be  satisfied  before  Administrative
              Review is granted are very limited and don't match the  legal
              requirements of the judicial review grounds advanced in  this
              case; although a "case working error" includes, in respect of
              paragraph 320(7A) in the instant  case,  the  view  that  the
              initial decision was "wrong" and permits new evidence  to  be
              provided to address this, the  definition  excludes  reliance
              upon procedural fairness, or indeed any of the other  grounds
              of review advanced in this application. Administrative Review
              cannot  accommodate  the   applicant's   criticism   of   the
              dishonesty finding because there is  no  facility  to  obtain
              disclosure of the 'checks' and  no  facility  to  assess  the
              fairness of the interview. There is also said to be no  right
              to contend that the decision under Administrative  Review  is
              not in accordance with the law.


           d) Even when new evidence  can  be  provided,  it  can  only  be
              advanced  on  paper.  Administrative   Review   is   not   an
              adversarial  procedure   allowing   the   applicant   to   be
              represented and Article 8's procedural  aspect  calls  for  a
              procedure for hearing oral evidence when necessary  in  order
              to provide an effective and procedurally fair remedy.


           e) The time limit for  applying  for  Administrative  Review  is
              short, usually only 14 days, or 28 days  in  this  case,  and
              there is no scope for supplementing submissions and  evidence
              submitted within that time by  further  materials.  Moreover,
              where an applicant requires disclosure of important materials
              in  order  to  have  a  fair  chance  at   success   in   the
              Administrative Review there is no time,  nor  procedure,  for
              such materials to be requested and provided.


  21. The applicant contends  that  he  acted  reasonably  in  not  pursuing
      Administrative Review in light of his two  previous  applications.  He
      was entitled in the circumstances to conclude that the respondent  was
      not prepared to address this challenge to the Decision with  an  "open
      mind"  and  he  had  spent  enough  time,  money  and  effort  on  the
      applications. The option of Administrative Review would not have cured
      the procedural unfairness that partly stemmed from the failure of  the
      respondent to disclose  the  information  upon  which  she  relied  to
      support her finding of dishonesty and her finding that the applicant's
      proposed employment was not genuine. If the Tribunal  were  to  refuse
      relief or permission in this case it would  be  acting  unlawfully  by
      failing to  respect  the  applicant's  constitutional  entitlement  to
      effective access to justice, and  to  a  procedurally  fair  decision-
      making process.

Ground 1

  22. Mr Biggs relied on a number of authorities including, inter alia, R  v
      Hackney London Borough Council, ex p Decordova (1995) 27  HLR  108,  R
      (Citizens UK) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1812, R v SSHD ex p Doody  [1994]
      1 AC 531, and Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 to support his submission
      that the applicant was entitled to be addressed  of  the  respondent's
      concerns relating to his honesty and his intentions. Fairness required
      the allegations of dishonesty to be put to the applicant in advance of
      the decision and for there to be adequate disclose  of  material  upon
      which the respondent relied to enable the applicant to deal with those
      allegations. The applicant provided a response to  the  allegation  of
      dishonesty in his witness statement  dated  17  August  2020  and  his
      explanation was plausible. Nor was such a duty confined to allegations
      of dishonesty (re HK (An Infant) [1966] 2 QB 617, Gaima v SSHD  [1989]
      Imm  A.R.  527).  There  was  nothing  impractical  about  giving  the
      applicant notice in advance of the respondent's  concerns  as  to  his
      credibility and honesty. The availability of the Administrative Review
      procedure could not  cure  any  procedural  unfairness.  Although  new
      evidence could be provided in  the  Administrative  Review  procedure,
      this was insufficient to repair what would otherwise be a procedurally
      unfair decision and  the  ability  to  provide  further  evidence  was
      illusionary given the absence of any provision to  obtain  disclosure.
      The applicant did not have a fair opportunity  of  responding  to  the
      reasons in the Decision without adequate disclosure  of  the  evidence
      supporting those reasons, which were only provided belatedly.


  23. Mr Biggs submits that the duty to provide the applicant with the  gist
      of the case that he had to answer, including the concerns underpinning
      the respondent's view  that  the  applicant's  proposed  job  was  not
      genuine, extended in this case to  the  material  disclosed  with  the
      Detailed Grounds of Defence, and in particular, the  record  of  "Home
      Office checks". An Administrative Review would  have  been  unable  to
      cure the procedural fairness as the applicant was  not  provided  with
      the information and/or documents necessary for him to  fairly  respond
      to the respondent's allegations in advance of the Decision or in  time
      to apply for Judicial Review.

Ground 2

  24. Mr Biggs contends that  a  finding  of  deception  should  mirror  the
      "anxious  scrutiny"  approach  applicable  in  respect  of   decisions
      concerning  asylum  and  human  rights,  and  that  this  approach  is
      consistent with R(Giri) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  784,  at  [32].  The
      sentence  in  the  Decision  immediately   before   the   respondent's
      conclusion referring to  paragraph  320(7A)  indicated  that  she  was
      unclear as to the reason for the provision of false  information,  and
      before that she irrationally  expressed  certainty  as  to  facts  the
      applicant was not able to challenge. If it was  "not  clear"  why  the
      applicant provided what was considered to be  inaccurate  information,
      it could not reasonably and lawfully be concluded that the reason  was
      dishonesty.


  25. Nor was it rational to conclude that the applicant behaved dishonestly
      on the basis that the  "checks"  had  "confirmed"  that  the  previous
      employer had contacted and informed the applicant of the  reasons  why
      he was not being invited back. A rational decision maker would have to
      conclude those "checks" did not confirm anything  at  all,  not  least
      because the applicant was given no opportunity  to  comment  upon  the
      information that was being implicitly refer  to  (i.e.  the  telephone
      conversation  between  Mohammed  Khushtar  and  Laura   Barrett,   and
      presumably the enquiries that follow that conversation referred to  in
      the 18 April 2019 CRS note). In reliance on Balajigari  the  applicant
      contends that it was an error of law and unreasonable for a  decision-
      maker  to  proceed  from  concerns  giving  rise  to  a  suspicion  of
      dishonesty to the conclusion that there had  been  dishonesty  without
      considering and determining why incorrect information  may  have  been
      given.


  26. Nor did the respondent make any specific findings that  the  applicant
      behaved dishonesty (applying AA Nigeria v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773) in
      respect of the key matters  supporting  the  refusal  under  paragraph
      320(7A). The only reference to dishonesty related to  the  applicant's
      previous work history and there was no similar finding in  respect  of
      the other factors relied upon. There was therefore a failure  to  make
      an  adequate  and  adequately  reasoned  finding  in  respect  of  the
      applicant's alleged dishonesty.  Nor  could  the  respondent  rely  on
      paragraph  320(7A)  in  respect  of  her  concerns  relating  to   the
      applicant's previous work history given the structure of the  decision
      and the fact that the applicant's earlier work history in Pakistan was
      immaterial to the application.


Ground 3

  27. The applicant contends that the respondent was  "wholly  unreasonable"
      to doubt that the applicant was a successful Sufi Naat singer and that
      she  failed  to  consider,  as  a  material  consideration,  that  the
      applicant was previously granted entry clearance as a Sufi Naat singer
      in the same Tier 5 category. The inconsistent  treatment  in  contrast
      with the applicant's earlier successful  entry  clearance  application
      needed to be explained. Given that the applicant was being employed by
      a mosque, which would have no reason to employ "a cultural performer",
      it was irrational to conclude that his role  was  not  in  respect  of
      "religious duties". Any reasonable understanding of the  nature  of  a
      Sufi Naat singer had to recognise that it  is  a  form  of  devotional
      singing and fell within the definition of "religious duties".  It  was
      therefore unreasonable to say that the  proposed  work  did  not  fall
      within the scope of the Tier 5 (Religious Worker) category.  Moreover,
      properly interpreted and applying the principles enunciated  in  Mahad
      [2009]  UKSC  16,  the  concept  of  "religious  duties"   under   the
      immigration rules, with particular reference to  paragraph  111(d)  of
      Appendix A, encompassed Sufi Naat singing.

Ground 4

  28. The respondent's conclusion  that  the  applicant  was  not  genuinely
      seeking to undertake his employment with the Hounslow Jamia Masjid and
      Islamic Centre was Wednesbury unreasonable as the "discrepancies" upon
      which the  respondent  relied  were  not  significant  and  could  not
      constitute sufficient grounds to render the other  grounds  of  review
      immaterial. They provided  no  rational  basis  for  the  respondent's
      decision. The respondent's concerns relating to the alleged  vagueness
      of the applicant's answers regarding his working  hours,  his  working
      pattern and location, were adequately addressed in the 15 January 2019
      Administrative   Review   application   which    resulted    in    the
      reconsideration  of  the  application   for   entry   clearance.   The
      respondent,  it  is  submitted,  ignore  these   representations   and
      therefore  failed  to  consider  material  matters.  The   applicant's
      previous work history was also relevant to his intentions but this was
      not considered by the respondent. A similar point was made in  respect
      of the applicant's answers in his first interview. In light of all the
      representations and all the material before the respondent  there  was
      said  to  be  an  inadequate  basis  for  her  conclusion  as  to  the
      genuineness of the applicant's proposed employment.


  29. The  November  2019  Pre-Action-Protocol  Letter  explained  that  the
      sponsor complied with the resident  labour  market  test  by  slightly
      increasing the advertised salary as this would  incentivise  potential
      employees within the resident labour market to apply for the position,
      and, as the advert was directed to the resident labour market, it  was
      natural and correct to state that it was  for  a  permanent  position.
      These points were not considered in the Decision.


  30. Neither the judicial review grounds nor Mr  Biggs'  skeleton  argument
      dealt with the refusal of entry clearance  based  on  the  applicant's
      failure to achieve  the  points  necessary  to  meet  the  maintenance
      requirements in Appendix C of the immigration rules. In  his  response
      to Mr Malik's submissions and in further written  submissions  he  was
      permitted to make following the hearing Mr Biggs submitted that  there
      was no need for applicant to demonstrate that he held �945 for 90 days
      in his bank account because his sponsor was A-rated and  indicated  in
      the  application  form  that  it  would  maintain  the  applicant,  as
      permitted by paragraphs 8 - 9 of Appendix C.  For  reasons  that  will
      become apparent it is not necessary for me to set out his  submissions
      in any detail.

The respondent's submissions

  31. I summarise the respondent's submissions, as detailed  in  Mr  Malik's
      skeleton argument and his oral submissions.

Alternative remedy


  32. The Tribunal should decline to entertain  the  judicial  review  claim
      without considering its merits on  the  grounds  that  an  alternative
      remedy  could  have  been  pursued.  The  Decision  was  an  "eligible
      decision" as  defined  in  paragraph  AR5.2(a)  of  Appendix  AR  (the
      Appendix of the immigration rules dealing with Administrative Review).
      It was therefore open to the applicant  to  apply  for  Administrative
      Review on the basis that the respondent made a  "case  working  error"
      (paragraphs AR2.3 and AR2.11).  A  "case  working  error"  included  a
      situation where the immigration rules are incorrectly  applied.  Under
      paragraphs AR2.4(a) and AR2.11(a) it was  open  to  the  applicant  to
      adduce further  evidence  in  support  of  the  Administrative  Review
      application, and a successful application could have resulted  in  the
      withdrawal of the respondent's decision.


  33. The respondent submits, in light of the  Explanatory  Memorandum  that
      accompanied the introduction of Appendix AR into the immigration rules
      and the timing of its introduction, and in light of the  abolition  of
      rights of appeal against refusals of  entry  clearance  and  leave  to
      remain (other than in respect of protection and human  rights  cases),
      and in light of the authority of Cart v Upper Tribunal [2011] UKSC 28,
      that it was "tolerably clear that administrative review  was  seen  by
      the legislature as providing a remedy against  refusals  in  cases  of
      this nature in substitute of a right of appeal." The  right  to  apply
      for Administrative Review was therefore sanctioned by Parliament as an
      alternative remedy to be used in cases of  this  nature,  and  as  the
      applicant chose not to apply for Administrative Review,  the  Tribunal
      should decline to entertain his judicial review claim.  This  approach
      was supported by the analysis of  the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in R (Sukwinder Singh) (JR/13615/2015).


  34. It is well settled that the issue as to the alternative remedy  is  to
      be assessed by reference to the situation at the date of the  impugned
      decision. If there  was  an  alternative  remedy  available  when  the
      impugned decision was taken, judicial review,  in  principle,  is  not
      available and an  Administrative  Review  application  could,  in  any
      event, be made under paragraph 34R(1)(c) of the immigration rules with
      an application for an extension of time.

Ground 1

  35. The precise content of the duty to act fairly varies according to  the
      particular decision-making context in which it falls to be applied (E-
      K (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517, at [27]),  and  what  the
      requirements of fairness  demand  when  a  decision  has  to  be  made
      affecting the rights of individuals depends on the  character  of  the
      decision-making body, the kind of decision it  has  to  make  and  the
      statutory or other framework in  which  operates  (see  Lord  Bridge's
      judgment in Lloyd v McMahon [1987] AC 625).


  36. The respondent contends that reliance on Balajigari  is  misplaced  as
      the Court of Appeal was dealing with a decision made  under  paragraph
      322(5)  of  the  immigration  rules  that  related  to  a  refusal  of
      Indefinite Leave to Remain ("ILR"). Among the reasons  for  concluding
      that, as a matter of procedural  fairness,  an  individual  should  be
      given an opportunity to respond to a suspicion  that  they  have  been
      dishonest before the SSHD concludes  that  there  has  been  dishonest
      conduct, was that the consequences of the refusal  of  ILR  could  "be
      very  serious  indeed"  [53].  The  consequences,  with  reference  to
      particular provisions of the Immigration Act 1971 and the  Immigration
      Act 2014, were considered at [81] and included the person committing a
      criminal offence if they remained in  the  UK  without  leave,  severe
      restrictions on their right to work and rent accommodation and to have
      a bank account, restrictions on holding a driving licence  and  access
      to medical treatment. Although this applicant may face a 10  year  ban
      on respect of further entry clearance applications it was open to  him
      to make a fresh application adducing  any  evidence  relevant  to  the
      issue of dishonesty and this evidence would be fully considered.


  37. Mr Malik  distinguishes  present  case  from  Balajigari  because  the
      present applicant is not in the UK and the considerations set  out  by
      Underhill LJ do not apply. Balajigari made no reference  to  cases  of
      entry clearance and  there  was  no  authority  to  suggest  that  the
      principles considered in Balajigari should be  extended  to  cover  an
      entry clearance application. Nor  was  there  any  obligation  on  the
      respondent to disclose the material on  which  a  decision  was  based
      prior to or at the time that the decision is made. Mehmood [2015] EWCA
      Civ 744, at [72], indicated that the 'gist' of the evidence had to  be
      provided in support of a decision, but there was  no  suggestion  that
      the actual evidence required disclosure.


  38. Mr Malik further submits that, unlike the  appellants  in  Balajigari,
      the present applicant was able  to  adduce  further  evidence  at  the
      Administrative Review stage to show that the respondent's decision was
      incorrect. By analogy with Ashfaq (Balajigari:  appeals)  [2020]  UKUT
      226 (IAC), the ability of the applicant to adduce further evidence  at
      the Administrative Review  stage  could  correct  any  defect  in  the
      original decision-making process. There was no  procedural  unfairness
      in relation to the interview and it was conducted in  compliance  with
      guidance given in R(Mushtaq) v ECO (ECO  -  procedural  fairness)  IJR
      [2015] UKUT  224  (IAC)  and  R(Anjum)  v  ECO  (entrepreneur-fairness
      generally) [2017] UKUT 406 (IAC).

Grounds 2, 3 and 4

  39. The respondent  contends  that,  applying  a  Wednesbury  unreasonable
      approach, her decision was one she was reasonably  entitled  to  reach
      for the reasons given. In particular, she was  entitled  to  find  the
      applicant answers in interview to be unsatisfactory and to  find  that
      they were vague and unclear as to his proposed working hours,  working
      pattern and location of work. He was  unable  to  demonstrate  how  he
      proposed to work for  the  contracted  30  hours  per  week,  and  the
      discrepancies in respect of his employment by Ascon Engineers entitled
      her  to  doubt  that  he  had  accurately   presented   his   personal
      circumstances.


  40. The evidence set out in Laura  Barrett's  witness  statement  and  the
      exhibited telephone note showed that the applicant's  former  employer
      informed  him  that  his  services  were  not   required.   This   was
      inconsistent with the  information  given  by  the  applicant  in  his
      interview that there was no such contact. The applicant's focus on the
      term "not entirely clear" had to read in its context;  the  respondent
      was saying that the applicant had misrepresented facts and  there  was
      deception, but the motivation for  the  deception  was  "not  entirely
      clear".


  41. There were material discrepancies  between  the  job  advert  and  the
      employment contract namely;


     a) The advert stated an annual salary of �21,000 whereas the contract
        stated an annual salary �19,500;


     b) The advert stated that the job was "permanent" and did not state
        that applications from overseas were accepted whereas the
        applicant, as recorded in the contract, was a resident of Pakistan;
        and


     c) The advert stated that the job location was "London" whereas the
        contract required the services to be provided "all over the United
        Kingdom".


  42. It was rational for the respondent to conclude that the applicant  was
      not genuinely seeking to work on the proposed role and  that  he  made
      false representations in his interview. This conclusion was rationally
      open to the respondent even if her findings  of  dishonesty  were  not
      justified.


  43. The respondent was rationally entitled to conclude that the  SOC  Code
      and the job description used in the applicant's application related to
      those intending to work in the creative sector and that the  applicant
      should have made an application under the Tier 5 (Creative)  category.
      There was no evidence that devotional singing amounted  to  "religious
      duties"  and,  given  that  it  was  incumbent  on  the  applicant  to
      demonstrate that he met the requirements  of  the  immigration  rules,
      there was no proper basis to make a decision in the applicant's favour
      in the absence of probative evidence such as that from an expert. This
      Tribunal did not have the precise evidence that had  been  before  the
      ECO  in  respect  of  the  applicant's  earlier  successful   Tier   5
      application and it was open to take a point  in  a  later  application
      that had not been taken in an earlier one. In respect to the principle
      of 'consistency', Mr Malik drew my attention to Chirairo,  R  (on  the
      application of) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 77.


  44. Mr Malik submitted  that  the  respondent  independently  refused  the
      application on the  basis  that  the  applicant  failed  to  meet  the
      requirements for the scoring of points for maintenance under paragraph
      245ZO(c) of the immigration rules, with reference to paragraphs 8-9 of
      Appendix C. In further written submissions that he  was  permitted  to
      make following the hearing Mr Malik contended  that  the  requirements
      that the applicant had to have a certain level of funds in his account
      over a particular period of time was obligatory for all applicants and
      that he did not meet this requirements. For reasons that  will  become
      apparent it is not necessary for me to  deal  any  further  with  this
      submission.

Relevant legislative framework

  45. The applicant seeks entry clearance under Tier 5 of the  Points  Based
      System (PBS) as a Temporary Worker, within the particular  subcategory
      of Religious Worker.  Paragraph  245ZO(a)  of  the  immigration  rules
      requires that an applicant must not fall for refusal under the general
      grounds of  refusal.  Paragraph  245ZO(b)  of  the  immigration  rules
      requires an applicant to have been awarded  a  minimum  of  30  points
      under paragraphs 105 to 112 of  Appendix  A,  and  paragraph  245ZO(c)
      requires an applicant to have been awarded minimum of 10 points  under
      paragraphs 8 to 9 of Appendix C.


  46. Paragraph 245ZO(i) reads, in material part,


           Unless the applicant is sponsored in the  Seasonal  Worker  sub-
           category of the Tier 5 (Temporary Worker), the  Entry  Clearance
           Officer or Immigration Officer must be satisfied that:  (i)  the
           applicant genuinely intends to  undertake,  and  is  capable  of
           undertaking, the role recorded by the Certificate of Sponsorship
           Checking Service; and (ii)  the  applicant  will  not  undertake
           employment in the United Kingdom other than under the  terms  of
           paragraph 245ZP(f)(iii), [...]


  47. Paragraph 245ZO(j) states,


           To support the  assessment  in  paragraph  245ZO(i),  the  Entry
           Clearance  Officer  or  Immigration  Officer  may:  (i)  request
           additional information and evidence, and refuse the  application
           if the information or evidence is not  provided.  Any  requested
           documents must be received by the Home  Office  at  the  address
           specified in the request within 28 calendar days of the date the
           request is sent, and  (ii)  request  the  applicant  attends  an
           interview, and refuse the application if the applicant fails  to
           comply with any such  request  without  providing  a  reasonable
           explanation.

  48. Paragraph 111(d) of Appendix A states, in material part,


           In addition, a Certificate of Sponsorship reference number  will
           only be considered to be valid:
           ...


           (d) where the Certificate of Sponsorship Checking Service  entry
           shows that the Certificate of Sponsorship has been issued in the
           Religious Workers subcategory, if the entry confirms:


                 (i) that  the  applicant  is  being  sponsored  to  perform
                 religious duties, which:


                       (1) must  be  work  which  is  within  the  Sponsor's
                       organisation,   or   directed   by   the    Sponsor's
                       organisation,


                       (2) may include non pastoral work, and


                       (3) does not include work which falls under the  role
                       of a minister of religion, as set  out  in  paragraph
                       169(i) of these Rules


  49. The COS provided by the applicant's sponsor in the Tier  5  (Religious
      Worker) category detailed  his  Standard  Occupational  Classification
      (SOC) code as 'Job Type 3413 Actors, entertainers and presenters'. The
      following is contained in Appendix J of the immigration  rules,  which
      sets out the skill level and appropriate  salary  rate  for  jobs,  in
      respect of Job Type 3413;


           Example job tasks:
           . studies script,  play  or  book  and  prepares  and  rehearses
        interpretation;
           . assumes character  created  by  a  playwright  or  author  and
           communicates this to an audience;
           . performs singing, comedy, acrobatic,  illusion  and  conjuring
        routines;
           . trains  animals  to  perform  entertaining  routines  and  may
        perform with them;
           . introduces and presents radio and television programmes, reads
           news bulletins and makes announcements;
           . conducts interviews and prepares reports for news  broadcasts,
           current affairs programmes and documentaries;
           . plays pre-recorded  music  at  nightclubs,  discotheques,  and
        private functions.


           Related job titles:
           . Actor
           . Disc jockey
           . Entertainer
           . Presenter (broadcasting)
           . Singer


           Salary rates:
           New entrant: �20,400
           Experienced worker: �25,300


  50. Paragraph 320 of the immigration rules contains a  list  of  mandatory
      grounds of refusal of entry clearance,  including  paragraph  320(7A),
      which is in the following terms:


           Where false representations have been made or false documents or
           information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
           application, and whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge),
           or material facts have not been disclosed, in  relation  to  the
           application or in order to obtain documents from  the  Secretary
           of  State  or  a  third  party  required  in  support   of   the
           application.

  51. Paragraph 320(7B)(d)(ii) of the immigration rules provides that, where
      an applicant has previously breached the immigration  rules  by  using
      deception in an entry clearance  application,  they  will  be  refused
      entry clearance unless the  deception  occurred  more  than  10  years
      previously.


  52. According to the definitions in the immigration rules  'deception'  in
      paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  immigration  rules  means  "making  false
      representations or submitting false documents) whether or not material
      to the application), or failing to disclose material facts.


  53. Appendix AR to the immigration rules sets out the  provisions  of  the
      Administrative Review procedure. AR2.3 reads:

           The eligible decision will  be  reviewed  to  establish  whether
           there is a case working  error,  either  as  identified  in  the
           application for administrative  review,  or  identified  by  the
           Reviewer in the course of conducting the administrative review.


  54. According to AR2.11(a)(i) a 'case working error' includes a  situation
      where the original decision maker's decision to refuse an  application
      on the basis of paragraph 320(7A) was incorrect.


  55. AR5.2(a) indicates that, with certain exceptions that are not material
      to this challenge, an eligible decision is a refusal of an application
      for entry clearance  made  on  or  after  6th  April  2015  under  the
      immigration rules.


  56. AR2.4 reads, in material part:

           The Reviewer will not consider any evidence that was not  before
           the original decision maker except where: (a) evidence that  was
           not  before  the  original  decision  maker  is   submitted   to
           demonstrate that a case working error as  defined  in  paragraph
           AR2.11 (a), (b) or (c) has been made; [...]

Was Administrative Review in this case an adequate alternative remedy?

  57. There was no dispute between the parties as to  the  appropriate  test
      for assessing whether an alternative remedy  exists.  In  R(C)  v  FSA
      [2012] EWHC 1417 (Admin)[2], having considered a  number  of  relevant
      authorities, Silber J stated, at [89]:


           These cases show (a) that judicial review will  not  be  granted
           where there is an alternative remedy available as long as it  is
           in Lord Widgery's words in the Royco case [R v  Hillingdon  LBC,
           ex p Royco  Homes  Limited  [1974]  QB  720,  at  728]  "equally
           effective and convenient" or in Taylor LJ's words in Ferrero  [R
           v Birmingham City Council, ex parte Ferrero  Limited   [1993]  1
           All ER 530] "suitable to determine" the issue and  (b)  judicial
           review can be brought where the alternative remedy  is  in  Lord
           Denning's words in the Peachey case "nowhere near so convenient,
           beneficial and effectual."

  58. In R (on the application of Cart)  &  R  (on  the  application  of  MR
      (Pakistan) (Appellant) v The Upper Tribunal & SSHD (Respondent) [2011]
      UKSC 28 Lord Phillips stated, at [71]:

           The power of the High Court to conduct judicial review  subsists
           alongside these statutory provisions  for  appeal.  It  is  not,
           however, the practice of the Court to use  this  power  where  a
           satisfactory alternative remedy has been provided by Parliament.

  59. In Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  2009,  which  concerned  individuals
      accused of dishonesty in obtaining TOEIC English language  tests,  the
      alternative remedy (which  was  an  out-of-country  right  of  appeal)
      needed to be 'adequate' (at [35]). Then at [95] Underhill LJ stated:


           In my view Parliament cannot be  taken  to  have  intended  that
           access to judicial review should be unavailable in a case  where
           it is established that the statutory appeal procedure would  not
           afford effective access to justice.

  60.  In  R  (on  the  application  of  the  SSHD)  v  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  (Litigation  Privilege;  First-tier
      Tribunal) [2018] UKUT 00243 (IAC) the Tribunal referred, at  [23]  and
      [26], to the need for a "suitable alternative remedy."

  61. The words "adequate" and "effective" and "suitable" have all been used
      in the above authorities and  decisions  to  summarise  the  principle
      requirement of the alternative remedy. I accept Mr Biggs'  submission,
      which was not challenged by Mr Malik, that these  words  are  synonyms
      and do not disclose different tests. I will use  the  term  "adequate"
      for the remainder of this decision.

  62. Where an adequate alternative remedy exists the Tribunal or Court with
      a supervisory jurisdiction will not ordinarily allow an  applicant  to
      proceed by way of judicial review, save in  exceptional  circumstances
      (e.g. R (Christopher Willford) v FSA [2013] EWCA Civ 677, at [36]). In
      R (on the application of the SSHD) v First-tier Tribunal  (Immigration
      and Asylum Chamber) (Litigation Privilege; First-tier Tribunal) [2018]
      UKUT 00243 (IAC) the Tribunal stated, at [24]:

           Whether or not to entertain an application for  judicial  review
           is a matter that falls within the Upper  Tribunal's  discretion,
           applying well-known principles  that  apply  also  in  the  High
           Court. Where there is an alternative remedy it would only be  in
           the rarest of cases  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  consider
           exercising  its  jurisdiction  to  grant  permission  to   bring
           judicial review proceedings.

  63. Ultimately the Tribunal retains a discretion to entertain a claim  for
      judicial review, but whether it will do so in any given  case  depends
      on the nature of the dispute and the particular circumstances in which
      it arises.

  64. The Administrative Review procedure was introduced  by  HC  693,  laid
      before Parliament under s.3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971,  and  came
      into force on 20 October 2014. It  was  established  to  mitigate  the
      withdrawal of rights of appeal wrought by the Immigration Act 2014  in
      respect of a large number of immigration decisions and to allow for  a
      quick and cost-effective method  of  reviewing  those  decisions.  The
      Explanatory Memorandum that  was  part  of  HC  693,  as  laid  before
      Parliament, at paragraph 7.2, provided:


           Administrative review will  be  available  for  persons  refused
           leave to remain where they do not have a right  of  appeal.  The
           new administrative  review  process  will  resolve  case-working
           errors and will do so more quickly than the appeals  process  it
           replaces. The reviewer will  be  a  different  person  from  the
           original decision maker. The Home Office service standard is  to
           determine an administrative review application  within  28  days
           whereas the average time for a Points Based System appeal to  be
           concluded is 12 weeks.

  65. In R (Sukwindr Singh) v SSHD (JR/13615/2015) the Vice-President of the
      Upper Tribunal considered whether Administrative Review,  in  general,
      constitutes an alternative remedy available to an applicant  which  he
      should exhaust before bringing judicial review  proceedings.  Although
      the decision was a refusal of permission to apply for judicial  review
      rather than a substantive decision, the Vice-President certified  that
      his decision related to a matter of  general  importance  and  may  be
      cited. The Vice-President observed:

           While administrative review is pending there is an effect on the
            continuation of leave or of status under ss 3C and  3D  of  the
           Immigration Act 1971; and the Rules set out under four heads  at
           paragraph 2.2 of Appendix AR the possible outcome  decisions  of
           an application for administrative review. The decision on review
           may maintain a refusal but  for  reasons  different  from  those
           supporting the original decision.


           This process is in my judgment of a wholly  different  character
           from  the  informal  process  where  an  applicant  invites  the
           Secretary of State to reconsider a  decision  she  has  made.  A
           request of that sort, often made as a preliminary to  commencing
           a judicial review claim,  has  no  specific  structure  or  time
           limit, and indeed there is no clear entitlement to  request  it.
           If the request is made and the decision is left unchanged, there
           is no proper basis for saying that a new decision has been made.




           Administrative  review  under  Appendix  AR  is  different.   It
           provides a process by which an applicant is  entitled  to  raise
           the question whether the decision in his case was incorrect, and
           requires the Secretary of State to reach and communicate a  view
           on that. It is clear that if an unsuccessful applicant for leave
           began judicial review proceedings before applying for, or before
            receiving the result of, administrative review, he would be met
           by  the response that he had an alternative remedy available  to
           him in  the form  of  administrative  review,  which  he  should
           exhaust   before  bringing  judicial  review  proceedings.  That
           consideration,   the  fact  that  the  effects  of   a   pending
           administrative review are  prescribed, and  the  fact  that  the
           outcome of a review may be  adverse  to  the  applicant  but  in
           terms different from those of the  original decision all lead me
           to  the  conclusion  that,  where  there   has  been   a   valid
           application for  administrative  review  the  original  decision
           cannot be regarded as final. The final decision is that  on  the
           review. That  is  the  decision  that  is  the  subject  of  any
           challenge by judicial review, and that is the decision from  the
           date of which the passage of time for a judicial review claim is
           to be measured.

  66. It is apparent from the extract set  out  above,  and  from  paragraph
      AR5.2(a) of Appendix AR to the immigration rules,  that  the  Decision
      was an  "eligible  decision"  attracting  a  right  of  Administrative
      Review,  and  that  it  was  open  to  the  applicant  to  apply   for
      Administrative Review of the Decision on the basis that the respondent
      made  a  "case  working  error"  (paragraph  AR2.3  of  Appendix  AR).
      Moreover, under paragraphs AR2.4(a) and AR2.11(a) it was open  to  the
      applicant to adduce further evidence in support of any  Administrative
      Review application.

  67. Although the Administrative Review is carried out by the  respondent's
      own department it is not by the same person who made the decision  and
      the scope for assesses whether there has been a case working error  is
      sufficiently robust to ensure that a 'fresh pair of eyes'  is  brought
      to bear on the  application.  Parliament  did  not  consider  that  an
      independent judge was necessary to review  the  initial  decision  and
      judicial review is, in any event, available should issue be taken with
      the  reviewer's  assessment.  It  is  unclear   whether   the   person
      undertaking the Administrative Review has legal training or  not,  but
      proceeding on the basis that the person is not legally  trained,  this
      has insufficient bearing on the adequacy  of  the  procedure  provided
      that the person carrying out the Administrative Review  is  adequately
      trained or qualified. There was no evidence  that  the  Administrative
      Review procedure was not  manned  by  suitably  qualified  or  trained
      individuals and Mr Biggs did not suggest otherwise, and the  procedure
      enables the reviewer to consider  submissions  concerning  the  proper
      interpretation of the immigration rules. The reasons for the  decision
      will, in the majority of cases, speak for itself and any  unlawfulness
      in reaching the decision is amendable to a judicial review  challenge.
      Whilst the Administrative Review procedure is paper based and the time
      limits are relatively short, there is no reason why an applicant could
      not instruct legal representatives to draft  the  representations  and
      the time limits themselves are not, on their  face,  unlawfully  short
      such as to deny an applicant with an adequate remedy given the  stated
      purpose in the Explanatory Memorandum. So far as Mr  Biggs  relies  on
      Article 8 ECHR procedural rights, the Administrative Review  procedure
      is not designed  to  deal  with  human  rights  applications  and,  as
      accepted by Mr Biggs, Article 8 is not engaged in the present case.


  68. There is however merit in Mr Biggs' submission that the Administrative
      Review procedure may be inadequate in circumstances where an applicant
      is contending that procedural unfairness is directly relevant  to  and
      impacts upon a finding  of  dishonesty  and  where  the  applicant  is
      unable, due to the confines of the Administrative Review procedure, to
      effectively engage with the basis for the finding of dishonesty.


  69. A  material  reason  for  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  the
      applicant's alleged dishonesty in misrepresenting his contact with his
      previous UK employer following his return to  Pakistan.  The  Decision
      referred to "Home Office checks" that "confirmed" that the applicant's
      previous UK employer contacted him and informed him of the reasons why
      he was not being invited back to the  UK.  The  respondent  maintained
      that the applicant was "given opportunities to explain the  background
      on this" but that he chose not to  do  so.  Regardless  of  the  other
      reasons for the refusal of entry clearance, the respondent  relied  on
      this alleged false misrepresentation in refusing the  entry  clearance
      application.


  70. A central issue that the Administrative Review needed to consider  was
      whether the original decision-maker was correct in concluding that the
      applicant made a false misrepresentation in  his  2019  interview.  To
      determine this the reviewer would need to consider  the  circumstances
      in which the alleged false misrepresentation was  made  including  the
      manner in which the interview was conducted, the particular  questions
      he was asked, and the fact that the "checks" were not disclosed to the
      applicant. This however concerned issues of the procedural fairness of
      the  Decision  that  the  Administrative  Review  procedure  was   not
      adequately equipped to evaluate.


  71.  The Decision, at least in material part, relied on "checks" with  the
      International  Naat  Association  that  were  not  disclosed  to   the
      applicant prior to or at the time of the Decision and,  significantly,
      in  circumstances  where   there   was   no   mechanism   within   the
      Administrative Review procedure  through  which  the  applicant  could
      obtain  their  disclosure,   or   even   to   obtain   more   detailed
      particularisation of the alleged false misrepresentation. There is  no
      facility within the Administrative Review procedure for the  applicant
      to meaningfully engage with or respond to the respondent's  conclusion
      based on "checks" that he had neither seen nor  been  informed  about.
      The Decision was based  on  the  applicant's  answers  in  respect  of
      general questions concerning his  previous  employment  (question  37)
      that did not expressly put to him the content  of  the  "checks".  The
      applicant  could  not  meaningfully  offer  further  evidence  in   an
      application for Administrative Review if he did not know  the  details
      of the contact  that  his  former  employer  said  it  made  with  him
      concerning the reasons for the  termination  of  his  employment.  The
      definition of  "case  working  error"  in  AR.2.11  does  not  include
      reliance on procedural fairness and the applicant would not have  been
      able to contend that  the  conclusion  in  the  Decision  was  "wrong"
      because it was arrived at through an unfair  process,  a  particularly
      relevant consideration when assessing the existence of dishonesty.


  72. In circumstances where there  is  a  sufficient  evidential  basis  to
      support an assertion of procedural unfairness in  the  context  of  an
      allegation  of  dishonesty,  such  as  the  present  case  where   the
      respondent placed material reliance on "checks" the content or  nature
      of which were not put to  the  applicant  in  interview  or  otherwise
      meaningfully disclosed to him, and in the absence of  a  mechanism  in
      the Administrative Review procedure for obtaining either disclosure or
      a detailed summary of such evidence to enable  meaningful  submissions
      to be made by the applicant, I find  that  the  Administrative  Review
      procedure does not constitute an adequate alternative remedy.


  73. Mr Malik relies on R (G) v the Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2004] EWCA
      Civ 1731 in support of the proposition that a 'review' is an  adequate
      remedy in circumstances where Parliament has made clear its  intention
      that the 'review' should be pursued in place of judicial review.   The
      relevant statutory framework at that time gave a right to  only  apply
      for 'statutory  review'  of  a  decision  by  the  Immigration  Appeal
      Tribunal refusing permission to appeal a decision  of  an  immigration
      adjudicator, but the 'statutory review' assessment was paper based and
      without an opportunity to have any oral hearing. Whilst the  Court  of
      Appeal accepted that the 'statutory  review'  procedure  offered  less
      comprehensive protection that the traditional judicial  review  route,
      it concluded that the procedure as a whole nevertheless satisfactorily
      assured that the rights of those entitled to asylum  were  upheld  (at
      [23]). This was because asylum applicants had  their  cases  initially
      considered by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and,  if
      refused, they had a  right  of  appeal  before  a  properly  qualified
      adjudicator and dismissal of the  appeal  would  be  considered  by  a
      legally qualified member of the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  (supra).
      The same levels of protection do not apply in the  present  case  and,
      unlike  the  'statutory  review'  system,  the  Administrative  Review
      procedure is not equipped to adequately deal  with  an  allegation  of
      dishonesty  in  the  circumstances   described   above.   Whilst   the
      Administrative Review procedure will, as was observed in R  (Sukwinder
      Singh), constitute an adequate alternative remedy in the  overwhelming
      majority of cases, on the particular facts of this case  and  for  the
      reasons  given  I  find  that  it  did  not  constitute  an   adequate
      alternative remedy for this applicant.


  74. Both parties were in agreement that if  I  found  that  Administrative
      Review did not constitute an adequate alternative remedy in respect of
      one material element of the respondent's Decision  then  the  judicial
      review should consider all the points raised by the applicant.

Procedural fairness

  75. I will consider grounds 1 and 2 together as they both relate to issues
      of procedural fairness. The applicant contends that he was  unlawfully
      deprived of an opportunity to comment on the  respondent's  conclusion
      that he made misrepresentations in  his  entry  clearance  application
      interview that were dishonest and in respect of her concerns about the
      genuineness of the applicant's intentions. The respondent, it is said,
      acted in a procedurally unfair  manner  by  failing  to  disclose  the
      evidence supporting her conclusion prior to the  decision  being  made
      or, at the very least, failing to make  the  applicant  aware  of  the
      basis of her suspicion or the 'gist' of the evidence  supporting  that
      conclusion  and  giving  him  an  opportunity  to  give  a  meaningful
      response.


  76. Both parties relied on the authority of Balajigari. It is necessary to
      consider that authority in some detail. It concerned  the  refusal  of
      applications for ILR made by Tier 1  (General)  Migrants  because  the
      SSHD believed their presence in the UK was undesirable based on  their
      alleged dishonest conduct by either inflating  their  income  for  the
      purposes of immigration control or deflating their  stated  income  in
      order  to  reduce  their  tax  liability.  The  respondent  relied  on
      paragraph 322(5) of the immigration rules, part of the General Grounds
      for refusal in Part 9 of the immigration rules,  which  requires  that
      leave to remain should normally be refused if the conduct or character
      of a person makes it undesirable to permit them to remain in  the  UK.
      The 'Domestic Public law Challenges' advanced by the  appellants  were
      concerned with,  inter  alia,  the  exercise  of  discretion  and  the
      requirements of procedural fairness.


  77. With reference to paragraph 322(5) and within the context of  earnings
      discrepancies made to the Home office and HMRC, Underhill  LJ  stated,
      at [42]:


           "A discrepancy between the earnings declared to HMRC and to  the
           Home Office may justifiably give rise to a suspicion that it  is
           the result of dishonesty but it does not  by  itself  justify  a
           conclusion to that effect. What  it  does  is  to  call  for  an
           explanation. If an explanation once sought is  not  forthcoming,
           or is unconvincing, it may at that point be legitimate  for  the
           Secretary of State to infer dishonesty; but even  in  that  case
           the position is  not  that  there  is  a  legal  burden  on  the
           applicant to disprove dishonesty. The Secretary  of  State  must
           simply decide, considering the discrepancy in the light  of  the
           explanation (or lack of it), whether he is  satisfied  that  the
           applicant has been dishonest."

  78. At  [44]  Underhill  LJ  noted  that  the  allegations  based  on  the
      discrepancies in the tax  figures  submitted  by  the  applicants  was
      "serious" and that it  carried  "serious  consequences".  At  [51]  an
      assertion of dishonesty  was  described  as  "a  particularly  serious
      allegation going to a person's character."


  79. His Lordship considered the requirements  of  procedural  fairness  at
      [45] to [61].  He set out an extract from R(Citizens UK) v SSHD [2018]
      EWCA Civ 1812 which summarised the relevant principles:


        68.  That  the  common  law  will  'supply  the  omission   of   the
        legislature' has not been in doubt since Cooper v  Wandsworth  Board
        of Works (1863) 4 CB (NS) 180 (Byles J); see also  the  more  recent
        decision of the House of Lords in Lloyd v  McMahon  [1987]  AC  625.
        Accordingly,  the  duty  to  act  fairly  or  the  requirements   of
        procedural fairness (what in the  past  were  called  the  rules  of
        natural justice) will readily be implied into a statutory  framework
        even when the legislation is silent and does not  expressly  require
        any particular procedure to be followed.


        69. The requirements of procedural fairness were summarised  in  the
        following well known passage in the opinion of Lord Mustill in  R  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex p Doody [1994]  1  AC
        531, 560 in which he summarised the effect of earlier authorities:


             'From them, I derive that  (1)  where  an  Act  of  Parliament
             confers an administrative power there is a presumption that it
             will be exercised in  a  manner  which  is  fair  in  all  the
             circumstances.  (2)  The  standards  of   fairness   are   not
             immutable. They may change with the passage of time,  both  in
             the general  and  in  their  application  to  decisions  of  a
             particular type. (3) The principles of fairness are not to  be
             applied by rote identically in every situation. What  fairness
             demands is dependent on the context of the decision, and  this
             is to be taken  into  account  in  all  its  aspects.  (4)  An
             essential feature of the context is the statute which  creates
             the discretion, as regards both its language and the shape  of
             the legal and administrative system within which the  decision
             is taken. (5) Fairness will very often require that  a  person
             who may be adversely affected by the  decision  will  have  an
             opportunity to make representations on his own  behalf  either
             before the decision is  taken  with  a  view  to  producing  a
             favourable result; or after  it  is  taken,  with  a  view  to
             procuring its modification; or  both.  (6)  Since  the  person
             affected  usually  cannot  make   worthwhile   representations
             without knowing what factors may weigh against  his  interests
             fairness will very often require that he is  informed  of  the
             gist of the case which he has to answer.'


        70. In R v Hackney London Borough Council, ex p Decordova (1995)  27
        HLR 108, 113, Laws J said, in the context of a housing decision  but
        by reference to immigration law as well:


             'In my judgment where an authority lock, stock and  barrel  is
             minded to disbelieve an account  given  by  an  applicant  for
             housing where the circumstances described in the  account  are
             critical to the issue whether the  authority  ought  to  offer
             accommodation in a particular area, they are bound to  put  to
             the applicant in interview, or by some appropriate means,  the
             matters that concern them. This must now surely be  elementary
             law in relation to the function of decision-makers in relation
             to subject matter of this kind.  It  applies  in  the  law  of
             immigration, and generally where public  authorities  have  to
             make decisions which affect the rights of individual  persons.
             If the authority is minded to make an adverse decision because
             it does not believe the account given by the applicant, it has
             to give the applicant an opportunity to deal with it.'


        71. The origins of the duty to act  fairly  in  the  context  of  an
        immigration decision can be traced  back  to  the  decision  of  the
        Divisional Court in In re HK (An Infant) [1967] 2 QB 617, 630  (Lord
        Parker CJ).

  80. Underhill LJ then considered the decision of the Court of Appeal in  R
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p. Fayed [1998] 1 WLR
      763 which he found "instructive" for  several  reasons  including,  as
      with the instant challenge, the fact that it  involved  a  context  in
      which  the  relevant  individuals  had  no  legal  entitlement  to   a
      favourable decision and no  pre-existing  right  which  was  adversely
      affected by a public decision [50]. At [53] his  Lordship  noted  that
      the consequences of a refusal of ILR could be  "very  serious  indeed"
      and referred in detail at [81] to the statutory consequences  set  out
      the Immigration Act 2014 commonly known as the "hostile  environment."
      At [55] and [56] he stated:


        55.     For all of those reasons, we have come  to  the  conclusion
        that where the Secretary of State is minded to refuse  ILR  on  the
        basis of  paragraph  322  (5)  on  the  basis  of  the  applicant's
        dishonesty, or other reprehensible conduct, he  is  required  as  a
        matter of procedural fairness to indicate clearly to the  applicant
        that he has that suspicion; to give the applicant an opportunity to
        respond, both as regards the conduct  itself  and  as  regards  any
        other  reasons  relied  on  as  regards  "undesirability"  and  the
        exercise of the second-stage assessment;  and  then  to  take  that
        response into account before drawing the conclusion that there  has
        been such conduct.


        56.     We do not consider that an interview is  necessary  in  all
        cases. The Secretary of State's own rules give a discretion to  him
        to hold such an interview. However, the duty  to  act  fairly  does
        not, in our view, require that discretion to be  exercised  in  all
        cases. A written procedure may well suffice in most cases.

  81. In response to a submission that the Administrative Review  procedures
      satisfied the requirements of procedural fairness Underhill LJ held:


           59.     In the first place, although sometimes the duty  to  act
           fairly may not require a fair process to be  followed  before  a
           decision is reached (as was made clear by Lord  Mustill  in  the
           passage in Doody which we have quoted  earlier),  fairness  will
           usually require that to be  done  where  that  is  feasible  for
           practical and other reasons. In Bank Mellat v HM  Treasury  (no.
           2) [2013] UKSC 39, [2014] AC 700, Lord Neuberger  (after  having
           cited at para. 178 the above passage from Doody) said, at  para.
           179:


                   "In my view, the rule is that, before a  statutory  power
                   is  exercised,  any  person  who  foreseeably  would   be
                   significantly  detrimentally  affected  by  the  exercise
                   should be given the opportunity to  make  representations
                   in advance, unless (i) the statutory provisions concerned
                   expressly or impliedly  provide  otherwise  or  (ii)  the
                   circumstances in which the power is to be exercised would
                   render it impossible, impractical or pointless to  afford
                   such an  opportunity.  I  would  add  that  any  argument
                   advanced in support of impossibility,  impracticality  or
                   pointlessness should be very closely examined, as a court
                   will be slow to hold that there is no obligation to  give
                   the opportunity, when such an obligation is not dispensed
                   with in the relevant statute."


           60.      This  leads  to  the  proposition  that,   unless   the
           circumstances of a particular case make this impracticable,  the
           ability to make representations only after a decision  has  been
           taken will usually be insufficient to  satisfy  the  demands  of
           common  law  procedural  fairness.  The   rationale   for   this
           proposition lies in the underlying reasons for having procedural
           fairness in the first place. It is conducive to better decision-
           making because it  ensures  that  the  decision-maker  is  fully
           informed at a point when a decision  is  still  at  a  formative
           stage. It also shows respect for the individual whose  interests
           are affected, who will know that they have had  the  opportunity
           to influence a decision before it is made. Another rationale  is
           no doubt that, if a decision has already been made, human nature
           being what it is, the decision-maker may  unconsciously  and  in
           good faith tend to be defensive over the decision to which he or
           she has previously come. In the related context of the right  to
           be consulted, in Sinfield v London  Transport  Executive  [1970]
           Ch. 550, at p. 558, Sachs LJ made reference to the need to avoid
           the  decision-maker's  mind  becoming  "unduly   fixed"   before
           representations are made. He said:


                   "any right to be consulted is something  that  is  indeed
                   valuable and should be implemented by  giving  those  who
                   have  the  right  an  opportunity  to  be  heard  at  the
                   formative stage of proposals - before  the  mind  of  the
                   executive becomes unduly fixed."


           61.     More fundamentally, it  is  a  central  feature  of  the
           administrative review procedure, stated at  paragraph  AR2.4  of
           Appendix AR, that the reviewer will not  consider  any  evidence
           that was  not  before  the  original  decision-maker  except  in
           certain specified cases (broadly described as the correction  of
           case-working  errors).  That  means  that  the  applicant  would
           normally only be able to assert that he  or  she  had  not  been
           dishonest but would not  be  permitted  to  adduce  evidence  in
           support of that assertion. That limited type of legal review  is
           clearly inadequate here. It is precisely because  the  applicant
           had no notice of the Secretary of State's concerns  that  he  or
           she had no opportunity  to  put  evidence  before  the  original
           decision-maker.

  82. I have also considered R (on the application of Pathan) (Appellant)  v
      SSHD (Respondent) [2020]  UKSC  41  ("Pathan")  and  Taj,  R  (On  the
      Application Of) v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 19 ("Taj"), both of which  were
      promulgated after the  hearing  before  me.  I  did  not  consider  it
      necessary to obtain the views of the parties on these two  authorities
      in order to fairly determine the instant challenge. Taj concerned  the
      issue of procedural fairness in respect of an application for  further
      leave to remain  made  by  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  where,
      following an interview and a 'site visit', it  was  decided  that  his
      small business, as detailed  in  his  application,  was  not  genuine.
      Although  the  SSHD  had  concerns  with  the  truthfulness   of   the
      appellant's account,  there  was  no  assertion  that  he  made  false
      misrepresentations and no reliance was placed on paragraphs 320(7A) or
      322(5). It was argued on behalf of the appellant  (coincidentally,  by
      Mr Malik) that the system by which  the  appellant's  application  was
      evaluated  was  procedurally  unfair  and  that  procedural   fairness
      required inconsistencies or other 'concerns' upon which the respondent
      relied to be put to the appellant or to give him notice of the gist of
      those  concerns,  particularly  if  the  concerns   related   to   the
      truthfulness of the appellant's account (at [5] and [6]).


  83. Green LJ, with whom Males LJ and Jackson  LJ  agreed,  considered  the
      Supreme Court's decision in Pathan, which concerned an application for
      leave to remain by a Tier 2 (General) Migrant whose  sponsor  had  its
      licence withdrawn by the SSHD after the appellant made his application
      and who was not informed of the revocation (which meant  that  he  did
      not have a valid Certificate of Sponsorship and  which  prevented  him
      from meeting the requirements for further leave) by  the  SSHD  before
      the decision was made to refuse his application.


  84. The principal issue in the appeal was whether the  SSHD's  failure  to
      inform the appellant of the revocation of his  sponsor's  licence  was
      reviewable upon the basis that principles of procedural  fairness  and
      natural justice required a person to have an opportunity to  be  heard
      on any material information which the decision-maker acquired  and  of
      which he was unaware. A majority  held  that  the  SSHD's  failure  to
      inform the appellant that his sponsor's licence had been withdrawn had
      been a breach of the principle of procedural fairness.

  85.  From [45] to [50] Green LJ dealt with the argument that  there  is  a
      general obligation on the SSHD under the  PBS  to  provide  notice  of
      concerns arising. The following conclusions, at [50], were drawn based
      on the Supreme Court's assessment,  the  authorities  upon  which  the
      Supreme Court relied, and the decision in Topadar v SSHD  [2020]  EWCA
      Civ 1525:

           (i)  PBS  and  procedural  fairness:  The  Doody  principles  of
           fairness apply to PBS, but the manner of their application  will
           be fact and context specific: Lloyd v McMahon [1987] AC  625  at
           pages [702] - [703]; Doody page [560d-g] paragraph [52] per Lord
           Mustill; Pathan paragraphs [55], [104]; Topadar  v  SSHD  [2020]
           EWCA Civ 1525 ("Topadar") at paragraph [59].
           (ii)   The   public   interest   behind   procedural    fairness
           requirements: The  principle  of  procedural  fairness  supports
           important public  interest  values:  (a)  a  person's  intuitive
           expectation of what a just system entails  or  the  dictates  of
           "fundamental justice"  (Pathan  paragraphs  [49]  [107],  [124],
           [125], [126]; Osborne v Parole Board [2014] AC 1115  ("Osborne")
           paragraph [68]; Secretary of State for the Home Department v  AF
           [2012] AC 269 paragraph [72]); (b) the promotion of the rule  of
           law  under  which  decision-makers  hear  from  those  who  have
           something to say since  this  promotes  congruence  between  the
           actions of decision makers and the law which should govern their
           actions (Osborne paragraph [71]; Pathan  paragraphs  [50]);  and
           (c), the promotion of long term cost  savings  over  short  term
           expenditure. Procedures which involve  an  immediate  cost,  but
           which contribute to better long-term  decision  making,  are  in
           reality less costly than they at first appear (Osborne paragraph
           [72]; Pathan paragraphs [51], [52]).
           (iii) The absence of a pointlessness (materiality/utility) test:
           Because  of  the  broader,  public  interest,  reasons  for  the
           principle of procedural fairness, the courts  do  not  undertake
           any detailed analysis of whether had the breach not occurred, it
           would have made any difference.  In  Pathan  the  majority  were
           unimpressed by the Respondent's arguments that to  grant  relief
           would be pointless. The majority considered that the breach  did
           deprive Mr Pathan of, at the least, an opportunity to ameliorate
           his position. Lady Arden extolled  the  virtues  of  the  policy
           considerations behind procedural fairness (paragraphs [48]-[52])
           and she agreed (paragraph [72]) with Lord Kerr and Lady Black on
           this point. At paragraphs [118] - [130] Lord Kerr and Lady Black
           discuss the principle of pointlessness. They  explain  that  had
           the Respondent given notice it might have made a difference. But
           they also highlight the great importance  of  the  principle  of
           procedural fairness per se. In paragraph [131], they state  that
           the duty to give notice  to  someone  adversely  affected  by  a
           procedural  failure  "...  cannot  be  defined  solely  by   the
           consideration that it is  pointless  for  that  person  to  make
           representations with a view to reversing or avoiding the  effect
           of the decision." If observance of the  principle  (i.e.  acting
           fairly) would or could or might have made a difference, then the
           Court will intervene but the converse if  not  true:  the  Court
           might still intervene even if it appeared that the breach had no
           effects such that to grant relief would be pointless, given  the
           high public interest attached to the role that the principle  of
           procedural fairness plays in the context of natural justice  and
           the rule of law. In paragraphs [132] - [134] Lord Kerr and  Lady
           Black thus explain why, on the facts, the failure to give notice
           did deprive Mr Pathan of  the  opportunity  to  take  mitigating
           steps and they were  of  the  view  that  the  failure  was  not
           therefore  pointless.  However,  they  also  observe  (paragraph
           [134]) that a fairness analysis is not to  be  judged  with  the
           benefit of hindsight, ex post facto. This  is  because  at  that
           point in time there was "no way to know" whether Mr Pathan would
           have been able to take steps to mitigate his dilemma. If this is
           so, then speculation as to what might  have  happened,  had  the
           breach not occurred is not relevant. Further, in paragraph [135]
           they add that the failure was unfair  "in  itself"  for  another
           reason, namely because failing to give Mr Pathan notice  of  the
           revocation of the CoS licence accelerated the point in  time  at
           which  he  became  an  overstayer:  "To  deny  him  the  greater
           opportunity to avoid those consequences was  in  itself  unfair"
           and that this was a conclusion which did  not  depend  upon  any
           judgment as to whether Mr Pathan would have taken steps to avoid
           that outcome Lord Wilson agreed with Lord Kerr and Lady Black in
           relation to this part of their judgment (paragraph [201]).
           (iv) Systemic and operational failings: The principles apply  to
           individual decisions taken by virtue of  the  operation  of  the
           system (operational failings) but also to administrative systems
           (systemic failings) (Pathan paragraph [44]).
           (v) Procedural fairness is a standalone obligation: A  challenge
           based upon procedural fairness does not have to be linked  to  a
           substantive challenge,  for  instance  a  rationality  challenge
           (Pathan paragraphs [32] - [35] and cases cited thereat).
           (vi) Administrative convenience and cost  do  not  amount  to  a
           justification for procedural fairness: If  a  Court  finds  that
           there is procedural unfairness then the fact that remedying  the
           breach might result in cost or administrative  inconvenience  to
           the decision maker is irrelevant (R  (Refugee  Legal  Centre)  v
           SSHD [ 2004] EWCA Civ 1481 at paragraph [8]; R  v  Secretary  of
           State for the Home Department ex P Fayed [1998] 1  WLR  763  per
           Lord Woolf; Pathan at paragraph [47]).

  86. The Court of Appeal then considered whether there was a duty to put an
      applicant  on  notice  of  general  concerns  (concerns  which   arise
      regardless of whether the applicant's account  was  considered  to  be
      truthful or not) about an application. In concluding that the PBS  and
      the SSHD's decision were not procedurally unfair the Court considered,
      inter alia, the following points. The decision maker had  to  look  to
      the substance of an application to ensure, for example, "... that  odd
      discrepancies and errors in the paper work or in answers to  questions
      posed in interview do not prevent an otherwise  solid  and  acceptable
      application being accepted." [53]. Pathan  was  distinguished  on  the
      basis that the appellant in that case had not been at  fault  and  his
      application had failed because of something done by the SSHD that  was
      exclusively under her control. At [54] Green LJ stated:

        It is clear from the judgments that key  determinants  of  fairness
        will focus upon (a) who has access to  the  information  needed  to
        support an application for LTR; and (b) who has control  over  that
        information. In my view access and control are key determinants and
        serve to distinguish between the facts of Pathan  and  the  present
        case. Unlike in Pathan, here the Appellant had both access  to  and
        control over every fact relevant to the success or failure  of  his
        application.

  87. Another relevant point, identified at [55], was that  the  PBS  system
      was  open  and  transparent;  an  applicant  would  be  aware  of  the
      requirements  that  he  needs  to  fulfil.  It   was   not   therefore
      unreasonable for the burden of proof to fall on an applicant as it was
      up to him to provide adequate information and evidence  [56],  and  an
      applicant had every opportunity to prepare for their  interview  [58].
      At [59] the Court held that basic  system  (at  least  insofar  as  it
      related  to   Tie   1   (Entrepreneur)   Migrant   applications)   was
      intrinsically fair, and, at [61], it was held that, provided  the  PBS
      is systematically and operationally fair, the serious and  potentially
      harsh consequences that could result from a negative decision  were  a
      consequence of the failure to obtain the required leave  and  did  not
      render the decision unfair.


  88. At [63] to [78] the Court considered whether there was a duty  to  put
      an applicant on notice of concerns about truthfulness. Green LJ  found
      that the authorities upon which the appellant relied  (which  included
      Citizens UK and Decordova) did not assist him because they related  to
      contexts that were far removed from the present and they did  not,  in
      any event, put down hard and fast principles, and because Taj was  not
      at its core about the veracity of the appellant but about the  paucity
      and inadequacy of the evidence submitted concerning his business [65].
      Having considered a number of decisions Green LJ concluded that a duty
      to  put  evolving   and   potentially   dispositive   concerns   about
      truthfulness was not an absolute but was fact  and  context  sensitive
      and concluded, at [74]:


           In my judgment, the principles of procedural fairness as applied
           to the PBS in issue do not compel the decision maker to
           communicate evolving concerns about truthfulness.


  89. And at [78]:


           For these  reasons  I  reject  the  submissions  that  case  law
           establishes  a  right  to  have  concerns   about   truthfulness
           communicated to the applicant in the context of this  particular
           type of PBS. I also reject any suggestion that on the  facts  it
           was operationally unfair  of  the  decision  maker  not  to  put
           concerns as to truthfulness to the Appellant.


  90. In determining whether there has been  procedural  unfairness  in  the
      present case  I  have  applied  the  principles  considered  in  above
      authorities including Doody, Balajigari, Pathan and Taj. The  Decision
      was made in the context of the PBS. As pointed out in  Junied  v  SSHD
      [2019] EWCA Civ 2293 the PBS is designed to  achieved  predictability,
      consistency, administrative simplicity and certainty and  does  so  by
      being prescriptive, at the expect of discretion.


  91. The respondent refused the application because, inter  alia,  she  was
      not satisfied that the applicant  genuinely  intended  to  pursue  his
      employment  as  a  devotional  singer  (paragraph  245ZO(i)   of   the
      immigration rules), and because  he  made  misrepresentations  in  his
      application (paragraph 320(7A) of the immigration rules). I will first
      consider the lawfulness of the  Decision  with  respect  to  paragraph
      320(7A).


  92.  Unlike the appellant  in  Taj,  but  similar  to  the  appellants  in
      Balajigari, the present applicant was specially accused of acting in a
      dishonest manner such as to  trigger  the  operation  of  the  general
      grounds of refusal in Part 9 of the immigration  rules.  Although  the
      applicant is not in the UK and would not, as a result of the decision,
      be exposed to the serious consequences  resulting  from  the  'hostile
      environment' considered at [81] of Balajigari,  I  do  not  understand
      Underhill LJ to have restricted the  serious  nature  flowing  from  a
      finding of dishonesty to those already in  the  UK.  Exposure  to  the
      'hostile environment' was an example of the serious consequences,  but
      not a requirement. A refusal of an application under paragraph 320(7A)
      does have serious consequences.  Firstly,  it  can  have  reputational
      damage on an  application  because  he  will  tarnished  as  being  an
      untruthful person, someone who  has  expressly  acted  dishonestly  in
      respect of an important application. Secondly, the applicant will,  as
      a consequence of the belief that he has been dishonest, be barred from
      making a similar application for a period  of  10  years  pursuant  to
      Paragraph 320(7B)(d)(ii),  and  his  dishonesty  is  likely  to  be  a
      relevant factor in determining any other type of  application  he  may
      make  to  enter  the  UK.  That  the  applicant  could  make  a  later
      application for entry clearance and seek  to  deal  with  the  earlier
      refusal under paragraph 320(7A) does not detract from the  seriousness
      immediately flowing from a decision based  on  a  finding  that  false
      misrepresentations or false information was used.


  93. Although Green LJ found that the principles of fairness as applied  to
      the Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  requirements  did  not  compel  a
      decision-maker to communicate evolving  concerns  about  truthfulness,
      the Home Office decision under challenge in  Taj  did  not  involve  a
      specific allegation of dishonesty and did  not  involve  any  external
      element to the decision that was not contained within the application.
      A material basis for the  present  Decision  under  paragraph  320(7A)
      rested on the content of an interview that was conducted on  17  April
      2019,  some  6  days  after  the  applicant's  second  interview.  The
      respondent's decision was based on external information that only came
      to light because of specific inquiries  made  by  an  Entry  Clearance
      Officer. With reference to the assessment of Green LJ at [54] of  Taj,
      only the respondent had access to and  control  of  that  information.
      These factors material distinguish Taj from the present case. Although
      the applicant was asked in the interview whether he  had  any  contact
      with his previous employer after he returned to Pakistan he  was  not,
      contrary to the assertion in the Decision, given  the  opportunity  to
      explain the background to the allegation of dishonesty  because  there
      was, at that time, no inconsistency in information  available  to  the
      respondent and because, by reference to his statement,  the  applicant
      denied having been directly contacted by his former employer.


  94. In finding that the applicant acted dishonestly the respondent  placed
      material reliance  on  information  that  was  not  available  to  the
      applicant and in respect of which he was unaware, information that did
      not form any part of his application and which was obtained after  the
      applicant's interview, and information that was within  the  exclusive
      control of the respondent. Given the serious nature  and  consequences
      of the allegation of dishonesty, and bearing in mind the purposes  and
      prescriptive nature of  the  PBS,  it  was  not  impractical  for  the
      respondent  to  make  the  applicant  aware  of  the  'gist'  of   the
      information  that  materialised  after  the   interview,   either   by
      disclosure of the record of the conversation, or  in  the  form  of  a
      'minded to' letter, or by way of a summary of  the  conversation  that
      included all the material elements that the respondent maintains  were
      contrary  to  the  applicant's  answers  in  his   interview.   I   am
      consequently satisfied that the aspect of the Decision that was  based
      on paragraph 320(7A) was arrived at in a procedurally unfair manner.


  95. I have additional concerns regarding the respondent's conclusion  that
      the applicant acted dishonestly by making false misrepresentations. In
      her decision the respondent stated:


           You  were  given  opportunities  at  interview  to  explain  the
           background on this however; you chose not to and therefore it is
           not clear why you misrepresented this fact at interview.


  96. I consider there to be merit in the  Mr  Biggs'  submission  that  the
      reference to "not clear" related to the reasons why the applicant gave
      information during his interview that was different to that  given  by
      his former employer. If the respondent  was  "not  clear"  as  to  the
      reasons why the applicant's answers in his interview were different to
      those of his former employer, she had, at most, suspicions  concerning
      his honesty. Contrary to Balajigari at [42] and [129],  she  proceeded
      to reach a conclusion as to the applicant's honesty  in  circumstances
      that did not justify that conclusion, at least  until  an  explanation
      for the provision of different  information  had  been  considered.  I
      find, for this additional reason, that the Decision,  so  far  it  was
      dependent on a finding of  dishonesty  under  paragraph  320(7A),  was
      unlawful.


  97. I am not however persuaded that the Decision, so far as it  was  based
      on paragraph 245ZO(i)  of  the  immigration  rules,  was  procedurally
      unfair. The respondent's conclusions in  respect  of  the  applicant's
      intentions concerning his employment were not based  on  any  external
      information that the applicant could neither access nor  control.  The
      inconsistencies between the job advert provided by  the  applicant  in
      respect of his employment and his contract with Hounslow Jamia  Masjid
      and Islamic Centre, detailed  at  paragraphs  8  and  41  above,  were
      apparent on the face of the  papers  that  supported  the  applicant's
      application. The applicant must be taken to have  been  aware  of  the
      differences between the advertised position and his contract and there
      was no obligation, in the context of his PBS category, to bring to his
      attention clearly identifiable differences (although Taj deals with  a
      different PBS category and is a decision in respect of an  application
      for leave  to  remain,  both  Tier  1  and  Tier  5  categories  share
      'genuineness' elements). Mr Biggs submitted that the respondent failed
      to take account of the  representations  made  in  the  Administrative
      Review application dated 15 January 2019, but  this  application  only
      made brief reference to the advert that was required in order to  meet
      the resident labour market test, and claimed that the advert  did  not
      specifically relate to the applicant. The advert  however  related  to
      the position in respect of which the applicant  made  his  application
      and the respondent was consequently entitled to take account of  clear
      discrepancies between the  advertised  position  and  the  applicant's
      contract. Further, the burden rests on the  applicant  to  demonstrate
      that he fulfils all the requirements for  entry  clearance,  including
      the provision of adequate evidence. If  he  has  provided  information
      that is prima facie inconsistent or  vague  but  which  has  not  been
      expressly put to him either in interview or by way of a 'minded  to  '
      letter, that does not disclose any procedural unfairness but rather  a
      failure by the applicant to provide adequate evidence.  The  applicant
      had sufficient opportunity to prepare for his  interview,  mindful  of
      his proposed job, and was given the opportunity  at  the  end  of  the
      interview to provide any further information.


  98. In my judgment the principle of procedural fairness in the context  of
      a Tier 5 (Temporary Worker) entry clearance application and as applied
      in the present case did not require any vagueness or lack  of  clarity
      in  the  applicant's  interview  answers  relating  to  his   proposed
      employment, or any inconsistency in the documentary  evidence  adduced
      by him in support of his application, to be expressly put to him.

Whether the applicant was being sponsored to perform "religious duties"

  99. The respondent noted that the SOC identified  in  the  Certificate  of
      Sponsorship for the applicant  related to those intending to  work  in
      the creative sector and, whilst accepting that Sufi Naat  singing  was
      devotional, the respondent was not satisfied that the  performance  of
      Sufi Naat singing could properly be described as  the  performance  of
      "religious duties", as required under the Tier  5  (Religious  Worker)
      category.


 100.  The  applicant  contends  that  the  respondent   misinterpreted   or
      misapplied the immigration rules in light of all the evidence provided
      by him and available to the respondent, including  the  fact  that  he
      would be singing in mosques and Islamic centres  and  given  that  his
      proposed employer was an Islamic centre. It  was  submitted  that  his
      prospective employer had no reason to employ  a  'cultural  performer'
      rather than someone carrying out 'religious duties'.


 101. I have  considered  the  evidence  that  accompanied  the  applicant's
      application.  The  Employment  Agreement  described  his  job  as  the
      performance  of  "non-instrumental  religious   singing   at   various
      religious places/Islamic centres  and  Mosques  all  over  the  United
      Kingdom." The advert for the job referred to "Sufi religious  singing"
      to be performed in live gatherings with an audience ranging from 1,000
      to 7,000 in a variety of events, with the Sufi singer expected  to  be
      proficient in Urdu and Panjabi and with "a good melodious  voice."  In
      his April 2019 interview, when asked to give details of what  he  will
      be doing in his job, answered, "Nothing just  reading  naats  in  Urdu
      Punjabi other than this I don't know  anything  else."  (question  8).
      When asked about his experience the applicant stated that he had  been
      singing since childhood and had done this all  over  Pakistan  and  in
      other countries (question 27). In his first  interview,  conducted  in
      December 2018, the applicant said he would be "singing religious songs
      and prayers" and in his statement he stated that  a  Naat  Singer  was
      someone whose singing abilities were principally  devoted  to  singing
      praise of the Prophet Muhammad.


 102. There was no detailed or independent evidence before  the  respondent,
      or indeed before me at the hearing, describing the nature of Sufi Naat
      singing, or describing or explaining how that religious or  devotional
      singing was an Islamic religious duty. Religious or devotional singing
      is a wide term, one that is potentially capable of including,  by  way
      of example, hymns or psalms, or even carols. There was  a  paucity  of
      information before the respondent that the devotional singing that the
      applicant  proposed  to  undertake  constituted  the  performance   of
      religious duties.


 103. The applicant was previously granted  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  5
      (Religious Worker)  Migrant  was  as  a  "Religious  Singer/Sufi  Naat
      Singer" (question 72 of the  applicant's  October  2016  application).
      This is a relevant consideration  when  interpreting  the  immigration
      rules, but it cannot be determinative. It is  possible,  for  example,
      that the earlier grant of entry clearance was made in  error,  without
      adequate attention being brought to bear on the nature  of  Sufi  Naat
      singing.


 104. The original grounds referred to the Home Office Policy Guidance 'Tier
      2 & 5 of the Points Based System - Guidance  for  Sponsors  -  version
      04/14', which stated, at 31.7:


           When recruiting a person who will  be  sponsored  under  Tier  2
           (Minister of Religion) or Tier 5 (Religious  Workers)  you  must
           conduct  a  Resident  Labour  Market  Test.  Although  not   all
           religious occupations are 'jobs' in the traditional sense,  this
           does not mean that the test does  not  apply.  Any  migrant  you
           sponsor must not displace a suitable settled worker.


 105. Section 31.8 of the same guidance states that  a  sponsor  must  "only
      recruit migrants who will carry out  skilled  religious  duties."  The
      applicant contends that his  singing  constituted  "skilled  religious
      duties" and that the Policy Guidance recognises that  jobs  under  the
      religious  occupations  do  not  always  meet  the  standards  to   be
      considered as 'occupations' in the traditional sense of the word,  and
      that the respondent consequently acted unlawfully in failing to accept
      Sufi Naat singing as the performance of  religious  duties.  The  fact
      however  that  the  Guidance  recognises  that   not   all   religious
      occupations are 'jobs' in the traditional sense does not mean that the
      respondent misinterpreted the immigration rules by excluding Sufi Naat
      devotional singing from the performance of religious duties, it simply
      reflects a necessary flexibility in the Guidance  in  dealing  with  a
      range of different religious duties.


 106. In Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16 Lord Brown  stated,
      at [10]:

           There is really no dispute about  the  proper  approach  to  the
           construction of the Rules. As Lord Hoffmann said  in  Odelola  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR  1230,
           1233 (paragraph 4):


                 "Like any other question of construction, this  [whether  a
                 rule change applies to  all  undetermined  applications  or
                 only to subsequent applications] depends upon the  language
                 of the rule, construed  against  the  relevant  background.
                 That involves a consideration of the immigration rules as a
                 whole  and  the  function   which   they   serve   in   the
                 administration of immigration policy."


           That is entirely consistent  with  what  Buxton  LJ  (collecting
           together a number of dicta from past cases concerning the status
           of the rules) had said in Odelola in the Court  of  Appeal  and,
           indeed, with what Laws  LJ  said  (before  the  House  of  Lords
           decision in Odelola) in the present case. Essentially  it  comes
           to this. The  Rules  are  not  to  be  construed  with  all  the
           strictness applicable to the construction  of  a  statute  or  a
           statutory instrument but, instead,  sensibly  according  to  the
           natural and ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising that
           they are statements of the Secretary of  State's  administrative
           policy. The respondent's counsel readily accepted that what  she
           meant in her written case by the proposition  "the  question  of
           interpretation is . . . what the Secretary of State intended his
           policy to be" was that the court's task is to discover from  the
           words used in the Rules what the  Secretary  of  State  must  be
           taken to have intended. After all, under  section  3(2)  of  the
           Immigration Act 1971, the Secretary of  State  has  to  lay  the
           Rules before  Parliament  which  then  has  the  opportunity  to
           disapprove them. True, as I observed in Odelola (para 33):  "the
           question is what the Secretary of State intended. The rules  are
           her rules." But that intention is to  be  discerned  objectively
           from the language used, not divined  by  reference  to  supposed
           policy considerations. Still less is the  Secretary  of  State's
           intention to be discovered from  the  Immigration  Directorates'
           Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently to  guide  immigration
           officers in their application  of  the  rules.  IDIs  are  given
           pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971  Act  which
           provides that:


                 "In  the  exercise  of  their  functions  under  this   Act
                 immigration officers shall  act  in  accordance  with  such
                 instructions (not inconsistent with the immigration  rules)
                 as may be given them by the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  ."
                 (emphasis added)."

 107. Looking at the term "religious duties" in accordance with the  natural
      and ordinary meaning of the words, and recognising that they form part
      of the statements of the Secretary of State's  administrative  policy,
      and in light of the very limited evidence  before  the  respondent,  I
      cannot say that the respondent was not  rationally  entitled  to  have
      interpreted the immigration rules so as to exclude Sufi  Naat  singing
      from the performance of religious duties.


 108. The previous grant entry clearance as  a  Tier  5  (Religious  Worker)
      Migrant was as a Sufi Naat singer was however a relevant consideration
      that should have been taken into account by the respondent,  but  does
      not appear to have been, at least expressly. Moreover,  the  principle
      that like cases should be treated in a like manner is another  way  of
      describing what Lord Hoffmann described in Arthur J  S  Hall  &  Co  v
      Simons [2002] 1 AC 615, 688H as "the fundamental principle of  justice
      which requires that people should be treated equally  and  like  cases
      treated alike." In Chirairo, R (on the application of) v  SSHD  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 77, at [25], Richards LJ stated:

           It is not in doubt that a discretionary public  law  power  must
           not be  exercised  in  an  arbitrary  or  partial  way.  If  two
           individuals in identical  circumstances  are  knowingly  treated
           differently, this may well  involve  an  arbitrary  exercise  of
           power in the case  of  one  of  them  and,  without  a  rational
           explanation, is liable to be struck down as unlawful.  Moreover,
           the circumstances of the two individuals, though not  identical,
           may be so similar as to call for a rational explanation for  the
           different treatment to be given, if the  unfavourable  treatment
           given to one is to stand. It would be unfair of the Secretary of
           State  not  to  treat  like  cases  alike  in   the   sense   of
           discriminating against someone upon inadequate grounds: see R  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p  Zeqiri  [2002]
           UKHL 3; [2002] INLR 291 at [56] per Lord Hoffmann.  Nonetheless,
           caution is required. First, personal circumstances will  usually
           differ to an extent which prevents two  individuals  from  being
           treated as like cases. Secondly, different decision-makers faced
           with substantially the  same  facts  may  on  entirely  rational
           grounds come to different conclusions: see Otshudi  v  Secretary
           of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 893.


 109. The question of whether a Sufi Naat singer  is  someone  who  performs
      "religious duties" is not a matter of the exercise of discretion,  but
      Chirairo helpfully expresses the principle of consistency in decision-
      making and that like cases should be treated in a like  manner.  I  am
      satisfied that the previous grant of entry clearance to the  applicant
      as a Sufi Naat singer in the category of  Tier  5  (Religious  Worker)
      Migrant meant that the respondent was  required  to  explain  why  she
      decided this aspect of the present  application  differently.  To  the
      extent that the respondent appears to have failed to take the previous
      grant of entry clearance into consideration in her  interpretation  of
      the immigration rules, and to the extent that she has failed  to  give
      an explanation for  treating  this  aspect  of  the  two  applications
      differently, she has acted unlawfully.

Was the Decision unlawful in its assessment of the applicant's intentions?

 110. The fourth ground contends that the respondent acted in  a  Wednesbury
      unreasonably  manner  (Associated  Provincial  Picture  Houses  LTD  v
      Wednesbury Corporation [1947] EWCA Civ 1) in respect of her conclusion
      that the applicant was not genuinely seeking to undertake  his  stated
      employment as a Sufi Naat singer.


 111. I can  deal  relatively  briefly  with  this  ground.  The  respondent
      properly identified discrepancies  between  the  job  advert  and  the
      employment contract namely:


     a) The advert stated an annual salary of �21,000 whereas the  contract
        stated an annual salary �19,500;


     b) The advert stated that the job was "permanent" and  did  not  state
        that  applications  from  overseas  were   accepted   whereas   the
        applicant, as recorded in the contract, was a resident of Pakistan;
        and

     c) The advert stated that the job location was  "London"  whereas  the
        contract required the services to be provided "all over the  United
        Kingdom".


 112.  Further,  the  Decision  additionally  identified  vagueness  in  the
      applicant's 2019 interview  answers  regarding  his  proposed  working
      hours, and a lack of clarity concerning his work pattern and his  work
      location, and the Decision expressed doubts as to  how  the  applicant
      could be working 30 hours a week for  his  sponsor  in  light  of  his
      answers. The respondent was rationally entitled to conclude  that  the
      applicant did not genuine intend to undertake the  work  described  in
      his application for the reasons  given.  In  his  2018  interview  the
      applicant was asked only a few questions about his working  hours  and
      his answers did not materially expand on  those  given  in  his  later
      interview. The factors upon which the respondent placed reliance  were
      apparent from the face of  the  documents  upon  which  the  applicant
      relied and his answers in interview,  and  were  all  relevant  to  an
      overall assessment of the applicant's intentions.


 113. The applicant's contention that the respondent  failed  to  appreciate
      that all  the  points  upon  which  she  relied  had  been  adequately
      addressed in the 15 January 2019 Administrative Review application  is
      not  borne   out   by   scrutiny   of   those   representations.   The
      representations focus on differences in  dates  for  the  end  of  the
      applicant's proposed employment and briefly assert that the advert did
      not specifically relate to the applicant. I have dealt with  the  last
      point at paragraph 99 above.  The  Administrative  Review  application
      focuses on Facebook accounts that were not the subject of the decision
      now under challenge and did not comment on the issues of vagueness and
      lack of clarity as the applicant had not, at that stage, undergone the
      interview where these points  became  apparent.  The  amended  grounds
      refer to  information  provided  on  the  applicant's  behalf  in  his
      November 2019 Pre-Action-Protocol  Letter,  but  this  post-dates  the
      decision under challenge and was not therefore before  the  respondent
      when  her  decision  was  made,   and   the   September   2019   joint
      Administrative Review application and Pre-Action-Protocol  Letter  did
      not meaningfully engage with the points raised by the respondent other
      than to assert that there was no discrepancy in respect of the  stated
      salary.


 114. I am consequently satisfied that there is no merit in the  applicant's
      challenge to the respondent's decision under  paragraph  245ZO(i)  and
      that the respondent was rationally entitled, for the reasons given, to
      conclude that the applicant did not genuinely intend to undertake  the
      role recorded by the Certificate of Sponsorship Checking Service.  The
      respondent  was  consequently  lawfully   entitled   to   refuse   the
      application under paragraph 245ZO(i) even though other elements of the
      Decision,  as  discussed  above,  were  unlawful.   The   respondent's
      assessment under paragraph 245ZO(i), when read in the context  of  the
      decision, was separate from  and  independent  of  the  refusal  under
      paragraph 320(7A) and of the respondent's approach to  the  nature  of
      Sufi Naat singing  and  whether  it  constitutes  the  performance  of
      religious duties.


   Maintenance


 115. As I have found that the respondent was lawfully  entitled  to  reject
      the application under paragraph 245ZO(i), it is not necessary  for  me
      to consider and determine the arguments that were only advanced at the
      hearing  and  in  written  submissions  that  followed   the   hearing
      concerning the refusal based on the  maintenance  requirements.  Those
      arguments are rendered academic in light of my findings.


Conclusion

 116. To the limited extent that the Decision relied on paragraph 320(7A) of
      the immigration rules, I find that those elements are unlawful for the
      reasons given. I therefore make a declaration that  paragraph  320(7A)
      was unlawfully deployed.


 117. I make a further  declaration  that  the  respondent's  assessment  of
      whether Sufi Naat singing constitutes  the  performance  of  religious
      duties, by  reference  to  paragraph  111(d)  of  Appendix  A  of  the
      immigration rules, is unlawful for the reasons given.


 118. The respondent was however lawfully  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
      applicant did not genuinely intend to undertake his role  recorded  by
      the Certificate of Sponsorship Checking  Service,  with  reference  to
      paragraph 245ZO(i). This finding is separate from and  independent  of
      the unlawful elements of the  decision  identified  above.  For  these
      reasons I decline to quash the decision.

                   D.Blum
            Signed:


                            Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




        Dated:    8 February 2021










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors: Z2001261/GAS/HOI1
Home Office Ref: SHEFO/1107548
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 08/02/2021
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.


-----------------------
[1] Pursuant to paragraph 3(i) of the direction transferring judicial
review to the Upper Tribunal dated 21 August 2013 (as amended on 17 October
2014), the Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction to entertain a judicial
review application that includes a challenge to the validity of the
immigration rules.
[2] Although Silber's J decision was overturned on appeal to  the  Court  of
Appeal, his distillation of the principles relevant to alternative  remedies
was not the subject of criticism


