
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/1726/2020  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |LD                                           |              |
|              |(Anonymity Order made)                       |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |and                                          |              |
|              |Islington London Borough Council             |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |

BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having heard Ms.  A  Benfield  of
counsel, instructed by InstaLaw Solicitors  for  the  Applicant  and  Mr.  M
Paget  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Islington  Legal  Services,   for   the
Respondent at a hearing held at Field House on 27 and 28 May 2021

UPON  the  Applicant  having  issued  judicial  review  proceedings  in  the
Administrative Court  and  having  been  granted  permission  to  apply  for
judicial review by that Court and her claim having been transferred  to  the
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for a  fact-finding  hearing
to determine her age

UPON the Upper Tribunal having found the Respondent's age  assessment  dated
3 March 2020 to have been procedurally  unfair  for  failing  to  conduct  a
lawful minded-to process

AND UPON the Upper Tribunal having found  the  Applicant  to  have  been  17
years of age, with a date of birth of 20 September 2002,  upon  her  arrival
in the United Kingdom on 2 December 2019

IT IS DECLARED THAT:

   1. The Applicant's date of birth is 20 September 2002.

   2. The Applicant is presently aged 18.


IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The Applicant shall not be identified either directly or indirectly.

    2) The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's costs on a standard basis.

    3) There shall be an order for public funding assessment of any residual
       costs not otherwise borne by the Respondent.




Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated:       22 June 2021



The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal  Case No: JR/1726/2020
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                                 Field House
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                                22 June 2021

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN
                 ___________________________________________

                                   Between

                                     LD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                    -and-

                         LONDON BOROUGH OF ISLINGTON
                                                                  Respondent
              _________________________________________________

   Antonia Benfield (instructed by InstaLaw Solicitors) for the Applicant
   Michael Paget (instructed by Islington Legal Service for the Respondent

                      Hearing dates: 27 and 28 May 2021
                            ____________________

                                   JUDGMENT
                            ____________________

Judge O'Callaghan:

The Tribunal confirms the anonymity order in the following terms:

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court orders otherwise, no  report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the applicant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  the
applicant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

I so order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising  to  the  applicant
from the contents of her protection claim being publicly known.

Introduction

 1. By an order dated 22 May 2020 (CO/1275/2020) John Howell QC, sitting as
    a Deputy Judge of the High Court, granted the applicant  permission  to
    apply for judicial review against the respondent's decision as  to  her
    age and transferred the claim to the Upper Tribunal.

Issue

 2. The applicant seeks a declaration that she was  born  on  20  September
    2002.

 3. The primary issue for  me  to  resolve  in  these  proceedings  is  the
    applicant's age, which is in dispute between the parties. In  resolving
    this issue, I am required to identify the applicant's  age  as  at  the
    date of the respondent's age  assessment  which  was  provided  to  the
    applicant on 3 March 2020.

 4. The applicant asserts that she was born on 20 September 2002 and so was
    aged 17 both when she entered the United Kingdom on 2 December 2019 and
    at the date of assessment on 3 March 2020.  She  asserts  that  she  is
    presently 18. She has been consistent as to her claimed date  of  birth
    throughout.

 5. The respondent assessed the applicant to be aged over 18 and likely  to
    be aged 19 at the date of assessment. Her date of birth was  considered
    by the respondent to be 29 September 2000. The respondent now considers
    her to be aged 20.

 6. A 2-year margin of  dispute  arises  between  the  parties  as  to  the
    applicant's age.

 7. There is no dispute between the parties that the applicant  is  now  an
    adult. The applicant seeks a declaration as to  her  age  to  establish
    that the respondent is required to  continue  to  provide  support  and
    accommodation to her as a  'former  relevant  child'  pursuant  to  its
    duties under the  Children  Act  1989.  In  such  circumstances,  I  am
    satisfied that if I were to grant a declaration in the terms sought, it
    would serve a useful purpose.

Anonymity

 8. By his order of 5 April 2020,  Mr.  Justice  Robin  Knowles  issued  an
    anonymity order and neither representative before me sought to  set  it
    aside.

 9. Upon  considering  rule  14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules  2008  (the  2008  Procedure  Rules)  and  the  general
    principle underlying para. 13(1) of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber) Guidance Note 2013, No.1 concerned with anonymity, I am
    satisfied that it is presently in the interests  of  justice  that  the
    applicant is not publicly recognised as someone  seeking  international
    protection. I am satisfied that the  applicant's  protected  rights  as
    established by article 8  ECHR  enjoy  greater  weight  than  the  open
    justice principle protected by article 10 of the ECHR: re Guardian News
    and Media Ltd and Others [2010] UKSC 1, [2010] 2 AC 697.

10. I confirm above the order made in relation to the applicant.

Background

11. The applicant asserts that she was born in Eritrea. Her stated personal
    history is detailed below.

12. The applicant's mother died in childbirth, and she was  raised  by  her
    father. At the age of 5 she relocated to Sudan with her father who  had
    secured employment in that country. Father  and  daughter  remained  in
    Sudan until August 2017 when  the  applicant  was  aged  14,  with  the
    applicant attending school from the age 6 until returning  to  Eritrea.
    She was taught in the Amharic language.

13. Upon returning to Eritrea, the applicant resided with both  her  father
    and her grandmother. She did not return to school, instead carrying out
    housework and caring for her grandmother.

14. She asserts that she was required to flee Eritrea consequent  to  fears
    arising from her being a Pentecostal Christian. A friend  was  detained
    by  the  Eritrean  authorities  in  December  2018  consequent  to  her
    adherence to Pentecostal Christianity and the applicant feared that she
    too was at risk of detention. Her father arranged with an agent for her
    to leave the country. She  initially  travelled  to  Sudan,  where  she
    remained for 9 months, before flying to Paris. She then travelled  onto
    Belgium where she was the victim of a serious assault.

15. The applicant entered the United Kingdom on 2 December  2019.  She  was
    not accompanied by any family member.  She  presented  herself  to  the
    police and informed them that she was a  minor.  She  was  subsequently
    referred to the respondent and placed in foster care.

16. By a letter dated 17 December  2019  the  Home  Office  identified  the
    applicant's physical appearance and demeanour as  'not  very  strongly'
    suggesting that she was aged over 25 and so  confirmed  that  it  would
    treat her in accordance with the processes designed for handling asylum
    claims from children.

Age assessment

17. The respondent conducted an age assessment over two meetings held on 13
    and 24 January 2020. The two social workers undertaking the  assessment
    were Mrs. Wisbeach and Ms. Gooden-Smith. A  decision  was  subsequently
    made by the respondent to bring forward the 'minded-to'  meeting  to  3
    March 2020, it being  considered  that  the  applicant  was  exhibiting
    distress  as  she  awaited  the  conclusion  of  the  assessment.   The
    respondent further decided that the  minded-to  meeting  would  not  be
    conducted by either  of  the  assessors,  but  by  Ms.  Couchman  whose
    professional role is identified  as  'Project  Manager  and  Specialist
    Advisor'. I was  informed  at  the  hearing  that  Ms.  Couchman  is  a
    qualified lawyer and not a social worker.

18. The assessment concluded on 3 March 2020 with the assessors determining
    that the applicant was then aged 19. Appendix A of  the  assessment  is
    dated 3 March 2020 and was presented to the applicant on this date.  It
    provides the following conclusion as to the applicant's age:

         '[The applicant] has the appearance and demeanour of a young  woman
         significantly over the age of 17.

         [The applicant] has also given inconsistencies in her account  that
         indicate she is over the age of 18.'

19. Such conclusion was reached  despite  neither  assessor  attending  the
    minded-to meeting. I address the minded-to meeting below.

20. Appendix B of the assessment  was  provided  to  the  Home  Office  and
    states, at para.6:

         6. Islington Children Services have assessed the person  to  be  19
             and to have the date of birth of 29/09/2000. The  reasons  for
             this are the following:

                . [The applicant's] appearance and demeanour  indicate  that
                  she is a young woman who is significantly  over  18  years
                  old.

                .  [The  applicant]  has  provided  an  account   that   has
                  inconsistencies consistent with her being over 18,  albeit
                  not significantly over.

                . [The applicant] has been unable  to  provide  details  and
                  memories of her day-to-day life outside of  her  schooling
                  despite many approaches  to  establish  this  information.
                  This inconsistency with her memory and yet her ability  to
                  give a relatively consistent timeline gives  doubt  as  to
                  whether her timeline has been learnt.

                . Professionals who have seen and assessed  [the  applicant]
                  including the Home  Office  interviewing  officer  at  her
                  screening interview have observed that her appearance  and
                  demeanour is consistent with  someone  significantly  over
                  the age of 17.'

21. Consequent to the establishing  of  the  assessed  date  of  birth  the
    applicant was transferred from the care  of  the  respondent,  provided
    under section 20 of the Children Act 1989 (the 1989  Act),  to  support
    and accommodation provided  by  the  National  Asylum  Support  Service
    (NASS).

The legal framework

22. Thornton J observed in AB  v.  Kent  County  Council  [2020]  EWHC  109
    (Admin), [2020] P.T.S.R. 746, at [18]:

         '18.     The law requires a wholly  different  treatment  of  young
         asylum  seekers  depending  on  whether  they  have  passed   their
         eighteenth birthday. This  is  of  course  in  itself  an  entirely
         artificial   and   inflexible   dividing   line,   bearing   little
         relationship to human reality but it is built into the structure of
         not only domestic law but international law in this area and it has
         to be applied as best as can be (Underhill LJ  in  BF  (Eritrea)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  872  at
         �52). Thus: a number of rights and obligations under  the  Children
         Act depend upon the distinction.  Local  authorities  are  under  a
         general duty to safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of  children
         within their area who are in need (section 17). This  includes  the
         provision of accommodation (s20). 'Child' means a person under  the
         age of eighteen (s105). It is unlawful for the Secretary  of  State
         to detain asylum seeking children.'

23.  There  is  no  statutorily  prescribed  way  identifying   how   local
    authorities are obliged to carry out age assessments. The law  proceeds
    on the basis that the most reliable means of assessing  the  age  of  a
    child or young person in circumstances where no documentary evidence is
    available is by the so-called 'Merton compliant' assessment:  R  (B)  v
    Merton  London  Borough  Council  [2003]  EWHC  1689   (Admin)(Merton),
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in BF (Eritrea) [2020] 1 All E.R. 396,
    at [53].

24. Lady Hale confirmed in R (A) v. London Borough of Croydon  [2009]  UKSC
    8, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 2557, at [51], that the question whether a person is
    a child for the purposes of section 20 of the 1989 Act is a question of
    fact which must ultimately be decided by the Tribunal and  the  process
    must be one of assessment. This involves the application of judgment on
    a variety of factors and however difficult it may  be  to  resolve  the
    issue it admits of only one answer.

25. As it is a question of fact, ultimately the question must be  a  matter
    for  the  Tribunal.  This  requires  me  to  effectively  act   in   an
    inquisitorial  role  determining,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whether the applicant was or was not a child for the  purposes  of  the
    1989 Act at the date of the age assessment. The approach  to  be  taken
    and the burden of proof to be applied were confirmed by Stanley Burnton
    J in Merton, at [37] - [38].

26. Once the Tribunal is invited to decide upon jurisdictional fact it  can
    do no more than apply the balance of probability to the  issue  without
    resorting to the concept of discharge of a burden of proof:  R  (CJ)  v
    Cardiff County Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590, [2012] 2 All E.R. 836,  at
    [21] and [23]. I am therefore required to decide whether, on a  balance
    of probability, the applicant was or was not at  the  material  time  a
    child.

27. Consequent to the claimed  age,  I  proceed  to  consider  whether  the
    applicant was a young person aged under 18 at the date of assessment. I
    proceed on the basis that it may well be inappropriate to  expect  from
    the applicant conclusive evidence of age in circumstances in which  she
    has arrived unaccompanied and without original identity documents.  The
    nature of the evaluation of evidence depends upon the particular  facts
    of the case. In the absence of any corroborative  documentary  evidence
    as to age, the starting point is the credibility of the evidence placed
    before the Tribunal, as confirmed by Aikens LJ  in  R  (AE)  v.  London
    Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547, at [23].

28. I am not confined to choose between the positions of the parties: R (W)
    v. London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWHC 1130, at [3].

Evidence

29. The parties filed two bundles, which were placed by the Tribunal in one
    lever arch file, containing 324 pages.

30. I have had the benefit of considering the totality of the evidence upon
    which the parties seek to rely, whether expressly referred to me or not
    at the hearing. The applicant attended the hearing and  gave  evidence,
    as did her former foster mother, Ms. Ghebreamnak. Mrs. Boyd, a lecturer
    at  the  applicant's  college,  gave  evidence  remotely  as  did  Mrs.
    Wisbeach, a social worker employed by the respondent, who  was  one  of
    the two age assessors in this matter. I have also  considered  the  two
    witness statements of Mr. Luke, the applicant's solicitor. In addition,
    I have considered various documents filed with the Tribunal,  including
    a case note, a health referral assessment form  and  various  documents
    authored by the Home Office.

31. I have also been aided by the  very  helpful  submissions  provided  by
    counsel who attended Field House on both days of the hearing.

32. The applicant relied  upon  the  'Age  assessment  guidance  to  social
    workers and their managers on undertaking age assessments  in  England'
    which was  published  by  the  Association  of  Directors  of  Children
    Services in October 2015 (the 'ADCS guidance'). Section 7 of the  Local
    Authority Social Services Act 1970 is not applicable to this  document,
    but as observed by Lavender J when considering its relevance  to  local
    authorities in the conduct of  age  assessments  in  R  (S)  v.  London
    Borough of Croydon [2017] EWHC 265  (Admin),  at  [41]  and  [50],  the
    authors of the guidance possessed considerable experience in the field.
    I have given appropriate consideration to this guidance.

33. The applicant is presently seeking international protection and so I do
    not detail the substance of her claim in my decision, nor do I make any
    findings or observations upon the core of the claim. That is  a  matter
    to be considered by the Home  Office  by  application  of  a  different
    standard of proof to that which is to be applied in this  matter.  Such
    approach was identified to the representatives at the  hearing  and  no
    complaint was made.

34. For the avoidance of doubt, before I embark  upon  the  search  for  an
    answer to the question now to be addressed as to  the  applicant's  age
    and date  of  birth,  I  confirm  that  I  have  done  so  without  any
    'predisposition' that the applicant is or is not a young person.

Vulnerability

35. When assessing the  applicant's  credibility,  I  have  had  particular
    regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2  of  2010:  Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance,  and  my  assessment
    has been considered in the round, taking due account  of  the  evidence
    presented and giving due allowance for the fact that many child  asylum
    seekers and victims of trafficking will have problems in  presenting  a
    coherent account of their personal history and travel to this country.

Decision

Preliminary application.

36. I initially address a request made by Ms. Benfield at  the  hearing  to
    advance a submission that the minded-to meeting  was  not  procedurally
    fair consequent  to  the  failure  by  the  respondent  to  appoint  an
    independent appropriate adult. Such complaint did not form part of  the
    original grounds. It is appropriate to  observe  that  the  applicant's
    concern arose from Mrs.  Wisbeach's  oral  evidence  presented  on  the
    second day of the hearing, in which she confirmed for  the  first  time
    that the applicant's appropriate adult at the minded-to meeting held on
    3 March 2021, Ms. Goldberg, was a former Manager of  Children's  Active
    Involvement Service (CAIS), a service provider used by  the  respondent
    in respect of all children who have social  workers,  children  'Looked
    After' by the respondent under the  1989  Act  and  care  leavers.  Ms.
    Benfield sought to rely upon a one-page print out as establishing  that
    persons connected to CAIS lacked independence. Mr.  Paget  informed  me
    that to address this issue the respondent would be required  to  secure
    further evidence, including a witness statement, and it  would  not  be
    fair to adjourn proceedings to another day. At the  hearing  I  refused
    the applicant permission to orally amend her grounds so as to rely upon
    a new ground not previously identified to either the Tribunal or to the
    respondent. Being mindful of the overriding objective as established by
    rule 2 of the 2008 Procedure Rules and the requirement that a  case  be
    dealt with fairly  and  justly,  I  was  satisfied  that  the  one-page
    document proffered by Ms. Benfield was insufficient for me  to  make  a
    reasoned decision upon the proposed amended ground. Further, I accepted
    Mr. Paget's contention that further evidence would have to  be  secured
    by  the  respondent  to  establish  both  Ms.  Goldberg's  professional
    position and the structure and role of CAIS vis-a-vis the respondent. I
    was satisfied that an adjournment to  permit  the  parties  to  further
    address this issue was not compliant with the overriding objective  and
    was not an appropriate use of resources. I was further  satisfied  that
    on the facts arising in this matter, consideration as to Ms. Goldberg's
    engagement  in  this  matter  would  ultimately  be  peripheral  to  my
    consideration.

Minded-to meeting of 3 March 2020.

37. I turn to the minded-to meeting conducted on 3 March 2020. As a  short-
    form assessment was not undertaken,  the  respondent  was  required  to
    permit the applicant a fair opportunity to respond  to  the  assessor's
    provisional view. I observe Stanley Burnton J's  conclusion  in  Merton
    that such step is mandatory, at [55].

38. It is well-established that an applicant should be  given  a  fair  and
    proper opportunity, at a stage when a possible adverse decision  is  no
    more than provisional, to deal with important  points  adverse  to  her
    case which may weigh against her: VS v. Home Office  [2014]  EWHC  2483
    QB, at [78(13)].

39. Box 10 of the age assessment form used by the respondent in this matter
    expressly reminded the assessors that a young person must  be  given  a
    chance to comment on an adverse provisional view as to their  age.  Two
    typed paragraphs were entered into this box consequent to the minded-to
    meeting. The applicant is recorded as reconfirming that she is aged  17
    and asking if there are alternative means  that  would  enable  her  to
    establish her age. She was asked at the meeting whether she possessed a
    birth or baptism certificate and  also  whether  she  could  contact  a
    family member who may be able to help corroborate her age  and/or  help
    obtain supporting documents. She stated that her birth certificate  was
    in Eritrea, but she did not have access to it or know anyone who  could
    help her obtain it.

40. Box 11 of the assessment form  identifies  the  attendees  at  the  two
    assessment interviews in January 2020. The  applicant,  Mrs.  Wisbeach,
    Ms. Gooden-Smith and other named attendees are recorded  as  attending.
    However, there is no reference as to attendees at the minded-to meeting
    held on 3 March 2020. I asked Mr. Paget  at  the  commencement  of  the
    hearing on 27 May 2021 to clarify who conducted the March  meeting.  In
    response to my request, the respondent took steps to  secure  a  second
    witness statement from Mrs. Wisbeach and to arrange for her  attendance
    on the second morning of  the  hearing.  Mrs.  Wisbeach  confirmed,  as
    detailed above, that a lawyer, Ms. Couchman, had conduct of the minded-
    to hearing. I was informed by Mrs. Wisbeach that  though  Ms.  Couchman
    has  experience  in  dealing  with  sensitive  matters,  she  was   not
    experienced as to conducting age assessment meetings.

41. The first issue of concern arises in respect of the  minded-to  meeting
    not being conducted by the  two  assessors.  Indeed,  neither  of  them
    attended. Whilst the respondent  appears  to  have  been  concerned  to
    expedite matters because of the applicant's distress at ongoing  delay,
    which is laudable, a decision was made to conduct an important  element
    of the assessment process in the absence of the actual assessors.

42. Thornton J confirmed in AB,  at  [20]  that  there  is  no  statutorily
    prescribed way in which local authorities are obliged to carry out  age
    assessments and the Courts have given guidance as to the approach to be
    taken to establish the basic requirements of an interview or assessment
    process compliant with necessary safeguards of inquiry and fairness, or
    'Merton' compliant. As confirmed at [21] of the judgment in AB relevant
    guidance includes an assessment being required to be undertaken by  two
    experienced social workers who are properly trained, and  an  applicant
    being given the opportunity to explain  any  inconsistencies  in  their
    account or anything which is likely to result  in  adverse  credibility
    findings.

43. I observe the confirmation in VS, at [78 (13)]:

         '(13)    It is "axiomatic that an applicant should be given a  fair
         and proper opportunity, at a stage when a possible adverse decision
         is no more than provisional, to deal with important points  adverse
         to his age case which may weigh against him": FZ  per  Sir  Anthony
         May P at [21]. It is not sufficient that  the  interviewing  social
         workers withdraw to consider their decision,  and  then  return  to
         present the applicant "with their conclusions without first  giving
         him the opportunity to deal with the  adverse  points":  [22].  See
         also J per Coulson J at [15]; AAM per Lang J at [94(c)]; and Durani
         per  Coulson  at  [84-87]  (in  particular,  at  [84]:  "Elementary
         fairness requires that the crucial points which are thought  to  be
         decisive against an applicant should be  identified,  in  case  the
         applicant has an explanation for them").'

44. The minded-to meeting is undoubtedly a core part of the assessment, not
    an ancillary meeting,  and  so  there  is  a  requirement  that  it  is
    conducted by the assessors. To be otherwise diminishes the notion of it
    constituting a fair and proper opportunity for the applicant to address
    potentially adverse points that may weigh against him or her.

45. Such conclusion is supported  by  Stanley  Burnton  J's  conclusion  in
    Merton, at [55], that the minded-to meeting is a mandatory mechanism by
    which an applicant can explain themselves to the decision maker, namely
    the assessors, before a final view on age is formed.

46. I am therefore satisfied that the undertaking of  a  minded-to  meeting
    requires the attendance of the two assessors. I  observe  that  in  its
    true form such meeting is not a one-way conversation, with an applicant
    simply providing observations on expressed issues  of  concern  without
    more. There is an expectation that further questions will be  asked  of
    the applicant for clarification  purposes,  and  the  totality  of  the
    evidence presented will be considered in respect  of  important  points
    that  may  provisionally  weigh   against   the   applicant.   In   the
    circumstances, being a core part  of  the  assessment,  both  assessors
    would be required to attend. If the  meeting  on  3  March  2020  truly
    constituted a minded-to meeting the failure of both assessors to attend
    can only properly be considered  to  be  a  material  irregularity  and
    procedurally unfair, the applicant not having  been  provided  with  an
    adequate opportunity to address issues of concern  with  the  assessors
    before the decision was made.

47. Before me, the respondent confirmed that it considered the meeting of 3
    March 2020 to be a minded-to meeting.  However,  a  further  matter  of
    concern arises from the evidence of Mrs. Wisbeach as presented  at  the
    hearing. Mrs. Wisbeach explained her understanding  that  Ms.  Couchman
    read the analysis section of the age assessment  form,  which  runs  to
    almost 3 pages, to the applicant. She further  explained  that  if  the
    applicant 'had brought forward something, then we would not have made a
    decision'. It was explained to me that  responsibility  fell  upon  Ms.
    Couchman to decide whether the applicant had raised a matter or matters
    that could properly bring the meeting to an early  conclusion,  with  a
    new meeting to be arranged with the  assessors  attending  at  a  later
    date. As previously  observed  Mrs.  Wisbeach  candidly  accepted  that
    whilst Ms. Couchman possessed experience in  dealing  with  matters  of
    sensitivity, she did not have experience of conducting  age  assessment
    meetings.

48. The identified arrangement is much closer to a sift assessment  than  a
    minded-to meeting. The arrangement was for the applicant to be provided
    notice of the provisional decision, to be asked  for  observations  and
    for a sift to be conducted by a lawyer, not  a  social  worker,  as  to
    whether a further meeting conducted  by  the  assessors  was  required.
    Consequently, if the applicant did not provide  information  considered
    by a non-assessor to be potentially relevant to  the  assessment,  then
    the meeting was a simple mechanism to  serve  the  prepared  assessment
    with  no  additional  consideration   by   the   assessors.   In   such
    circumstances the responses of the applicant were to be simply noted in
    box 10 of the assessment form and subject to no  consideration  by  the
    assessors. I observe that the decision  as  to  whether  the  assessors
    should be asked to revisit  their  provisional  assessment  at  another
    meeting and to consider the applicant's response was one to be made  by
    a person with limited, if any, understanding of the social work element
    of the assessment process, with there being no clear indication of what
    guidance was provided to the non-assessor, no clear  identification  as
    to what hurdle was to  be  crossed  by  the  applicant  in  respect  of
    information she provided and ultimately no clarity as to what range  of
    new information may be considered to be relevant.

49. I observe the confirmation of the High Court in AS v. London Borough of
    Croydon  [2011]  EWHC  2091  (Admin),  at  [19],  that  the  procedural
    safeguards set out in Merton and R (FZ) v. London  Borough  of  Croydon
    [2011] EWCA Civ 59 are the 'minimum standards' of fairness,  and  I  am
    satisfied that the sift nature of the meeting  held  on  3  March  2020
    fails to meet minimum standards. It simply  failed  to  adhere  to  the
    basic requirements of  a  minded-to  meeting.  That  Ms.  Couchman  was
    empowered in accordance with her own judgment to bring the meeting to a
    conclusion and to arrange a subsequent meeting  between  the  applicant
    and the assessors further establishes the sift nature of  the  meeting.
    That the decision was to be served unless and until  a  lawyer,  not  a
    qualified and experienced social worker,  decided  that  the  assessors
    should attend to conduct further enquiries fails to  meet  the  minimum
    standards established in age  assessments.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    procedure adopted was unfair, denying the  applicant  the  instrumental
    value of contributing relevant information  to  the  decision-maker(s).
    The process adopted by the respondent to  the  assessment  process  was
    therefore unlawful.

50. Having found that the meeting of  3  March  2020  was  conducted  in  a
    procedurally unfair manner, and therefore unlawfully, I am not required
    to further consider as to whether Ms. Couchman provided  the  applicant
    with a true opportunity to address issues of concern.  I  do  not  have
    evidence on this issue from Ms.  Couchman  and  in  such  circumstances
    consider it inappropriate to make a detailed finding of  fact  on  this
    matter. However, it is appropriate that I observe the contents detailed
    in box 11 to be unusual for a minded-to meeting as beyond the applicant
    re-asserting  her  age,  the  focus  is  upon  her  ability  to  secure
    corroborative documentary evidence as to her age. No reference is  made
    to  the  applicant  addressing  relevant  matters  of  adverse  concern
    identified in the analysis section of the assessment, said to have been
    read to her by  Ms.  Couchman,  even  to  the  limited  extent  of  the
    applicant stating her agreement or  disagreement  with  the  individual
    matters of concern raised. The applicant was clear in her oral evidence
    before me that the conclusion, or analysis, section of  the  assessment
    was interpreted to her over a 'very short  period  of  time'.  She  was
    explicit that she was not provided an opportunity  to  provide  comment
    upon the contents of the assessment. Whilst  the  applicant's  evidence
    may be consistent with the recording in box  11  as  to  her  primarily
    answering questions  as  to  whether  she  could  secure  corroborative
    documentary evidence, I have decided that I have insufficient  evidence
    before me to make a finding on this  matter.  However,  the  respondent
    should always be aware that a minded-to meeting permits an applicant  a
    fair and proper opportunity to deal with important  points  adverse  to
    their case and that elementary fairness requires  that  crucial  points
    that are  thought  to  be  decisive  against  an  applicant  should  be
    identified and an applicant permitted, and encouraged,  to  provide  an
    explanation for them.

Consideration

51. The fact that I have found the age assessment to  have  been  conducted
    unlawfully does not mean, per se, that the  applicant  succeeds.  I  am
    required to consider the question posed in my inquisitorial  role,  and
    so proceed to consider the rest of the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    parties.

52. I turn to the core observations contained within the age assessment:

           . The applicant has the appearance  of  a  woman  aged  over  25
             years.

           . She has signs of aging on her face:  lines  around  her  eyes,
             smile lines, and 'what may be' age spots. It is  accepted  the
             age spots 'could be' moles.

                o 'It could be that childhood sun exposure and the difficult
                  experiences of LD's last two  years  have  contributed  to
                  signs of aging. However, it is unlikely that it would have
                  contributed to LD looking over the age of 25 years ...'

           . The applicant's level of  emotional  regulation,  insight  and
             reflection into her life and experiences  was  quite  advanced
             for someone who is 17 years, though 'this may in part' be  due
             to the applicant having lived alone with her father  for  most
             of  her  life  and  'perhaps'  needing  to   learn   emotional
             regulation early on in life.

           . The applicant stated in  her  interview  and  when  she  first
             presented in December 2019 that her appendix  was  removed  in
             2012, when aged 10, whilst in her  medical  health  assessment
             she stated that she was 12 years old.

           . There is a  discrepancy  as  to  when  the  applicant  injured
             herself playing football: aged 10, 10 or 11, 12.

           . There is a discrepancy as  to  when  the  applicant  completed
             school: Grade 10 when aged 14 in 2017; Grade 9 when aged 14 in
             2017. However, the assessors accept:

                o 'all further information regarding her  schooling  was  in
                  line with her completing up to Grade 9. It could have been
                  she made a mistake in the first interview.'

           . The applicant's ability to disclose and  very  quickly  access
             support following her sexual assault in Belgium is  identified
             as being 'advanced' for someone aged 17 though:

                o 'it may be that growing up with her father has allowed  LF
                  to mature faster and therefore also be more  able  to  act
                  confidently in times of need.'

           .  Inconsistency  was   identified   as   to   the   applicant's
             independence skills with her stated limited  ability  to  cook
             and wash clothes contrasted with her history of  carrying  out
             housework in Eritrea.

           . Concern is raised as to the recollection of certain periods of
             the applicant's life:

                o 'Having spent 9 years living in Al Demi, one may expect  a
                  more detailed description of her life  especially  as  she
                  recalls school so clearly. Moreover, LD spent 9 months  in
                  Bahri but has almost no information  to  provide  for  her
                  time there. LD's lack of knowledge/recall about  her  time
                  [in] Bahri may also be due to it being  a  difficult  time
                  having separated from her father and being uncertain about
                  her future of safety. However, this is at odds  with  LD's
                  ability to clearly recall her journey from  Sudan  to  the
                  UK, which [was] also a significantly stressful time in her
                  life.'

53. The assessors identified the applicant  as  shaking  mildly  at  times,
    though it was unclear if this was due to nerves.

54. The  assessors  further  accepted  that  the  applicant  was  generally
    consistent  as  to  her  timeline  of  events.  As  to  the  identified
    inconsistences, the assessors accepted that they were small  and  could
    be attributed to a number of factors:  not  understanding  the  Western
    calendar; not celebrating  her  birthday  (prior  to  turning  15)  and
    therefore not having a clear  recollection  of  her  age  at  different
    times; or simply due to poor memory of  earlier  years.  The  assessors
    confirmed that 'regardless  of  the  reasoning,  these  inconsistencies
    would only make [sic] count for a difference of 1 - 2 years,  in  which
    case we would give the benefit of the doubt'.

55. Ultimately, the primary reason relied upon by the  respondent  is  that
    the applicant has the appearance of a  woman  aged  over  25,  in  part
    identified by signs of aging on her  face.  Though  demeanour  is  also
    relied upon, it is done so hesitantly. Before me Mr. Paget also  relied
    upon the applicant's ongoing failure to take steps to secure her  birth
    certificate or any document that would establish her age.

56. As to the assessment, I agree with Mr. Paget that in this matter  I  am
    able to place weight upon the evidence recorded in the assessment,  and
    the observations of the assessors, though such weight  must  take  into
    account the unlawfulness of the procedure adopted. I accept Mr. Paget's
    observation that by  means  of  her  witness  statement  and  her  oral
    evidence the applicant raises few  complaints  as  to  the  provisional
    observations reached by the assessors as detailed above, at  [52]-[54].
    I observe at [21]-[28] of her witness statement the applicant confirmed
    that she does not precisely know when  her  appendix  was  removed  but
    believes it to have been when she was  aged  10.  Her  reference  at  a
    health assessment to it having occurred when she was aged 12 was simply
    a mistake consequent to the passage of time and her  being  reduced  to
    guessing to answer the question. She confirmed that her command of  the
    English language is not as great as that concluded by the assessors. As
    for her exuded maturity, she confirmed that  responsibility  fell  upon
    her consequent to her circumstances in Eritrea and Sudan. Her  maturity
    and independence is said to have further grown when she was required to
    care for her grandmother.

57. I had the opportunity to hear the applicant give evidence, as  well  as
    read her written evidence. Mr.  Paget  skillfully  cross-examined  her,
    which she accepted with good  grace.  No  inconsistencies  in  evidence
    arose. Upon careful  consideration,  I  found  her  to  be  a  truthful
    witness. I was particularly struck by her evidence to Ms. Benfield,  in
    re-examination, that she had sought to telephone a number  provided  to
    her by 'Abraham', who  was  helping  her  on  her  travels,  which  she
    believed may have enabled her to contact her father. She explained that
    she tried to phone the number whilst she was in Belgium, but she  found
    that it was not working. She must have been aware that  such  admission
    could potentially have an adverse effect  upon  my  assessment  of  her
    credibility, but she provided it willingly. It struck me  at  the  time
    that it was the answer of an honest person. Having been  subject  to  a
    serious physical assault in Belgium, it is entirely understandable that
    she would want to contact her father. I am left in no doubt that if she
    had contacted him, she would have informed me.

58. My primary focus is on the  credibility  of  the  applicant's  evidence
    concerning her age, but I am permitted to have  regard  to  credibility
    more generally, provided that my primary focus is not forgotten.

59. Having heard the witnesses give  evidence,  I  found  them  all  to  be
    credible and  honest.  However,  they  are  not  capable  of  providing
    determinative evidence as to the applicant's age, so I  consider  their
    evidence in relation to the respondent's observations detailed above.

60. Mrs. Ghebreamnak was ultimately unwilling  to  identify  what  age  she
    believed the applicant to be, explaining that  her  role  as  a  foster
    mother was to assume that those who came to her were children  and  she
    did not make further enquiries on the issue.  I  am  satisfied  to  the
    requisite standard as to Ms. Ghebreamnak being accurate in her evidence
    that in the house the applicant rarely used the phone provided  to  her
    and that she did not use her phone to access social  media.  I  further
    find that  Ms.  Ghebreamnak  was  truthful  when  recounting  that  the
    applicant had confirmed that her father remained in  Eritrea,  and  she
    did not  have  a  telephone  number  to  contact  him.  I  accept  Mrs.
    Ghebreamnak's evidence that the applicant presented as studious  during
    the months she resided with her and did not have many friends.

61. Mrs. Boyd gave evidence in support of the applicant and confirmed  that
    she attended English language lessons with her at college from December
    2019 to March 2020. At the commencement of lockdown resulting from  the
    present pandemic college lessons reverted to being held online  and  so
    the  applicant  attended  remotely.  During  the  short  time   college
    attendance was in person Mrs. Boyd did not consider the applicant to be
    older than claimed. Whilst it is not possible for Mrs. Boyd to cogently
    confirm whether the applicant was 17 or 19 at such time, I am satisfied
    that she did not have concerns that  the  applicant  was  a  woman  who
    appeared to be aged 25. I accept that if Ms. Boyd  had  been  concerned
    that the applicant was older than claimed she would have escalated such
    concerns to college management.

62. Turning to my consideration, I observe  that  the  application  of  the
    benefit of the doubt in an age assessment matter is nothing  more  than
    an acknowledgement that age assessment cannot be  concluded  with  100%
    accuracy, absent definitive documentary evidence, and as in the case of
    unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  who   may   also   have   been
    traumatised, unlikely to be supported by other evidence. On such basis,
    its proper application is that where, having considered  the  evidence,
    it is concluded that there is doubt as to whether an individual is over
    18 or not, then in those circumstances, it should be concluded that the
    applicant is under 18. Thus, the benefit of the doubt  is  not  of  use
    where a specific date or age has to be determined except insofar as  it
    requires a sympathetic assessment of  the  evidence:  R  (AS)  v.  Kent
    County Council [2017] UKUT 446 (IAC), at [20] - [21].

63. I am mindful as to the caution that is to be exercised  in  respect  of
    the applicant's evidence, as noted by Stanley Burnton J in  Merton,  at
    [28]:

         'Given the impossibility of any decision maker being able  to  make
         an objectively verifiable determination of the age of an  applicant
         who may be in the age range of, say, 16 to 20, it is  necessary  to
         take a history from him or her with a view to  determining  whether
         it is true. A history that is accepted as true  and  is  consistent
         with an age below 18 will enable the decision maker in such a  case
         to decide that the applicant is a child.  Conversely,  however,  an
         untrue history, while relevant, is not necessarily indicative of  a
         lie as to the age of the applicant. Lies may be  told  for  reasons
         unconnected with the applicant's case as to his age, for example to
         avoid his return to his country of  origin.  Furthermore,  physical
         appearance and behaviour cannot be isolated from  the  question  of
         the veracity  of  the  applicant:  appearance,  behaviour  and  the
         credibility of his account are all matters  that  reflect  on  each
         other.'

64. I find that the applicant is consistent as to her timeline of  personal
    events. I have found her to be an honest witness and  accept  that  she
    made a mistake when asserting in a medical assessment that her appendix
    was removed when she was aged 12, rather than 10.  Her  credibility  is
    not impacted by her inability to precisely recall when she was  injured
    playing football. The incident was several  years  ago,  when  she  was
    young. I observe that the assessors accepted  that  the  applicant  may
    have made an error as to when she completed school,  in  light  of  the
    overall general consistency in answers concerned with her education.

65. I can identify no cogent basis for the  assertion  that  the  applicant
    acted in an 'advanced' and mature manner, beyond that expected of a 17-
    year-old, following a serious assault to which  she  was  subjected  in
    Belgium. No cogent  explanation  has  to  date  been  provided  by  the
    respondent as to why an adult level  of  maturity  is  required  for  a
    female victim of a serious crime to disclose events to  others  and  to
    seek to access support. There is no  reasonable  basis  for  concluding
    that the taking  of  such  steps  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    applicant was not 17 years of age at the time.  This  'concern'  should
    not have been relied upon, particularly when the assessors proceeded to
    acknowledge that her 'advanced' maturity may have been founded upon her
    family circumstances.

66. I place no weight on  the  purported  inconsistency  in  the  applicant
    enjoying limited able to cook and wash clothes in this country when she
    carried out housework in Eritrea. The failure by the  assessor  to  ask
    the pertinent question as to whether she used electrical appliances  in
    Eritrea is striking.

67. I agree with Ms. Benfield that the reliance upon  the  applicant  being
    unable to recollect much of her 9  months  in  Bahri  wholly  fails  to
    engage with the fact that she was separated  from  her  father,  living
    with others and did not leave the property. I place no weight upon this
    identified observation of the respondent.

68. I understand the concern of the respondent, which may well be shared by
    other local authorities, as to the perceived lack  of  effort  made  by
    some undocumented minor asylum seekers  to  secure  relevant  documents
    from home that would be determinative as to their age. However,  people
    fleeing persecution are often unable to  bring  corroborative  evidence
    with them. I have considered the applicant's  evidence  with  care  and
    taking it in the round I am satisfied that she is genuine and honest in
    her assertion that she has  no  ability  to  secure  the  documentation
    required by the respondent. I accept the evidence of  Mrs.  Ghebreamnak
    that the applicant was not in contact with  her  father  whilst  living
    with her, nor active on social media. This strongly suggests  that  the
    applicant was not in contact with  family  or  friends  in  Eritrea.  I
    further accept that the applicant was honest in her evidence to me that
    she sought to contact her father in Belgium  but  the  number  she  was
    provided did not work. I further accept  that  there  is  no  means  of
    contacting her father by post. In the circumstances, I place no adverse
    weight upon her inability to secure her birth certificate, or any other
    document that would establish her true age.

69. The respondent opines that the applicant was aged 19  at  the  date  of
    assessment. It is clear from the assessment that the assessors believed
    the applicant to possess an appearance identifying her as being aged 25
    or older. This was in part their own visual assessment, but also imbued
    with the erroneous understanding that the Home Office believed  her  to
    be aged over 25. Mr. Paget acknowledged this error before  me.  I  note
    that the assessors  did  not  conduct  a  short-form,  or  abbreviated,
    assessment as permitted if they concluded that she was an adult aged 25
    years or older: AB, at [35].

70. Mr. Paget asked me to conclude that the applicant is aged over 25 years
    by my own visual reference. Whilst it may be open to me to rely upon  a
    visual reference in respect of someone significantly older than 18, for
    example aged 25 years or older, and Ms. Benfield did not submit that  I
    could not adopt such a course of action, I remind myself that it  could
    only be in a clear-cut case where such  approach  could  be  considered
    appropriate. The respondent's position by means of  her  assessment  is
    that the applicant was aged 19, and so on the respondent's case  I  was
    observing her at  the  time  of  the  hearing  as  a  20-year-old.  The
    assessment was conducted by the assessors  in  January  2020,  some  17
    months ago. Therefore, I was  not  considering  her  appearance  as  it
    presented at the date of assessment. This is not a  clear-cut  case.  I
    therefore do not undertake the task proposed by Mr. Paget.

71. The purpose  of  the  respondent's  assessment  was  to  establish  the
    applicant's chronological age based upon information derived  from  her
    and an assessment of the credibility and plausibility of that evidence.
    If  the  chronological  information  is   consistent,   plausible   and
    believable then no apparent observation  about  chance  appearance  and
    demeanour is likely to tip the balance against the age  stated  by  the
    child or young person: R (AM) v London Borough of Croydon  [2011]  EWHC
    3308 (Admin), at [44], as cited in R (BM) v. London Borough of  Hackney
    [2016] EWHC 3338 (Admin), at [44(iii)].

72. I have observed that the  applicant  has  been  consistent  as  to  her
    claimed age throughout and consistent to the circumstances in which she
    was informed as to her age. I have found the applicant to be an  honest
    and credible  witness.  She  is  consistent  as  to  her  chronological
    timeline. The evidence of Mrs. Ghebreamnak and Mrs. Boyd satisfactorily
    answer a number of concerns raised by the respondent. I have found  the
    applicant to be honest as to why she is not in possession of her  birth
    certificate and as to why she is presently  unable  to  secure  it,  or
    other  documents  that  may  be  determinative  as  to  her  age.   The
    respondent's concerns as to demeanour are incapable of having  anything
    other than limited weight placed upon them. Being  mindful  as  to  the
    standard of proof, the respondent's  concerns  as  to  the  applicant's
    appearance do not tip the balance as to age.

73. I am satisfied to the requisite standard that the applicant is truthful
    as to her date of birth and therefore as to her age.

74. Though critical of the approach adopted by the  respondent  as  to  the
    minded-to meeting, I wish to take this opportunity to observe  that  it
    is clearly apparent to me that the assessors,  Mrs.  Wisbeach  and  Ms.
    Gooden-Smith,  conducted  the  meetings  in  January  2020  with  great
    sensitivity being mindful that the applicant reported being the  victim
    of a  serious  criminal  offence  some  four  months  previously.  This
    Tribunal can, and should, properly acknowledge the skill and care  that
    is evident in the approach adopted to the January meetings in light  of
    the applicant's particular circumstances.

75. To the requisite standard I find the following:

          i. The applicant was born on 20 September 2002.

         ii. The applicant  was  aged  17  at  the  date  the  respondent's
             assessment was handed to her on 3 March 2020.

        iii. The applicant was aged 18 at the date of the hearing.

         iv. The applicant is presently aged 18.



Summary of Decision

76. It is declared that the applicant's date of birth is 20 September 2002.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 22 June 2021

