
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/05767/2019 |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |BALHAV SINGH                                 |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE MR JUSTICE FORDHAM

HAVING considered all documents lodged and  having  heard  Billal  Malik  of
counsel, instructed by ABK Solicitors, for the Applicant and Matthew  Fraser
of counsel, instructed by GLD, for the  Respondent  at  a  hearing  on  16th
December 2020

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

   1) The application for judicial review is refused for the reasons in the
      attached judgment.


   2) The Applicant shall pay the Respondent's costs to be taxed if not
      agreed.

      Signed:     [pic]


                 Mr Justice Fordham


      Dated:           27th January 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                                    [pic]
                                                      Case No: JR/05767/2019
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                             27 January 2021
                                   Before:
                             MR JUSTICE FORDHAM

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:
                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of
                                BALHAV SINGH
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

        BILLAL MALIK (instructed by ABK Solicitors) for the Applicant
            MATTHEW FRASER (instructed by GLD) for the Respondent
                      Hearing date: 16th December 2020

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                               J U D G M E N T
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
MR JUSTICE FORDHAM:

Introduction

 1. This is an application for judicial review.  It  is  brought  with  the
    permission of UTJ Allen, granted on 10  February  2020  after  an  oral
    hearing. The mode of hearing involved me being  physically  present  in
    the hearing room at Field House together with the usher.  The  Tribunal
    building and hearing room were open to the public.  Counsel  and  their
    team members attended the hearing remotely by  Skype.  That  eliminated
    any risk to any of them from having to travel to  Field  House,  or  be
    present in the hearing room. Both Counsel were  satisfied,  as  was  I,
    that that mode of hearing involved no prejudice  to  the  interests  of
    their clients. The hearing and  its  start  time  were  listed  on  the
    Tribunal's hearings list at Field House. Any person - whether a  member
    of the press or public - who wished to observe the hearing but  was  or
    felt unable to be present in the hearing room would have been  able  to
    contact the Tribunal to seek permission to observe the hearing remotely
    by Skype. The hearing was recorded  through  the  Tribunal's  recording
    system. This ruling will be  available  in  the  public  domain.  I  am
    satisfied that the open justice principle was  secured,  and  that  the
    mode of hearing was necessary, justified and appropriate.

The Claim

 2. The Applicant seeks to impugn the Respondent (the Secretary of State)'s
    decision dated 16 August 2019 by which the Secretary of  State  granted
    the Applicant limited leave to remain for 30  months  and  declined  to
    grant him indefinite leave to remain (ILR). The Applicant says that  to
    refuse to grant ILR "outside the immigration  rules"  was  unreasonable
    and so unlawful, and asks the Tribunal to make a  declaration  to  that
    effect. The essential argument, as I see it,  can  be  encapsulated  as
    follows:

      a. The Applicant's Premise is that (a) it was and is unreasonable  for
         the Secretary of State to seek to maintain that a notice of removal
         decision (Form IS151A) was served on the  Applicant  on  2  October
         2008 and (b) no issue estoppel ought to preclude the Applicant from
         so arguing in these proceedings.

      b. The Applicant's  Analysis,  based  on  that  premise,  is  then  as
         follows. Previous decisions in which ILR was not granted, on (i) 13
         February 2012 and/or (ii) 15 April  2014  and/or  (iii)  6  January
         2015, constituted an 'historic injustice'. That is because, but for
         reliance on 2 October 2008 service of Form IS151A, ILR  should  and
         would have been granted. That makes it unreasonable and an abuse of
         power for the Secretary of State not now to grant ILR, outside  the
         immigration  rules  but  pursuant  to  the  Secretary  of   State's
         statutory power under section 3 of the Immigration  Act  1971.  The
         Tribunal should so declare.

Six Issues

 3. As can be seen, the Applicant's essential argument embodies a number of
    elements. Mr Malik  identified  six  issues  which  he  and  Mr  Fraser
    addressed. They were as follows. Issue [1]: the reasonableness  of  the
    Secretary of State maintaining that IS151A was served on the  Applicant
    on 2 October 2008. Issue [2]:  whether  issue  estoppel  precludes  the
    Applicant from contesting issue [1]. Issue [3]: whether the decision 13
    February 2012 constituted an 'historic injustice'. Issue  [4]:  whether
    the decisions 15 April  2014  and/or  6  January  2015  constituted  an
    'historic injustice'. Issue [5]: whether  it  is  unreasonable  and  an
    abuse of power not now to grant  ILR  outside  the  immigration  rules.
    Issue [6]: whether, if so, the Tribunal should grant a  declaration  to
    that effect. As  can  be  seen:  issues  [1]  and  [2]  relate  to  the
    Applicant's Premise; issues  [3]  to  [6]  relate  to  the  Applicant's
    Analysis (based on that premise).

What Happened In This Case: The Immigration Rules

 4. In order to understand this case it  is  necessary  to  appreciate  the
    sequence  of  key  events,  both  as  they  concern  the  relevant  and
    applicable immigration rules,  and  as  they  concern  the  Applicant's
    position. I will start with the  relevant  and  applicable  immigration
    rules, as authoritatively analysed by the appellate Courts.

 5. At all material times prior to 9  July  2012,  paragraph  276B  of  the
    immigration rules (so far as material to this case) provided that:

The requirements to be met by an Applicant for [ILR] on the ground  of  long
residence in the United Kingdom are that ... he has had at  least  14  years
continuous residence in the United Kingdom, excluding any  period  spent  in
the United Kingdom following service of a [relevant] notice...

It is common ground that Form IS151A was a relevant notice for the  purposes
of paragraph 276B; and that  service  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  the
Applicant of Form  IS151A  on  2  October  2008  would  have  triggered  the
exclusion described  in  paragraph  276B,  in  relation  to  the  subsequent
period. This explains the significance of the Applicant's Premise.

 6. By HC 194 (made on 13 June 2012) the old paragraph 276B  was  replaced,
    with effect from 9 July 2012, with new  paragraphs  276ADE  and  276BE.
    These new rules (so far as material to this  case)  had  the  following
    effect. Paragraph 276ADE now provided that:

The requirements to be met by an  Applicant  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of  the  application,
the Applicant ... has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
...

Paragraph 276BE provided that, where these requirements are satisfied:

... limited leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK may  be
granted for a period not exceeding 30 months ...

Paragraph 276BE was later  amended  with  effect  from  28  April  2014  but
neither Counsel suggested that those  amendments  were  significant  to  the
analysis.

 7. The basic principle as  to  "simple  fairness"  and  considerations  of
    "retrospectivity" of immigration rule changes  was  described  by  Lord
    Brown in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25 at paragraphs 33-39. In particular  (at
    paragraph 39):

... the changes in  the  immigration  rules,  unless  they  specify  to  the
contrary, take effect whenever they say they take effect with regard to  all
... applications, those pending no less than those yet to be made.

 8.  HC  194  (made  on  13  June  2012)  contained  express   transitional
    provisions, and further transitional provisions were introduced  by  HC
    565 (made on 5 September 2012, with effect from 6 September 2012).  The
    effect of  those  provisions,  on  their  correct  interpretation,  was
    identified in two later judgments of the Court of Appeal:

      a. The transitional provisions  contained  within  HC  194,  correctly
         interpreted, had this consequence. An application made prior  to  9
         July 2012 was to be decided in accordance with  the  old  paragraph
         276B. That was decided by a judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
         Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402, handed down on 2 April 2014.

      b.  However,  the  provisions  contained  within  HC  565,   correctly
         interpreted, had this consequence.  The  'window  of  time'  within
         which an application made prior to 9 July 2012 was to be decided in
         accordance with the old paragraph 276B (as explained  in  Edgehill)
         was 9 July 2012 to 6 September 2012. From 7 September 2012, the new
         paragraph  276ADE  and  276BE  applied  to  a   decision   on   any
         application, including one made prior to  9  July  2012.  That  was
         decided by judgment of the Court of Appeal in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ
         74, handed down on 12 February 2015.

Until Singh was decided on 12 February  2015  a  prevalent  view  had  been,
after Edgehill, that old paragraph 276B continued  to  be  applicable  to  a
decision made after 6 September 2012, on an  application  made  prior  to  9
July 2012. Singh corrected that  view  as  wrong  in  law,  on  the  correct
interpretation of HC 565.

What Happened In This Case: The Applicant

 9. I turn to the Applicant and  events  concerning  him.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 1 October 1997 and claimed asylum using  his  correct
    name ("Balhav Singh") and correct date of birth ("1 May 1975").  Asylum
    was refused on 2 February 1998 but he was given leave to  remain  until
    15 April 1998. His UK entry date of 1 October 1997 means that 14  years
    (based on continuous qualifying residence and no relevant notice having
    been served) would have been 1 October 2011 for the purposes of the old
    paragraph 276B. It means that 20 years (based on continuous  qualifying
    residence) would have been 1 October  2017  for  the  purposes  of  new
    paragraph 276ADE.

10. On 2 October 2008, the Applicant was apprehended working illegally  and
    was interviewed by immigration officials. At this stage he  gave  (what
    he later came to acknowledge had been) a false name ("Ravinder  Singh")
    and a false date of birth ("5 March 1975"), and he now told immigration
    officials that he had entered the United Kingdom in 2006. It is  common
    ground that  he  was  served  on  2  October  2008  with  a  Form  IS96
    (notification of temporary admission)  which  told  him  that  he  must
    'report on 7 October 2008 and thereafter  as  advised'.  It  is  common
    ground that he reported on 7 October 2008,  but  that  he  subsequently
    absconded. The Secretary of State has maintained, and the Applicant has
    denied, that alongside Form IS96 the Applicant  was  also  served  with
    Form IS151A on 2 October 2008. An IS151A had two parts: Part 1  (Notice
    to a Person Liable to  Removal)  and  Part  2  (Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision).

11. On 12 January 2011 a firm of solicitors (N Sharma & Co) wrote a letter,
    insisting on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  that  his  correct  name  was
    "Ravinder Singh" and his "correct date of  birth"  5  March  1975.  The
    letter described him as having arrived in the UK in  October  1997  and
    claimed that the details of name ("Balhav Singh") and date of birth ("1
    May 1975") given by him when he claimed asylum in October 1997 had been
    incorrect because he was "very scared". The letter  insisted  that  the
    Applicant had given his  "correct  name  and  date  of  birth'  to  the
    immigration officer in October 2008. The 12 January 2011  letter  asked
    the Secretary of State to confirm that the Applicant's case would  fall
    into the category of "legacy" asylum cases (a programme later described
    by the Court of Appeal in SH (Iran) [2014] EWCA Civ 1469 at  paragraphs
    50-55). The letter referred to the Applicant as having been resident in
    the UK since 1997 and requested that he should be given ILR.

12. By a letter dated 13 February 2012 the  Secretary  of  State  explained
    that the Case Resolution Directorate had been dealing with  "unresolved
    asylum applications, such as yours" so as to deal with "leave to remain
    in accordance with the existing law and policy" and that having  "fully
    reviewed" the case "the outcome" was that the Applicant had  "no  basis
    of stay in the UK".

13. On 11 May 2012 new solicitors (Haris Ali & Co) wrote on the Applicant's
    behalf submitting that: "Given our client's length of stay in  the  UK,
    he is now entitled to be granted indefinite leave to remain  under  the
    14 year policy". After the making  of  HC  194  on  13  June  2012  the
    Applicant's solicitors commenced judicial  review  proceedings  in  the
    High Court claiming unlawful delay in decision-making by the  Secretary
    of State ("the 2012 Judicial Review"). On 10 October 2012 HHJ Langan QC
    refused permission for judicial  review,  endorsing  the  Secretary  of
    State's summary grounds of defence as accurately  analysing  the  case,
    and certified the claim as totally without merit. Those summary grounds
    of resistance had taken the point against the  Applicant  that  he  had
    been served with Form IS151A on 2 October 2008 excluding  him  from  14
    year residence eligibility under the old paragraph 276B. On 15  January
    2014 HHJ Vosper QC refused permission for judicial review in  a  second
    set of judicial review  proceedings,  where  unlawful  delay  was  also
    claimed. Like HHJ Langan QC, HHJ  Vosper  QC  certified  the  claim  as
    totally without merit.

14. On 14 February 2014 the Applicant's solicitors (Haris Ali  &  Co)  made
    further representations in  support  of  ILR.  On  15  April  2014  the
    Secretary of State refused ILR, again  taking  the  point  against  the
    Applicant that he had been served with Form IS151A on 2  October  2008,
    which excluded him from 14 year residence eligibility  under  paragraph
    276B.  By now, the Court of Appeal had  handed  down  its  judgment  in
    Edgehill on 2 April 2014. The Applicant launched an  appeal  on  7  May
    2014 ("the 2014 Appeal") against the refusal dated 15 April 2014. After
    an oral hearing on 24 September  2014,  FTTJ  Blake  allowed  the  2014
    Appeal as follows: "Appeal allowed to the limited extent that Secretary
    of State's decision in respect of article 8 was not in accordance  with
    the authority of Edgehill. Further [since]  there  is  to  be  a  fresh
    decision, the Secretary of State should obtain and  serve  evidence  of
    the alleged service  of  the  IS151A  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    application under the long residence rules".

15. On 6 January 2015 the Secretary of State served a new decision refusing
    ILR. That refusal was maintained on 30 April 2015, relying on the  fact
    of service on 2 October 2008 of the Form IS151A as serving  to  exclude
    the Applicant for the purposes of the old paragraph 276B. By  now,  the
    Court of Appeal had handed down its judgment in Singh  on  12  February
    2015. A third set of judicial review proceedings was then issued on  28
    May 2015 ("the 2015 Judicial Review"), this time in the Upper Tribunal.
    An acknowledgement of service with summary grounds  of  resistance  and
    supporting documents was filed by the Secretary of State, some time  in
    or after June 2015. On 7 March 2016 UTJ Jacobs refused  permission  for
    judicial review and certified the claim as totally  without  merit.  In
    his reasons UTJ  Jacobs  recorded  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    concluded  that  the  Applicant  had  been  issued  with  Form  IS151A,
    describing this as "a conclusion  reached  by  a  rational  process  of
    reasoning". UTJ Jacobs also referred to "the limited temporal effect of
    the Edgehill decision following the decision in Singh".  Permission  to
    appeal to the Court of Appeal was pursued on the Applicant's behalf but
    refused by Sir Kenneth Parker, sitting as  a  Judge  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, on 18 December 2017.

16. On 28 April 2018 the Applicant applied again for  ILR.  By  decision  7
    March 2019 the Secretary of State refused that application  and  issued
    an  enforcement  notice.  The  Applicant's  current   solicitors   (ABK
    Solicitors) then lodged an appeal in the context of which they filed an
    expert report dated 17 June 2019 of Ms Briggs. The Secretary  of  State
    gave notice of the wish to withdraw the decision of  7  March  2019,  a
    decision to which an entry on 6 August 2019 in the GCID (the name given
    to a 'case record sheet') refers. On reconsideration, and by a decision
    letter dated 16 August 2019 the Secretary of State granted the 30 month
    limited leave to remain based on paragraph 276ADE and paragraph  276BE,
    but refused ILR. As  I  said  at  the  outset,  these  judicial  review
    proceedings impugn as unreasonable and so unlawful that decision  dated
    16 August 2019 not to grant ILR outside the rules.

The Impugned 2019 Decision: Application of the Rules

17. Before embarking on a consideration of the six issues [1] to [6], it is
    right to recognise that the impugned decision of 16 August 2019  is  an
    unimpeachable application of  the  current  immigration  rules  to  the
    Applicant's case, in line with the principle in  Odelola.  The  current
    rules, applicable since 9 July 2012 (and  applicable  to  any  decision
    made after 6 September 2012, even on an application made before 9  July
    2012), allow the Applicant to obtain a maximum 30-month  limited  leave
    to remain based on the 20 years' continuous  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the milestone which he passed on 1 October 2017. That is  what
    the Secretary of State has granted.

18. Mr Malik submitted that it is "implicit" in the decision of  16  August
    2019  that  an  "operative  reason"  for  that  decision  included  the
    Secretary of State's continued reliance on the position which  she  has
    previously maintained, namely that Form IS151A had been served  on  the
    Applicant on 2 October 2008.  I  cannot  accept  that  submission.  The
    decision of 16 August 2019 is squarely based on the application of  the
    current and applicable immigration rules. The question of the  previous
    exclusion based on service of a relevant notice on 2 October 2008 plays
    no part in it. The GCID notes of 6  August  2019,  on  which  Mr  Malik
    relied, far from supporting his contention, record that the serving  of
    a relevant notice "no longer 'stops the clock'". That reflects the fact
    that past service of a relevant notice is no longer an exclusion  under
    the current rules. It is true that in defending  this  judicial  review
    challenge to the impugned decision, the Secretary  of  State  maintains
    the position that the Form IS151A was served on  2  October  2008.  But
    that does not mean that this is an inferred operative  reason  for  the
    impugned decision. It is not. The Secretary of State has discharged her
    Odelola duty and has decided the application of 28 April 2018 for leave
    to remain on the basis of the applicable immigration rules.

19. Having said that, discharge of the Odelola duty, in faithfully applying
    the relevant immigration rules, is not the  end  of  the  case.  It  is
    common ground that the Secretary of State had power, under section 3 of
    the 1971 Act, to grant ILR  and  to  do  so  "outside  the  immigration
    rules". I encapsulated the  Applicant's  case  at  the  start  of  this
    judgment. As Mr Malik put it in his skeleton argument:

In making the instant  decision  to  refuse  ILR  on  16  August  2019,  the
[Secretary of State] ought to have taken  [the]  'historic  injustice'  into
account. The  omission  to  do  so  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable.  Had  the
[Secretary of State] taken the 'historic injustice' into account,  the  only
just and reasonable (in the Wednesbury  sense)  decision  available  to  the
[Secretary of State] would have been an award of ILR.

The question is whether that analysis is correct in law.

Issues [3]-[6]: The Applicant's Analysis (Assuming the Applicant's Premise)

20. I am going to begin my analysis of this case by testing  the  position,
    on the assumption that Mr Malik is right as to the Applicant's Premise,
    to see whether the Applicant's Analysis - on that premise - is sound in
    law. In considering issues [3] to [6], I am therefore going  to  assume
    in the Applicant's favour that he is right about issues [1] and [2].  I
    will assume that at all material times  (including  now)  it  has  been
    unreasonable for the Secretary of State to maintain that the  Applicant
    was served with Form IS151A on 2 October 2008, and that it is  open  to
    the Applicant so to submit in these proceedings.

The Decision of 13 February 2012

21. I will start with issue [3], and the consequence under issues  [5]  and
    [6] which is said by the Applicant to flow from  issue  [3].  Mr  Malik
    says the refusal of  13  February  2012  to  grant  ILR  stands  as  an
    'historic injustice'. He so submits  for  the  following  reasons.  The
    solicitors' letter of 12 January 2011 had asked, not only for inclusion
    in the 'legacy' arrangements for asylum cases,  but  specifically  also
    for ILR based on continuous residence, referring to entry into  the  UK
    in October 1997. It is  true  that  the  14-year  mark,  for  the  then
    applicable paragraph 276B, had not passed when the  solicitors'  letter
    of 12 January 2011 was written. But it had passed on  1  October  2011,
    prior to the Secretary of State's letter  of  13  February  2012.  That
    letter, moreover, was written four months before the rule change in  HC
    194. The 13 February 2012 letter  itself  concluded,  by  reference  to
    "leave to remain in accordance with the existing law and policy",  that
    the Applicant had "no basis of stay in the  UK".  That  was  wrong  and
    'unjust'. Once it is recognised that it was (and is)  unreasonable  for
    the Secretary of State to assert that Form IS151A  was  served  on  the
    Applicant on 2 October 2008, it follows that the Applicant  should  and
    would have been granted  ILR  on  13  February  2012,  under  the  then
    applicable old paragraph 276B. The fact that ILR was not granted stands
    as an 'historic injustice', from which a  present  unreasonableness  or
    abuse of power flows.

22. I cannot accept these submissions. In my judgment, it is impossible  to
    characterise the failure or refusal to grant ILR on 13 February 2012 as
    an 'historic injustice' (issue [3]), still less one capable  of  giving
    rise to a present unreasonableness or abuse of power  (issue  [5])  and
    thus a declaration  (issue  [6]).  I  reach  that  conclusion  for  the
    following reasons.

      a. The solicitors' letter of 12 January 2011 did not  in  my  judgment
         constitute an application for ILR, nor a contingent application for
         ILR once the 14 years in paragraph 276B had elapsed. Moreover,  the
         focus and import of the Secretary of State's letter of 13  February
         2012 was that the Secretary of State was concluding the Applicant's
         unresolved asylum matter under the legacy  scheme.  Mr  Malik  says
         that the Secretary of State was also "refusing ILR", and that it is
         "implicit" that the Secretary of State considered the  question  of
         service of the Form IS151A on 2 October 2008. I do not accept that.
         Nothing in the documents in the case, in my judgment, show this  to
         have been the case.

      b. But even if the letter of  12  January  2011  were  treated  as  an
         application for ILR, and/or even if the letter of 13 February  2012
         were treated as a consideration of paragraph 276B and ILR, there is
         no basis for characterising the failure to grant ILR  as  'unjust'.
         The January 2011 letter  -  written  on  his  behalf  by  his  then
         solicitors - was maintaining what is now accepted to  have  been  a
         false name and address. Moreover, although it  was  being  asserted
         that the Applicant had been present since 1997, the fact is that he
         had told immigration officials at interview in October 2008 that he
         had entered the UK in 2006, in the same interview in which  it  was
         being  said  in  January  2011  that  he  had  been  truthful  with
         immigration  officials.   It   is   quite   impossible   in   these
         circumstances to characterise a refusal of ILR, on the  application
         of the then-applicable paragraph 276B, as unreasonable or unlawful.
         It cannot possibly  found  a  claim  of  'historic  injustice',  to
         support a contention of present unreasonableness or abuse of power.

I therefore find against the Applicant on issue [3], and issues [5] and  [6]
so far as they arise out of issue [3].

The Decisions of 15 April 2014 and/or 6 January 2015

23. I turn to issue [4] , and the consequence  under  issues  [5]  and  [6]
    which is said by the  Applicant  to  flow  from  issue  [4].  Mr  Malik
    submits, in essence as I see it, as follows. But for the  Secretary  of
    State's reliance on the 2 October 2008 service of the  Form  IS151A  as
    triggering the exclusion under the old paragraph  276B,  ILR  would  in
    fact have been granted on 15 April 2014 and again on  6  January  2015.
    Once the Applicant's Premise is accepted,  it  follows  therefore  that
    there was an 'historic injustice'. Edgehill had  been  decided  by  the
    Court of Appeal on 2 April 2014. Singh was not decided by the Court  of
    Appeal until 12 February 2015. In practice - and in fact - the position
    at 15 April 2014 and 6 January 2015 was that Edgehill was understood to
    govern. That was FTTJ Blake's understanding in giving his  decision  in
    the   2014   Appeal.   Although   Singh   subsequently   corrected    a
    misappreciation as to the true meaning  of  the  immigration  rules,  a
    grant of ILR based on the  understanding  that  Edgehill  governed  the
    position in April 2014 and January 2015 would have been lawful,  albeit
    as a 'generous' interpretation of the immigration  rules,  and  in  any
    event within the vires of section 3 of the 1971 Act. That can be tested
    by considering the cases of those who were granted ILR  at  that  time,
    based on that approach. The Court of  Appeal  in  Singh  (at  paragraph
    56(2) and (3)) said that the Secretary of State was "entitled" to  take
    into account the new immigration rules when dealing with a  pre-9  July
    2012 application but doing so after 6  September  2012.  The  'historic
    injustice' needs to be approached on the basis of what  would  in  fact
    have happened.

24. I cannot accept these submissions. In my judgment, it is impossible  to
    characterise the decisions not to grant ILR on 15 April 2014  and/or  6
    January 2015 as an 'historic injustice' (issue  [4]),  still  less  one
    capable of giving rise to a present unreasonableness or abuse of  power
    (issue [5]) and thus a declaration (issue [6]). I reach that conclusion
    for the following reasons.

      a. The fatal problem with this analysis is this. It asks the  Tribunal
         to look back on the 'justice' of a decision  from  2014  and  2015,
         which was arrived at in the application of the  immigration  rules.
         It asks the Tribunal to do  so,  after  the  event,  by  both:  (a)
         correcting what the Applicant says was a  factual  misapprehension;
         but (b) perpetuating what the Applicant has to accept was  a  legal
         misapprehension. The position in law is this. If the  Secretary  of
         State had got the facts right (assuming  the  Applicant's  Premise)
         and had got the law  right  (understanding  the  immigration  rules
         correctly: as explained in Singh), ILR would have been  refused  on
         15 April 2014  and  again  on  6  January  2015.  In  my  judgment,
         decisions in the application of the  immigration  rules  cannot  be
         characterised after the event as an 'historic injustice' when it is
         clear, at the  time  of  the  characterisation,  that  the  correct
         decision in law in the application of the immigration  rules  would
         have been the same adverse decision as was made. When the Court  of
         Appeal on 12  February  2015  gave  judgment  in  Singh  they  were
         authoritatively explaining the correct  legal  position  under  the
         rules for decisions  made  after  the  window  9  July  2012  to  6
         September 2012. So far as concerns issue [4], that is this case.

      b. As I have explained, by 15 April 2014 and 6 January  2015,  HC  194
         and HC 565 had introduced  provisions  which  -  in  combination  -
         served to render legally irrelevant the service of Form IS151A on 2
         October 2008, and which meant the Applicant could do no more  under
         the rules than secure 30 months limited leave to  remain  after  he
         crossed the 20-year line on 1 October 2017. Any factual error as to
         whether Form IS151A had been served on 2 October 2008 could not  be
         material in the lawful application of the immigration rules  on  15
         April 2014 and 6 January 2015. In my judgment, it is impossible  to
         build an 'historic injustice', leading to subsequent abuse of power
         and/or unreasonableness argument, by  reconstructing  decisions  to
         grant an entitlement which did not arise under the  relevant  rules
         at the relevant time.

      c. It is revealing that Mr  Malik  has  to  resort  to  his  suggested
         characterisation of the Secretary of  State  adopting  a  'generous
         interpretation' of the rules. The Applicant's legal entitlement  in
         2014 and 2015 was to a  correct  interpretation  -  and  reasonable
         application - of the applicable immigration rules. He  asks  for  a
         characterisation    which    reconstitutes    reasonable    factual
         application, but avoids correct interpretation.  Mr  Malik  has  no
         foundation for the argument that the Secretary of State was - or is
         now to be characterised as  having  been  -  adopting  a  'generous
         interpretation', with or without the resort to  section  3  of  the
         1971 Act. The decisions were,  straightforwardly,  decisions  under
         the immigration rules. When the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the
         Secretary of State was "entitled" to apply the new rules, that  was
         a  conclusion   based   on   giving   the   rules   their   correct
         interpretation. It was a description  of  the  Secretary  of  State
         discharging her decision-making function  in  accordance  with  the
         Odelola principle.  Nothing  in  the  documents  in  2014  or  2015
         committed the Secretary of State, or evinced any intention,  to  do
         other than  apply  the  relevant  immigration  rules.  It  is  also
         revealing that, in his determination in the 2014 Appeal, FTTJ Blake
         had concluded that the decision  of  15  April  2014  was  "not  in
         accordance with the law on the basis of the authority of Edgehill".
         What was being required by FTTJ Blake was a decision which was  "in
         accordance with  the  law",  and  which  correctly  understood  the
         position under the rules and by reference to Edgehill. The Court of
         Appeal in Singh then articulated what "in accordance with the  law"
         post-6 September 2012 meant. It meant the application  of  the  new
         paragraph 276ADE and paragraph 276BE. Under  those  provisions  the
         Applicant could not on 6 January 2015 obtain ILR, nor could  he  do
         so on 15 April 2014, even if no reliance was placed on  service  of
         any notice on 2 October 2008.

      d. In considering the logic and implications of the  argument,  it  is
         helpful to consider the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  Rashid
         [2005] EWCA Civ 744. That was an asylum case where the claimant was
         able to  demonstrate  in  judicial  review  proceedings  that:  (a)
         adverse historic decisions had been taken which could now be  shown
         to have been vitiated; (b)  under  the  applicable  decision-making
         criteria at the time of those adverse decisions  the  Secretary  of
         State would have granted the claimant asylum status;  (c)  although
         the claimant would not now be granted such a status, on  the  basis
         of the currently applicable criteria, the Secretary of  State  does
         have a broad power under section 3 of the 1971 Act  to  grant  ILR.
         That combination of circumstances led the Court of Appeal to uphold
         the claim and order the Secretary of State to grant ILR,  based  on
         'historic injustice'. For the reasons which I have  explained,  the
         analysis  in  the  present  case  is  like  Rashid,   except   that
         constituent element (b) is missing.

      e. Even if that problem were put to one  side,  there  would  then  be
         another. In TN (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40 Lord Toulson  (for  the
         Supreme Court) explained at paragraph 72  that  Rashid  "should  no
         longer be followed", on the basis that:

... it is not proper for a court to require  the  [Secretary  of  State]  to
grant unconditional leave to an appellant who would not be entitled to  such
relief under current policy (or have a current right to remain in the UK  on
other grounds, such as article 8), as a form of relief for an earlier  error
or breach of obligation.

Mr Malik submitted that that principle is or should be treated  as  confined
to the 'asylum' or 'protection' context,  being  concerned  with  situations
where protection is no longer 'needed'. He sought to distinguish  Article  8
cases, notwithstanding Lord Toulson's  reference  to  rights  to  remain  on
grounds "such as article 8". Mr Malik  further  sought  to  distinguish  the
present case as being one in which the Applicant had at  the  relevant  time
in the past "crossed the line" and  become  eligible,  at  a  time  when  an
adverse decision was made,  thus  "crystallising"  the  position.  I  cannot
accept  those  submissions,  even  leaving  aside  the  missing  constituent
element from Rashid. I can think of no principled basis on which  protection
or asylum claim should be treated differently,  and  more  unfavourably,  in
the application of the principled approach identified by Lord  Toulson.  The
rules in play in this case are, moreover, closely linked to Article 8.  What
Lord Toulson was saying in TN (Afghanistan) was this. It is  not  sufficient
to constitute an unlawfulness, which a court or tribunal  should  after  the
event require the Secretary of State to 'remedy' through the  grant  now  of
discretionary leave to remain, that a  decision  was  reached  in  the  past
which involved a vitiating error or breach of duty  in  the  application  of
criteria which - had they been correctly applied at that time -  would  have
been favourable, but which was in fact adverse,  and  where  the  individual
cannot now meet the current, relevant criteria. That was the  approach  that
Rashid took, and which TN Afghanistan disapproved. Be  that  as  it  may,  I
repeat: that is not this case, because of the  missing  constituent  element
which I have identified.

      f. Under the applicable rules at the relevant time  and  even  on  the
         Applicant's Premise of  non-service  of  a  relevant  notice  (Form
         IS151A) in October 2008, the Applicant would have  failed  to  meet
         the applicable eligibility requirements under the rules.  'Historic
         injustice' cannot, in my judgment, be premised on reconstructing  a
         'generous' discretionary decision in the historical past, departing
         from the correct meaning of the applicable rules,  in  substitution
         for  an  historic  decision  which  was  and  intended  to  be   an
         application of the rules. Nor, in my judgment, can it be  based  on
         reconstructing a decision, correcting what is now said to have been
         a factual misappreciation, but perpetuating what is  now  known  to
         have been a legal misappreciation.

It follows that there was no 'historic injustice', to support  a  contention
of present unreasonableness or abuse of power. I find against the  Applicant
on issue [4] and issues [5] and [6] so far as they arise out of issue [4].

Conclusion on Issues [3] to [6]

25. It follows, for these reasons, that I  cannot  accept  the  Applicant's
    Analysis (issues [3] to [6]), on the assumption that he is right  about
    the Applicant's Premise. That means the claim must fail. But I want  to
    add two footnotes on this part of the case.

      a. First, I have addressed unreasonableness and abuse of power in  the
         context of the 'historic injustices' (issues  [3]  and  [4])  which
         were the basis for the claimed unreasonableness or abuse  of  power
         (issue [5]). Issue [5] does not get off the ground  in  this  case:
         there  is  no   'historic   injustice'.   I   have   discussed   TN
         (Afghanistan). I add this. Mr  Fraser  accepted,  by  reference  to
         Talpada [2018] EWCA Civ 841 at paragraphs 65-66 that in an "extreme
         case" there can be "unfairness amounting to an abuse of power".  Mr
         Malik reminded me of the  observations  in  the  Supreme  Court  in
         Gallaher [2018] UKSC 25. Those observations commend  the  retention
         in public law of a 'reasonableness' doctrine to govern  species  of
         'substantive unfairness'  (leaving  aside  'substantive  legitimate
         expectation').  They  emphasise  the  public  authority's  built-in
         latitude and the high threshold of 'substantive  unfairness'  which
         avoids the judicial review Court or Tribunal intervening simply  by
         concluding that  the  decision  'was  unfair'.  They  also  express
         disfavour of the language of 'conspicuous unfairness', and  perhaps
         also 'abuse of power'. These are deep waters and I do not need,  in
         the circumstances, to navigate them further.  Mr  Malik's  ultimate
         submission was that present unreasonableness or abuse of power  can
         be found in this case, by reason of the impact and legal  relevance
         of the 'historic injustice or injustices' to which he points. In my
         judgment, there is no 'historic injustice' which could  render  the
         16 August 2019 refusal of ILR unreasonable or an  abuse  of  power,
         for the reasons which I have given.

      b. Secondly, in the light of my conclusions  on  issues  [3]  to  [5],
         issue [6] has to be resolved against the Applicant. However, in  my
         judgment issue [6] adds nothing to issue [5]. Had I been  satisfied
         that  the  Secretary  of  State   had   acted   unlawfully   and/or
         unreasonably in refusing to grant ILR outside the  rules,  I  would
         have seen no impediment to the granting of a  declaration  to  that
         effect and would have granted one.

Issues [1] and [2]: The Applicant's Premise

26. In the light of my conclusions on the Applicant's Analysis (issues  [3]
    to [6]), this application for judicial review  cannot  succeed.  But  I
    will now turn to address issues [1] and [2]. Until  now,  I  have  been
    assuming the answer to these two issues in the  Applicant's  favour.  I
    will now address them,  independently  of  my  analysis  on  the  other
    issues.

Unreasonable to Maintain that IS151A was Served on 2.10.08?

27. I turn to issue [1]. As I have explained, Mr Malik  submits  that  this
    Tribunal should conclude that it is unreasonable for the  Secretary  of
    State to maintain that Form IS151A was served on  the  Applicant  on  2
    October 2008. He relies on an expert report dated 17 June  2019  of  Ms
    Briggs who conducted a forensic document examination of two versions of
    the Form IS151A. The Briggs Report, as  I  have  explained,  was  first
    filed in the appeal against the 7 March  2019  decision.  It  was  then
    relied on in these judicial review proceedings.  The  two  versions  of
    Form IS151A examined by Ms Briggs were these.

      a. The  2012-Disclosed  Version.  This  version  of  Form  IS151A  was
         disclosed by the Secretary of State in  the  2012  Judicial  Review
         proceedings. It  bears  no  manuscript  contents.  It  bears  typed
         contents within the body of the text: (a) on  both  pages,  stating
         the Applicant's name and case reference number; (b) on  the  second
         page, stating that the Applicant was "served with form IS151A on 02
         October 2008". It also bears  two  typewritten  dates  "06  October
         2008" at the foot of each of the two pages.

      b. The  2015-Disclosed  Version.  This  version  of  Form  IS151A  was
         disclosed by the Secretary of State in  the  2015  Judicial  Review
         proceedings. It bears the same typewritten content in the  body  of
         the text, and at the foot  of  each  page,  as  the  2012-Disclosed
         Version. But is has a 'manuscript overlay' of contents  written  in
         handwriting. That manuscript overlay comprises: (a) the  manuscript
         date "2/10/08" (given as the "date of service");  (b)  one  of  two
         alternative boxes (which appear as alternative bases  for  removal)
         having been ticked; and  (c)  two  manuscript  'squiggles'  written
         within a signature box on both pages.

28. So far as is material and was relied on before me,  the  Briggs  report
    concluded as follows. First, that the two  documents  "are  not  copies
    taken at the same time of the same complete original document,  due  to
    the presence of different copying  marks,  pagination  and  differences
    between page 2 in each item".  Secondly,  that  there  are  differences
    which "cannot be as a result of  changes  caused  by  the  reproduction
    process" so that the 'manuscript  overlay'  on  page  2  of  the  2015-
    Disclosed Version "is therefore not a subsequent, signed copy of"  page
    2 of the 2012-Disclosed Version.

29. As I have said above, Mr Malik's skeleton  argument  characterises  the
    Secretary of State as having relied on "demonstrably false  documents".
    In his oral submissions Mr Malik argued that the two versions  of  Form
    IS151A contain "obvious discrepancies to the untrained eye". He went on
    to say that they contain further discrepancies, observed only on closed
    examination by the expert trained eye of Ms Briggs. He submitted:  that
    the Secretary of State has conspicuously failed to  adduce  any  proper
    evidence to explain what actually happened; that the  IS151A  documents
    and other documents disclosed in the 2015 Judicial  Review  provide  no
    demonstrably reliable and no fully contemporaneous  document  recording
    service on 2 October 2008; that no document before the Tribunal  proves
    such service; that Counsel for the Secretary of State has been left  to
    "speculate" as to why the typed date of 6 October 2008 appears  on  the
    2012- and 2015-Disclosed Versions of the form; that it is striking that
    the Secretary of State through Counsel is also  constrained  to  submit
    that the typed date of 6 October 2008 is "an error" on both versions of
    the form. Mr Malik invited the conclusion that the documentary evidence
    is "unreliable at best" as to whether service took place on  2  October
    2008 and, at worst, is "false, in the sense of the document 'telling  a
    lie about itself'".

30. In the 2015-Disclosed Version of IS151A, on other  documents  disclosed
    in the 2015  Judicial  Review,  names  and  signatures  of  immigration
    officials had been redacted. Although I was told that  the  Applicant's
    2015 legal representatives,  and  present  legal  representatives,  had
    never written asking for the redactions to be lifted, I was  keen  that
    they should be. At my instigation, Mr Malik received during the hearing
    before me, versions of the documents disclosed  in  the  2015  Judicial
    Review  proceedings  in  which  the  previously  redacted   names   and
    signatures were unredacted. I also suggested that we take  a  break  in
    the hearing,  to  give  Mr  Malik  an  opportunity  to  consider  those
    unredacted documents with his instructing solicitor. Having done so, Mr
    Malik submitted as follows. He said that there has been a relevant  and
    concerning course of conduct in 2012,  then  2015  and  then  in  these
    proceedings which constitutes a failure to approach the  disclosure  of
    documentation with appropriate candour.  He  submitted  that  the  name
    contained on the face of the documentation as the relevant  immigration
    officer (C Wilde/ Caroline Wilde), with an accompanying signature,  did
    not correspond with the 'squiggles' appearing on the manuscript overlay
    in the 2015-Disclosed Version of Form IS151A.

31. In the light of these materials, and in the light  of  the  submissions
    made about them, I have asked myself the  following  question:  whether
    the  Secretary  of  State  is,  and  would  be,  acting  reasonably  in
    maintaining that Form IS151A was served on the Applicant on  2  October
    2008. I have asked that question afresh, on all  the  materials  before
    me, forming my own view. I have asked the question: (i) by reference to
    the materials that are before me in these  proceedings,  including  the
    2012- and 2015-Disclosed Versions of the Form IS151A, and including the
    Briggs report; but also (ii) by reference to any limitations  and  gaps
    in what the Secretary of State has said or produced or explained.  What
    follows is my analysis of that question.

      a. There is, and always has been, a question-mark about the typed date
         of "06 October 2008" appearing at the bottom of both pages  of  the
         Form IS151A - both in the 2012-Disclosed Version and again  in  the
         2015-Disclosed Version - when this is put alongside the typewritten
         text in the main body of both versions of the document  on  page  2
         which states: "To: Ravinder Singh. You were served with form IS151A
         on 02 October 2008 informing you of  your  immigration  status  and
         your liability to detention and removal". However, in my  judgment,
         what is stated in the main body text about "served with form IS151A
         on  02  October  2008"  is  not  necessarily  contradicted  by  the
         appearance at the foot of each page  of  the  typewritten  date  '6
         October 2008'. That date, appearing on the foot of each page, could
         have appeared 4 days after service had taken place. That  would  be
         consistent - for example - with a version of  the  document  having
         been generated - retrieved from the system, and perhaps printed  up
         - on 6 October 2008. The Briggs Report does not address  this,  but
         this is  consistent  with  what  is  said  in  the  Briggs  Report.
         Moreover, 6 October 2008 was a date of  relevant  activity  on  the
         file: according to Form IS126(E), 6 October 2008 was  the  date  on
         which a  senior  immigration  officer  (CIO)  (now  unredacted:  "D
         Plant") gave an approval to the 'authority to remove' decision made
         by  an  immigration  officer  (IO),  on  what  IS126(E)  says   was
         "02/10/2008". That is not to speculate. It is, rather,  to  explain
         why there is not necessarily a contradiction  between  the  printed
         date on the foot of the pages and the date given for service in the
         main body text. The position of the Secretary of State, adopted  in
         summary grounds of resistance in  the  2015  Judicial  Review,  was
         this:

The Respondent acknowledges the printed date on Form  IS151  is  in  fact  6
October 2008. The discrepancy between these dates is likely  to  arise  from
the difference between the actual date of service and  the  date  when  copy
forms were  generated  from  the  template  held  in  the  case  information
database.

Whether or not those summary grounds were  accompanied  by  a  statement  of
truth, that was the explanation put forward  in  2015.  Ms  Briggs  was  not
asked about this. It is not implausible that a  document  retrieved  from  a
computer system - and perhaps printed up - may bear the retrieval date.

      b. So far as concerns the points made in the Briggs report, as I  have
         explained, they come to this. First, that  the  2012-disclosed  and
         2015-Disclosed Versions of the Form IS151A are not copies taken  at
         the same time of the same  complete  original  document.  Secondly,
         that the 2015-Disclosed Version of page 2 of the Form  IS151A  with
         its manuscript overlay is not  a  subsequent  signed  copy  of  the
         second page of the 2012-Disclosed Version of the form. However,  in
         my judgment, the fact that the two versions were not  generated  at
         the same time, and the  fact  that  the  manuscript  overlay  2015-
         Disclosed Version was not a subsequent signed  copy  of  the  2012-
         Disclosed Version, are not points which combine to  mean  that  the
         2015-Disclosed Version is unreliable, let alone false.

      c. There are undoubtedly concerns, which arise straightforwardly  from
         the 2015-Disclosed Version of Form IS151A.  How  could  a  document
         which bears a footer date of "06 October 2008" - even if that is  a
         'retrieval' or 'print-up' date - then bear a  'manuscript  overlay'
         of handwritten content written 4 days before 6 October 2008? If the
         'manuscript overlay' was written on or after 6 October 2008  -  for
         example by CIO D Plant (who other documents state on 6 October 2008
         approved 'authority to remove' the Applicant) - then the manuscript
         overlay was not contemporaneously recording service  on  2  October
         2008. That would mean the 2015-Disclosed Version cannot be,  as  Mr
         Fraser's skeleton argument for the hearing before me  characterised
         it: "the version actually served on the Applicant". It was striking
         that he was constrained to  characterise  the  footer  "06  October
         2008" as "an error". Then there is this. Form  IS96,  which  it  is
         accepted was served on the Applicant on 2 October  2008,  bears  at
         the foot of the page the typewritten date "02 October  2008".  That
         means one of the forms said to have been served on 2  October  2008
         has been preserved and produced with the footer date  corresponding
         to that date; but the other  has  not.  These  are  straightforward
         concerns. They arise out of the documents disclosed  in  2015,  and
         what appears on the face of those documents. They  are  not  expert
         points. The Briggs report does not touch on them.

      d. I am not ruling on a disputed question of fact, still less deciding
         by what process to be in a position to do so. I am being  asked  to
         consider the reasonableness of the Secretary of State's position in
         maintaining that the Form IS151A was served on 2 October 2008. I am
         not persuaded by  Mr  Malik  that  there  has  been  a  failure  to
         discharge the duty of candour. There has been  no  suggestion  that
         this is a judicial review case requiring 'further  information'  to
         be answered or  supplied;  still  less,  live  evidence  or  cross-
         examination. The evidence is what it is; including its limitations.

      e. Alongside the concerns which I have expressed about the 'manuscript
         overlay, and its timing, there are then these points:

          1) The 'main body' typewritten  text  in  both  2012-  and  2015-
             Disclosed Versions refers to service on the  Applicant  on  02
             October 2008.

          2) It is common ground that the Form IS96 was served on 2 October
             2008.

          3) There is a case history form (ISP300H). In my  judgment,  that
             is a significant document. It records the  date  and  time  at
             which the "forms"  were  "served":  as  "02  October  2008  at
             12.50". It gives the name of the immigration officer (Caroline
             Wilde) and also the name of the officer  authorising  "papers"
             (Alex Legg). It records in the  typewritten  text  "Alex  Legg
             authorised service  of  papers  and  he  was  given  temporary
             release and issued with IS96 to  report...  on  7  October.  C
             Wilde". There are then  manuscript  entries  which  have  been
             added to a print up of that form. They include an entry  on  6
             October 2008 at 08.15  by  Caroline  Wilde  referring  to  the
             processing which was to take place on 7 October 2008. Mr Malik
             accepts, rightly in my judgment, that the typewritten contents
             of that document must have been generated prior to 08.15 on  6
             October 2008. This document tells us that it was Alex Legg and
             not "D Plant" who authorised the service of the "papers" on  2
             October 2008. The date is given, as is a  specific  time,  for
             service of IS151A.

          4) There is the Form IS126(E) document. This gives details of the
             interview with the Applicant on 2 October 2008 at 10.46 at the
             foot of the same page that  document  records  "forms  served:
             IS151" (referring to parts 1  and  2)  and  then  records  who
             served the forms (Caroline Wilde) who authorised service (Alex
             Legg) and the date of service of  those  forms  02/10/2008  at
             12.250". That is the document which goes on  to  record  in  a
             subsequent section that the authority to remove the  Applicant
             signed by Caroline Wilde  on  02/10/08  was  approved  by  the
             signature of D Plant on 6/10/08.

          5) Finally, there is  the  form  ICD  2599  (Immigration  Factual
             Summary) records 02/10/08 "Encountered working  illegally  and
             served with IS151A and 96".

      f.  In  my   judgment,   and   notwithstanding   the   concerns   that
         straightforwardly arise on the face of the  2015-Disclosed  Version
         of Form IS151A, it is nevertheless reasonable for the Secretary  of
         State to have maintained and still maintain that  Form  IS151A  was
         served on 2 October 2008. Mr Malik is quite right to characterise a
         document like the Immigration Factual  Summary  as  a  'derivative'
         document whose contents may have been recording and been  parasitic
         on what had elsewhere been said to have taken place.  He  can  make
         all the same compelling points that could have been made in 2015 as
         to whether the Form IS151A itself can be said to  evidence  service
         on 2 October 2008, so far  as  the  'manuscript  overlay'  to  that
         document is concerned. He can make the point that if  the  box  was
         ticked after the  event  that  calls  into  serious  question  what
         happened on the Form on 2 October 2008 if it was served, why it was
         not retained and why it has not been produced. However, taking  the
         position at its highest in the Applicant's favour, the fact remains
         that prior to 08.15 on 6 October 2008 it  had  been  recorded  that
         Caroline Wilde had served the forms on 2 October 2008. That  action
         of serving papers is recorded as having been approved by Alex  Legg
         on 2 October 2008; not by D Plant  on  6  October  2008  after  the
         event. A very specific time for service of the forms  is  given  as
         12.50 or 12.250. That followed after the relevant  interview.  That
         date and time is specifically recorded, together with the names  of
         Caroline Wilde and Alex Legg,  and  specifically  by  reference  to
         IS151A. The two forms  are  designed  and  intended  to  be  served
         together. (Indeed, the correspondence before the Tribunal described
         IS151A as necessary for the service of IS91.) The thesis in  favour
         of the Applicant  would,  I  think,  have  to  be  this.  Something
         important and elementary was overlooked, inaccurately  recorded  as
         having taken  place,  when  the  twin  and  equally  important  and
         elementary  step  was  taken,  by  the  very  same  personnel,  and
         accurately recorded. I repeat: the prism through which  this  issue
         is being examined, as Mr Malik accepts, is  the  reasonableness  of
         the Secretary of State's position in the  light  of  the  evidence.
         Notwithstanding the concerns that arise  straightforwardly  on  the
         documents, based on all  the  materials  before  the  Tribunal,  my
         conclusion is that the Secretary of State's position in relation to
         service of the Form IS151A is a reasonable one.

It follows that I resolve issue [1] against the Applicant.

Issue Estoppel?

32. I turn finally to issue [2]. I put to one side what I have made of  the
    submissions on issue [1]. The question is whether it  is  open  to  the
    Applicant to impugn that position in these proceedings.

33. Mr Malik accepted that the judgment of Lord  Carnwath  in  DN  (Rwanda)
    [2020] UKSC 7 at paragraphs 44 to 64 contains  a  relevant  and  recent
    analysis of finality, res  judicata  and  issue  estoppel  in  judicial
    review proceedings. He rightly points out that even in that  concurring
    single judgment the discussion was obiter: see  paragraph  44  and  65.
    However, he accepts that at  paragraph  45  to  48  Lord  Carnwath  was
    discussing pre-existing relevant authority in the public law or "quasi-
    public" law field, namely the cases of Thrasyvoulou [1990]  2  AC  273,
    the citation in that case of Thoday v Thoday [1964] P 81, Watt v  Ahsan
    [2007] UKHL 51 and the citation in that case of Arnold [1991] 2 AC  93.
    In my  judgment,  the  commentary  of  Lord  Carnwath  in  DN  (Rwanda)
    persuasively  gathers  together   relevant   passages   from   relevant
    authorities, accompanied by observations which  constitute  a  reliable
    guide for the purposes of the present  case.  Mr  Malik  identified  no
    reasoned basis for departing from that analysis, and cited no authority
    supporting taking such a course.  The  two  essential  points  for  the
    purposes of the present case, in my judgment come to this. (1) There is
    a strong role of public policy which establishes that the  issue  of  a
    determination relating to the legal right of a public authority to take
    action should be given finality. (2) A court or tribunal in  subsequent
    proceedings in the public law arena may disapply that  rule  of  public
    policy in the interests of justice, as where material relevant  to  the
    correct determination of a point involved in  earlier  proceedings  has
    become available to a party and could not by reasonable diligence  have
    been adduced in the earlier proceedings.

34. Applying that approach, it is, in my judgment, clear that it  would  be
    contrary  to  public  policy  and  unjustified  having  regard  to  the
    interests of justice for the Applicant to be able  to  re-litigate  the
    question of the reasonableness of the Secretary  of  State  maintaining
    that the Form IS151A was served on 2 October 2008. My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

      a. As I have explained, the key concerns that arise in relation to the
         IS151A document arise squarely from the 2015-Disclosed Version, and
         the other documents disclosed in the 2015 Judicial Review. They  do
         not arise from the 2012-Disclosed Version. They do not  arise  from
         the Briggs report.

      b. Even had they arisen from  the  documents  disclosed  in  the  2015
         Judicial Review when put alongside the documents disclosed  in  the
         2012 Judicial Review, or even if they had arisen  from  the  Briggs
         Report  comparative  analysis  of  the  2012-  and   2015-Disclosed
         Versions, that is not material which was  unavailable  in  2015  or
         could not by reasonable diligence have been  adduced  in  the  2015
         Judicial Review. Indeed, the same  solicitors  had  acted  for  the
         Applicant in 2012 and in 2015.

      c. The backcloth to the 2015 Judicial Review was that FTTJ  Blake  had
         allowed the 2014 Appeal on 24 September 2014 in which he  described
         (paragraph 6 of the determination)  the  Form  IS151A  with  its  6
         October 2008 date which had  been  produced  by  the  Secretary  of
         State. That was a clear reference to the document produced  in  the
         2012 Judicial Review proceedings. FTTJ Blake had  referred  to  the
         Secretary of State, in the context of any fresh decision, obtaining
         and serving evidence of the alleged  service  of  the  IS151A.  The
         Applicant's then solicitors had written a letter before claim on 21
         January 2015. It referred to the IS151A bearing the date 6  October
         2008 and gave as one of the reasons for challenging  the  Secretary
         of State's decision the failure to "provide evidence of service  of
         the IS151A on our client in 2008". A further  letter  before  claim
         dated 11 May 2015 had at its heart that the Secretary of State  had
         not produced "cogent evidence that IS151A was actually served". So,
         at the heart of the claim for judicial review issued on 28 May 2015
         was the question of evidenced service of IS151A. The  first  remedy
         claimed in the 2015 Judicial Review was: "mandatory order  for  the
         [Secretary of State] to produce and serve IS151A". The grounds  for
         judicial review stated: "No evidence that IS151A was ever served or
         ever existed was produced to us". It was in that  context  that  an
         acknowledgement  of  service  and  summary  grounds  of  resistance
         disclosed the 2015-Disclosed Version and  the  other  documents  to
         which I have referred in my analysis. It is true that the  redacted
         names remained at that stage and thereafter redacted,  but  I  have
         been shown no request at any stage which challenged  the  redaction
         or invited disclosure of the named immigration officials.

      d. The issue whether it was reasonable for the Secretary of  State  to
         maintain that the Form IS151A had been served on 2 October 2008 was
         thus right at the centre of the 2015 Judicial  Review.  That  claim
         failed. On 7 March 2016 UTJ Jacobs refused permission for  judicial
         review and certified the claim as totally  without  merit.  In  his
         reasons UTJ Jacobs stated:

... the Secretary of State has reasoned by  inference  from  your  behaviour
and the practice of issue  of  IS151A  and  IS96  that  on  the  balance  of
probabilities you were  issued  with  the  former.  This  is  not,  as  your
solicitors allege, a mere  assertion.  It  is  a  conclusion  reached  by  a
rational process of reasoning.

Permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  was  sought  from  the  Upper
Tribunal and from the Court of Appeal, unsuccessfully, on 31 May 2016 and  9
March 2017 respectively.

      e. In my judgment, to reopen the reasonableness of  the  Secretary  of
         State's position maintaining that  Form  IS151A  was  served  on  2
         October, by reference  to  the  concerns  which  I  have  described
         arising out of the  documents  disclosed  in  those  2015  Judicial
         Review proceedings, would be a clear case of the Applicant  seeking
         by reference to the documents available to the Applicant and points
         which could with appropriate diligence have been  raised  in  those
         proceedings to reopen exactly the same point.

      f. In my judgment, it is  particularly  unjust  and  inappropriate  to
         allow such a course, when it is remembered that the present case is
         a case which alleges 'historic' injustice. The point that  is  made
         is that decisions made in the past were  'unjust'  on  the  premise
         that the Form IS151A was not in fact served. As I  have  explained,
         the Secretary of State's presently impugned decision of  16  August
         2019 involved application of the present  rules.  Service  or  non-
         service of the notice in 2008 does not feature in that analysis, as
         is explained in the GCID note of 6  August  2019.  It  is  only  by
         exercise of a reconstruction of past decisions that the  thesis  of
         'historic  injustice'  arises.  In  those  circumstances,   in   my
         judgment,   it   is   particularly   compelling   that   'historic'
         opportunities arose, and were taken,  to  litigate  the  very  same
         issue which is now sought to be reopened. Issue [1] is, in essence,
         a straight re-run - through a 'historic injustice' prism -  of  the
         very same central point as was at the heart of  the  2015  Judicial
         Review, being run  five  years  later.  Neither  the  interests  of
         justice nor  public  policy  support  allowing  that  course;  they
         clearly point against it.

It follows that I find against the Applicant on issue [2].

Conclusion on the Applicant's Premise

35. For the reasons which I have given, I find  against  the  Applicant  on
    each of the necessary steps in the Applicant's Premise, either of which
    would be fatal to the claim succeeding.

Conclusion and Consequential Matters

36. For the reasons I have given,  this  application  for  judicial  review
    fails, both as to the Applicant's Analysis, and in any event as to  the
    Applicant's Premise. As always,  having  circulated  this  judgment  in
    draft (on 11 January 2021), I am able to deal here at the end with  any
    consequential matter raised by the parties and the terms of the Order.
      a. The first matter raised was  this.  Mr  Fraser  (15  January  2021)
         supplied me with a judgment of the Tribunal (decided on 20 November
         2020) in Patel (historic injustice) [2020] UKUT 00351  (IAC).  That
         case was not cited to me at the  hearing  (16  December  2020)  nor
         drawn to my attention in the period between then and circulation of
         the draft judgment  (11  January  2021).  Mr  Fraser  submitted  as
         follows,  that:  (a)  Patel  had  no  bearing  on  the  substantive
         reasoning in the present judgment; and (b) the Applicant's claim in
         the present case would fall to  be  characterised  as  "historical"
         rather than "historic" injustice using the terminology in Patel. Mr
         Malik responded, agreeing with point (b) and not  contesting  point
         (a). In those circumstances I am satisfied that it is not necessary
         or proportionate to invite submissions on  Patel  and  how  further
         reference to it might be woven into, and with what consequences for
         the reasoning expressed in, this judgment; nor to  embark  on  that
         exercise for myself without the assistance of submissions from  the
         parties. That leaves the issue of costs.

      b. The other matter raised concerned costs. The Respondent (18 January
         2021) asked me summarily to assess the costs, and to do so  in  the
         sum of �7,698.00. The Applicant (18 January 2021) resisted  summary
         assessment but, beyond saying  that  the  costs  claimed  were  not
         agreed, did not make any points  on  what  the  correct  assessment
         should be if the Tribunal decided to assess the costs summarily.  I
         have decided, in the particular circumstances of the present  case,
         not to direct further submissions; nor to assess the costs  without
         them. In my judgment, a party who resists summary assessment on the
         papers should go on to assist the Tribunal by identifying  disputed
         points of substance in relation to the quantum of the sums  claimed
         (or a good reason for not doing so). Absent that, it  may  be  that
         the Tribunal will proceed to assess the costs  without  submissions
         on quantum, because the party resisting summary assessment has  had
         - but did not take - the opportunity open to it.  However,  in  the
         present case the Order I make  (excluding  recitals)  is:  (1)  the
         application for judicial review be  dismissed;  (2)  the  Applicant
         shall pay the Respondent's costs to be assessed if not agreed.

