
                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                          JR/5863/2019 ('V')

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                 Heard on: 27th October 2020

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between


              The Queen (on the application of Ms Syeda Ahmedi)


                     (No anonymity directions are made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Having considered all documents lodged and having heard Mr J Gajjar,
instructed by Edward Marshall Solicitors on behalf of the applicant and Mr
J Holborn, instructed by the Government Legal Department on behalf of the
respondent, at a hearing which I attended at Field House, London, and which
the representatives attended via Skype for Business on 27th October 2020
and upon judgment being handed down on the same date.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

The remote hearing

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to the
hearing being via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

These are a written record of the oral reasons given for the judgment at
the hearing.

The application

The applicant, an Indian citizen, applied on 22nd November 2019 for
judicial review of the respondent's decision dated 22nd May 2019, (the
'Decision') which was maintained in a decision on administrative review
dated 29th August 2019, to refuse the applicant entry to the UK as a Tier 1
(Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The applicant applied for entry clearance under
the Points Based System on 7th February 2019, on the basis of a stated
intention to invest �200,000 in a healthcare business at a location in the
area of W1, London.  She provided a business plan with her application,
which had been prepared with the assistance of an accountant, and which
provided turnover and profit forecasts.

The respondent interviewed the applicant on 19th March 2019 and following
that interview, refused her application in the Decision.  The respondent
accepted that the applicant had access to not less than �200,000, and these
funds were disposable by the applicant in the UK; that she had the
requisite English language proficiency; and she had previous relevant
experience in the healthcare sector.  However, the respondent did not
accept that the applicant genuinely intended to make an investment in the
UK business; or had a business plan which was viable and credible and so
her application was rejected under paragraphs 245DB(f) and (h) of the
Immigration Rules.  The respondent regarded the applicant's answers to the
question of why she planned on setting up a business in the W1 area of
London, which had included her reference to half of her family living in
the UK, as not one which a genuine entrepreneur would have given, and that
instead, a genuine entrepreneur would have focused solely on specific
business-related reasons for choosing their business location.

The respondent also regarded the applicant's answers about how she would
spend her investment funds as vague, with a lack of detail about how she
would spend working capital; and how much by way of salaries would be
incurred from the initial investment.  When asked about turnover in the
first year of business, the applicant began to talk about gross profit and
net profit, and was, in the respondent's view, clearly unable to
distinguish profit from turnover, which again undermined the genuineness
and viability of the proposed investment.

The applicant requested administrative review of the Decision and the
request was received on 20th June 2019.  The applicant asserted that the
requirement that the choice of business location should be dictated solely
by the business reasons was irrational and had ignored her answers about
why she had identified London W1 as appropriate.  The respondent's
conclusion that her business plan was not viable because of her inability
to explain how working capital would be used was indicative of a potential
lack of experience at best, and not an absence of genuine intentions.  The
questions around turnover should have been followed up with additional
questions in the interview and was therefore procedurally unfair, as per
the authority of R (Anjum) v Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
(entrepreneur - business expansion - fairness generally) [2017] UKUT 00406
(IAC).  The applicant's answers in fact demonstrated an understanding of
the difference between gross and net profit and the respondent had failed
to place any weight on the difficulties which the applicant had raised in
hearing the interviewing officer, given background noise and the
interviewing officer speaking too fast; or that the quality of any answers
might have been affected by nerves.

In the administrative review decision, the respondent accepted that some
technical difficulties may have arisen at the beginning of hearing, but
these did not seem to prevail during the whole of the interview.  The
applicant had clearly indicated which parts she did not hear by asking them
to be repeated and the quality of answers was not explained by any delay in
the communications.  At the end of the interview, the applicant confirmed
that she was happy with its conduct.

The respondent did not believe that the applicant had carried out a
sufficient analysis of the business environment within the UK, in locations
other than London W1.  The applicant's assertion that W1 was a 'medical
hub' was a mere assertion and there was no comparison with other potential
locations.  The applicant had to provide some indication as to how she
would invest her money and she was unable to explain in any detail,
particularly how working capital would be used, even if some of it were
retained for contingencies.  The respondent continued to have concerns
about the applicant's lack of knowledge of the difference between turnover
and profit.  The authority of Anjum was not relevant where the respondent
asked direct questions and received direct answers.  There was no
unqualified requirement to ask further questions in clarification.  In
essence, the respondent continued to believe that the applicant's proposed
business venture backed credibility.

The grounds in the application

The applicant essentially raised three grounds:

            a. Ground (1):  the requirement that the choice of business
               location be dictated solely by business reasons, as opposed
               to business and personal reasons, remained irrational as
               was the respondent's failure to consider the reasons given
               for choosing the location of the business as London W1.  The
               respondent placed impermissible weight on the applicant's
               reference to a substantial proportion of her family living
               in the UK;

            b. Ground (2): the respondent's conclusions about the applicant
               not knowing how working capital would be spent and her
               conclusions about the applicant's knowledge of the
               difference between turnover and profit were also irrational,
               in the context of difficulties of the applicant being able
               to hear her interviewing officer. It was also irrational for
               the respondent to focus on answers given in relation to
               staff salaries when the applicant had confirmed that she
               would not have any employees for the first six months of the
               business and the recruitment would take place according to
               the growth of the business.

            c. Ground (3) - the process was procedurally unfair, given the
               respondent's failure to follow up with additional questions,
               should she have any concerns.

Grant of permission, strike-out and reinstatement

On 10th January 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor granted permission
on the papers for the application to proceed on all grounds.  In his grant
of permission, Judge Norton-Taylor issued standard directions for payment
of a further fee, or in the alternative, for an application for fee
remission.  Following an apparent breach of those directions, the
continuation fee was not received and the application stood as struck-out.


The applicant then applied on 30th January 2020 for reinstatement of her
application, based on an asserted delay in receipt of the grant of
permission.  Asim Hussain, Lawyer of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) with
delegated judicial powers, granted the application for reinstatement on 3rd
February 2020.

The basis of the respondent's resistance to the orders sought

The respondent filed an Acknowledgement of Service on 24th December 2019,
followed by a detailed defence on 19th February 2020.  In essence, in
relation to the irrationality challenge, the respondent was plainly
entitled conclude that the applicant's answers during her interview were
unsatisfactory, and the test for irrationality was a high one.  In relation
to the location of the proposed business, the applicant had been asked
whether she had considered locations other than London W1 (question 23)
which the applicant had responded by saying not yet, because many of her
family lived in the UK.  The applicant's own annotated version of the
conversation was not materially different.  Her answer failed to engage
with why she was only looking at one particular postcode when she was
intending to invest substantial sums of money in the UK.  She had provided
no further research on alternative locations or background information to
support the estimated budget of �21,000 for six months' rent, rates,
deposits and agents' fees in London W1.

The respondent regarded as similarly vague the applicant's answers about
what she would use her investment for.  Whilst the applicant had clarified
in supplemental notes how much she intended to retain as working capital
(�109,5000 rather than �198,000), it was not enough to say staff would be
hired subject to business conditions particularly where it was asserted
that the business would need to achieve �120,000 turnover in the first year
alone.  Moreover, it was quite open to the respondent to conclude that the
applicant appeared to misunderstand the difference between turnover and
profit.  The decision was plainly not perverse.

The authority of Anjum could be distinguished on the basis that in that
case, the decision-maker had failed to understand the difference between
the applicant's present business and plans for its future enlargement and
had failed to resolve a misunderstanding through follow-up questions.  It
was a different from this case, where the interviewing officer had asked
simple questions such as the turnover of the proposed business, in
circumstances in which it was unnecessary to ask further questions.  In
simple terms any requirement of procedural fairness would depend on the
particular factual context, and there was no procedural unfairness in the
process adopted with the applicant's interview.

The applicant's submissions

The applicant provided written submissions, in which she reiterated the
irrationality of the respondent's decision as already set out. She added
that the test for whether the applicant met the requirements of 'Tier 1'
was not whether she was a "good" entrepreneur, rather a genuine one.  In
addition, the respondent had failed to consider in her assessment that the
applicant had applied for entry to the UK, to start a healthcare business,
which was a field in which the applicant already had substantial experience
and suitability.  The authority of Anjum remained the reported decision in
respect of procedural unfairness and general principles of procedural
fairness required the respondent to probe and ask follow-up questions as
opposed to sticking to a scripted list of questions.

In oral submissions developed by Mr Gajjar, the Decision rested on three
points. First, a lack of consideration of alternative locations other than
London W1. Second, a concern of the respondent was how the applicant
intended to invest the �200,000, in particular a reference to staffing
costs. Third, what was described in the Decision as a nonsensical answer to
turnover.

In relation to the first concern over the location of the business, the
real problem was in the Decision at page [17] of the applicant's bundle
where it is stated:

"In reaching the decision to refuse this application I have noted the
following:

You told the interviewer that you plan on setting up your business in the
W1 postcode area of London.  When asked if you considered any other areas
in the UK, I noted you stated:

No not yet so because of my family, half of my family ties in the UK.  I
will just leave my own mother here and she is very concerned of my being
lonely here.  So that is one reason why I want to move to the UK.

Whilst I appreciate the importance of family ties, it is reasonable to
expect a genuine entrepreneur to have solely specific business-related
reasons for choosing their business location."

In fact, on that basis alone, the requirement to have solely specific
business-related reasons for identifying a business was clearly and
unarguably irrational.  People may have a wide variety for reasons for
picking a location and it was not a requirement of the Immigration Rules
that it either be the sole or even the predominant reason.  Mr Gajjar
referred to the extreme example, of where an applicant had given as the
location for a healthcare business the summit of Ben Nevis, then one might
see why the Entry Clearance Officer had concerns, but in this case, the
applicant had identified London W1. I was invited to take judicial notice,
as Mr Gajjar reminded me, that Harley Street is located within London W1
and is notable for its medical services, both public sector and privately
provided. To suggest, in that context, that someone must be guided solely
by business-related reasons for the location of their business, and ignore
convenience and co-location of a personal support network, was unarguably
irrational.  Indeed, the respondent recognised the weakness of that
analysis by later relying on broader areas of concern in the administrative
review decision.

In any event, when considering whether the applicant was a genuine
entrepreneur, there was a failure to deal with all of the applicant's
evidence, which was detailed. The applicant could have been dishonest and
said that she had considered alternative locations.  She had instead
clearly identified and given detailed reasons for why London W1 was the
appropriate location for her business.  In that regard, I was asked to
consider the answers to questions [22] and [23] at page [35] of the
applicant's bundle.  It was clear here that the location of the applicant's
family was secondary to the business rationale for choosing London W1 as
the place for the proposed business.

Next, Mr Gajjar submitted that it was clear that there were technical
difficulties at least identified at the beginning of the hearing, that
arguably could be inferred throughout.  As part of the administrative
review process and as already referred to earlier in these reasons, the
applicant had provided her own version of her transcript, which she asked
the respondent to consider in its administrative review decision.  This can
be seen at page [48] of the applicant's bundle.  The question as heard and
understood by the applicant was as follows:

         "I seem to have heard - Did you consider any areas outside UK?

         No, not yet, so because my family, half of my family lives in the
         UK."

In essence, the applicant's answer given in relation to her family residing
in the UK, which would otherwise not make sense unless the question had
been misheard as relating to whether the applicant had considered business
locations outside the UK as opposed to within it, was clearly explicable.
The respondent had ignored this in the administrative review decision. It
made no sense to ignore this where, as here, the respondent accepted that
the applicant's intentions were honest and that instead of considering
whether she was telling the truth, there was an appraisal of whether she
was a 'good' entrepreneur.

In terms of the second reason for refusal at page [17] of the applicant's
bundle, as referred to in the Decision, the respondent had had concerns
about how much the applicant would pay her staff.  However, the respondent
had failed to consider her answers to two questions, [21] (page [35]) and
[29] (page [37]), where she had clearly stated that at least for the first
six months she had no intention of employing any staff and she would need
to decide whether to employ staff as the business developed.  More
importantly, in relation to the criticism that the applicant had failed to
give a detailed breakdown as to any staffing costs, when the respondent's
questions were considered (particularly question [28] at page [36]) the
respondent had never in fact asked any specific questions about salary
costs. The applicant could hardly be criticised for failing to set out more
detail about salary costs, when she was never asked to.

Next, in terms of what was described as a 'nonsensical answer' at page [17]
of the applicant's bundle, as contained in the Decision, namely the
applicant's response to a question about turnover, by setting out in detail
gross and net profit margins, this was explicable once again by reference
to the applicant's record of what she had heard. She recorded this in the
notes which she asked the respondent to consider in the administrative
review, at page [53B] of the applicant's bundle.  As recorded there,
question [37] states:

         "What do you forecast the turnover ... How have you come to this
         figure?

Repeat the question please. ... I asked the question to be repeated again
as I could not hear properly and understand what was being asked.  I seem
to have heard as - what do you forecast to be for year 1?  How have you
come to this figure?

We don't expect annual profit.  There will be about 70% gross profit but
there is no net profit as such.  It is in minus (negative) account.  There
is a gross profit though."

In essence, the applicant was unable to hear the reference to turnover and
this was not a case that she had misunderstood the concept, which would
have meant that it was pointless to repeat the question - rather, she
simply misheard the question, and she had thought it had referred to margin
profit rather than turnover.  In that context, this was an Anjum paradigm
case, where it screamed out for further clarification.  Clearly, Anjum had
a far wider application than merely the specific circumstances of that
case, as it was a Presidential panel and also at paragraph [20], recited
the test under the well-known authority of R v SSHD, ex parte Doody and
Others [1994] 1 AC 531.

The respondent's submissions

The respondent reiterated that the Decision was plainly open to her to
reach on the evidence before her and that the Decision could not be
impugned on irrationality grounds.  The applicant's explanation for not
researching any business locations other than London W1, namely because of
family members living in the UK, was unsatisfactory.  The administrative
review decision had noted that, even setting aside the original reference
in the Decision to the choice of location solely for specific business
reasons, the explanation given by the applicant remained inadequate.  This
was particularly striking noting that the business plan stated that the
success of the concept was wholly dependent on identifying the right
location for the first clinic.  Whilst there was a claim to have researched
premises, no details had been provided to underpin the �21,000, said to
relate to 6 months' rent, rates deposit.  There was a similar vagueness in
relation to how working capital would be invested, even after the issue of
the amount of that working capital (�109,000) was corrected.  For example,
in answer to question [28], (page [39]), the applicant had been asked:

"Can you explain how the �109,500 set aside for cash flow shall be used?

For the purchase of stock because I don't know exactly which stock I will
be needing.  For the purchase of the stock and the employees, the salaries
of the employees.  Staff, employees are also part of the �200,000."

It was not enough to suggest that flexibility in any business investment is
needed, as a genuine entrepreneur would have a clear idea about how they
were going to use the money they claimed to want to invest, even if there
needed to be flexibility in that plan.  It was also not enough to say that
staff would be hired subject to business conditions, particularly when in
order to break even, the business plan suggested that the business would
need to realise �124,350 in sales in the first year alone.

Finally, the applicant's inability to explain the concept of turnover in
answer to question [37] (page [39]) was particularly striking.

The respondent reiterated that the requirements of procedural fairness
would always depend on the particular factual context. In this case, the
respondent was entitled to consider that the questions asked were
sufficient and that in light of those questions and the answers given, that
the applicant was not a genuine entrepreneur.

In terms of the respondent's oral submissions, it was important to read
both the original Decision and the administrative review decision together
in the round.  There were three points identified, as had been referred to
by Mr Gajjar, but the decision that the application was not genuine was one
that the respondent was entitled to reach.  At heart, all of the challenges
were rationality points.

In terms of the issue around alternative location, a lot hanged on Mr
Gajjar's submission of the Decision referring to a need for exclusively
business-related reasons for choosing the location.  This was not a
position maintained in the administrative review decision and instead there
was concern about the limits of the applicant's research.  It was accepted
that Harley Street may be based in London W1 but there had only been
research based on the internet and no suggestion of alternative searches,
albeit it is accepted that there was no requirement for alternative
searches.  Even if it were now suggested that the applicant had
misunderstood the question and given reasons for why she wished to base her
business in the UK as opposed to in a location in London, she had not given
any wider answer or suggested that she wished to conduct the business in
any other part of the UK and therefore it was rational for the respondent
to consider the limits of her research.

The second limb of the challenge was in relation to the lack of detail
about investment, in particular in answer to question [28].  If I referred
to this at page [36] of the applicant's bundle, it was clear that the
applicant could not identify what the salary costs would be or even give an
estimate and it was rational for the respondent to take this into account.

The third limb was around the consideration about the applicant's answers
as being nonsensical even if it were accepted that the applicant had
misheard the question.  When I was asked to consider the answers given at
page [53B] (the applicant's more detailed notes) with her answer to
question [37] at page [39] (the respondent's transcript), the answer in
relation to question [37] made no sense.  It reads as follows:

         "We don't expect.  There will be about 70% of the gross profit but
         there is not net profit as such.  It is in the minus account.
         There is a gross profit though.

         Figure?  77% of the gross profit will go on the first year,
         financial figures and the second year it will be around 88% plus
         there is going to be a profit of �8,000 in the second year."

The applicant's answers were confusing, as to which years she was referring
to and her answers simply did not "hang together".

The final substantive challenge was in relation to procedural fairness.  As
could be seen from the notes, the applicant had asked for a question to be
repeated (question [37] at page [53B]) and it could not be right that the
respondent would have to be required to ask questions on a third occasion.
In reality, the applicant had been given an opportunity to answer the
questions and it was not suggested that she had anything else substantively
to say.



The Law

Paragraphs 245DB (f) and (h) of the Immigration Rules, as applied in the
Decision, state:

"245DB.     Requirements for entry clearance

To qualify for entry clearance as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant, an
applicant must meet the requirements listed below.  If the applicant meets
those requirements, entry clearance will be granted.  If the applicant does
not meet these requirements, the application will be refused.

(f)   Where the applicant is being assessed under Table 4 of Appendix A,
the Entry Clearance Officer must be satisfied that:(i)the applicant
genuinely intends and is able to establish, take over or become a director
of one or more businesses in the UK within the next six months;(ii)the
applicant genuinely intends to invest the money referred to in Table 4 of
Appendix A in the business or businesses referred to in (i);

(h)   In making the assessment in (f), the Entry Clearance Officer will
assess the balance of probabilities.  The Entry Clearance Officer may take
into account the following factors:

(i)   the evidence the applicant has submitted;

(ii)  the viability and credibility of the source of the money referred to
in Table 4 of Appendix A;

(iii) the viability and credibility of the applicant's business plan and
market research into their chosen business sector;

(iv)  the applicant's previous educational and business experience (or lack
thereof);

(v)   the applicant's immigration history and previous activity in the UK;
and

(vi)  any other relevant information."

The well-known authority of R (Anjum) v Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
(entrepreneur - business expansion - fairness generally) [2017] UKUT 00406
(IAC) makes clear that an immigration interview may be unfair where there
is inflexible adherence to prepared questions, which prevents clarification
of obscure questions or to probe or elucidate answers given.  That was in
the context of a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) visa application.



Discussion and conclusions

First of all, I accept that the first limb of challenge, namely one of
irrationality, is a high one and I am not considering a statutory appeal.
I have considered Mr Holborn's submission that I need to consider the
original Decision of 22nd May 2019 and the administrative review decision
of 29th August 2019 together and in particular that there has been a move
away from the respondent's initial decision that the applicant's choice of
business location should be dictated solely by business, as opposed to
personal, reasons.  Nevertheless, in relation to this first ground and even
taking both decisions together, I do conclude that the respondent's
reasoning is irrational. Mr Holborn does not seek to defend the requirement
of solely business-related factors. Instead he referred to the reasoning in
the administrative review decision at page [12] of the applicant's bundle,
which states:

"You confirm that you did not consider any other areas in the UK.  Whilst I
appreciate that you might have proposed some of the reasons for choosing
this particular area of the UK, it does not suggest that sufficient
analysis of the business environment in different locations was conducted
for an entrepreneur to conclude that the chosen location is best for their
business.  Within your review you indicate that your decision was not
solely based on your family members' presence and that fact could only be
considered as an added benefit.  I note you enumerated several reasons for
choice of the UK however, you only focussed on one area of London, which is
not indicative of genuine entrepreneur who has given due consideration to
the market landscape.  By having limited your choice to [London area] [sic]
only, you failed to demonstrate the research having conducted prior to your
application.  You say that W1 is considered to be medical hub however your
reasoning has not been substantiated with empirical data.  The ECO is not
considered to have made an error when highlighting that these responses
provide insufficient business details as to why the location is best,
particularly as you failed to discuss that against other potential
locations with similar market features."

In reality, I take judicial notice of the location in London W1 of Harley
Street and the medical services providers well-known for focussing on that
area; and I noted the applicant's consideration of that business location
in her business plan, included with her application.  I accept the Mr
Gajjar's submission that there is no requirement to have actively
considered alternative locations in the UK other than in relation to the
London W1 area; and that the respondent's assertion that there was no
evidence supporting that London W1 (including Harley Street) is a medical
hub is one which, when considered in the context of the earlier reference
in the Decision to having solely specific business related reasons for the
choice of location, is irrational. The applicant had provided detailed
reasons in her business plan for choosing the London W1 area, as being the
focus of her business, in the context of her substantial previous
experience in the healthcare business, which the respondent does not
question.  Having initially suggested that she must exclude any personal,
non-business related reasons in her choice of location, the respondent then
moved to criticise her for failing to go through a process of listing,
analysing and discounting other alternative locations, when she had already
given reasons for her choice of location.  In reality, I conclude that the
respondent's concerns were as a result of the applicant's reference to
having family members in the UK. While the respondent subsequently sought
to rationalise its refusal because of an absence of comparison with other
locations within the UK, that is not in my view, even taking into account
the high threshold, a rational decision for the respondent to have reached,
in the context of the well-known hub of healthcare businesses in London W1.

Dealing with the next question of what was said to be the absence of
details provided by the applicant in relation to working capital, I once
again accept Mr Gajjar's submissions that while the respondent's concerns
focussed around salary costs, first, the applicant had stated clearly that
for the first six months, she did not intend to employ any other staff
member.  That was a submission that Mr Holborn indicated was contradicted
by her statements during her interview, when she referred to salary costs.
However, as explained and as clearly can be seen in the business plan at
pages [67] and [68] of the applicant's bundle, there was in fact an
intended payment of a staff salary, but that was solely in relation to the
applicant's own salary.  I also further accept Mr Gajjar's submission that
having asked the applicant for a breakdown of how her working capital was
spent, it was irrational for the respondent to criticise the applicant for
failing to set out further detail of the breakdown of salary costs, when
she never asked for a specific breakdown of salary costs. Coming on to the
authority of  R (Anjum), if there were any confusion on whether there were
any salary costs and the respondent needed a breakdown of what those salary
costs were, I accept the Mr Gajjar's submission that this cried out for
further questions of the applicant, by way of clarification.

The final basis for the respondent's refusal of the application was the
asserted confusion on the part of the applicant about the difference
between turnover and profit.  First, I accept Mr Gajjar's submission that
the applicant had drawn to the respondent's attention, prior to the
administrative review decision, that there had been a potential confusion
about the question asked.  I accept further his submission that there is an
important difference between the pointlessness of asking the same clear and
simple question repeatedly, when the person questioned does not understand
the concept; and when the person asked is unable to hear the question
properly, and clearly (and obviously) answers a different question. The
respondent had asked about turnover; the applicant thought she heard the
question as relating to profit and her answer, in that context, is entirely
explicable. In the absence of further probing, the respondent's conclusion
that the applicant did not understand the different between the two, was
irrational, particularly when she had pointed out her confusion in seeking
administrative review.

Mr Holborn bases the final part of the criticism in the applicant's answer
in relation to profit margins as being that her answers were confusing as
to which year she was referring to.

Once again, I accept Mr Gajjar's submission that if there were such
confusion, that this was entirely apt for a follow-up question.  In
reality, the confusion lay in the mishearing of the question by the
applicant, which she had attempted to resolve by sending her notes as part
of the administrative review. Having received those notes, I accept the
submission that the respondent had failed to engage with them.  In the
circumstances therefore I also accept that there was irrationality in this
ground.

In relation to the final ground of procedural fairness, as will have been
appreciated in some of my earlier reasoning, I have identified areas where,
but for additional, basic probing by the respondent during the course of
the interview, obvious errors in answers such as in relation to profit,
when the question related to turnover, could easily, and should have, been
resolved.  I do not accept the submission that the authority of Anjum is
not to the point in this case and indeed I am reminded of the headnote to
which I was referred, (ii), which states:

"An immigration interview may be unfair, thereby rendering the resulting
decision unlawful, where inflexible structural adherence to prepared
questions excludes the spontaneity necessary to repeat or clarify obscure
questions and to probe or elucidate answers given."

While there was not an inflexible adherence to prepared questions, there
was a clear unfairness in failing to clarify answers which otherwise made
no sense. While the need for such probing is, as Mr Holborn rightly argued,
intensely fact-specific, there was such a failure here, where the applicant
had made clear at the time her difficulties in hearing what the
interviewing officer was saying, and her answers obviously made no sense if
she had hear the question as the respondent recorded it, but her answers
were explicable (and addressed the concerns) where she heard the answers as
recorded and explained by her.  Particularly where the applicant's honesty
has never been challenged, the role that questions of clarification could
have played was all the more important, and in these circumstances I do
regard there as having been a procedural unfairness by which the decisions,
particularly the later decision of the administrative review, was reached.

In those circumstances therefore the application for judicial review is
granted on all grounds.

Costs

In relation to costs, I am mindful of the authority of M v London Borough
of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 595.  On the one hand, the applicant has
succeeded in her application.  On the other hand, and without criticism
whatsoever of Mr Gajjar, this is a case where there was no compliance by
the applicant with the pre-action protocol, which is an important and
necessary part of the litigation process, for which there is no
explanation.  Even though it might be said, in light of the respondent
continuing to resist the application, that on receipt of the application,
the respondent could have sought resolution by way of a consent order, I
accept Mr Holborn's submission that the application was made without any
compliance by the applicant with the pre-action protocol.

I also note that whilst I have been provided with a schedule of the
respondent's costs in accordance with the standard directions, there is no
similar schedule from the applicant, thereby preventing me from making a
summary assessment of costs and as a result, leaving the assessment of the
amount of costs as unresolved.

Therefore, in these circumstances, I order that the respondent shall pay
the applicant's costs, to be assessed if not agreed, from the date of the
respondent's Acknowledgement of Service, but not before, as a result of the
failure to comply with the pre-action protocol, up to and including the
costs of this Hearing, but specifically excluding any costs related to the
assessment of the costs.

Application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

While there has been no application for permission to appeal to the Court
of Appeal, I considered whether to grant permission. I do not grant
permission as I do not regard there as being any arguable error of law in
my decision.



                       J Keith
             Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    3rd November 2020


                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                          JR/5863/2019 ('V')


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



              The Queen (on the application of Ms Syeda Ahmedi)

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Having considered all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Mr  J  Gajjar,
instructed by Edward Marshall Solicitors on behalf of the applicant  and  Mr
J Holborn, instructed by the Government Legal Department on  behalf  of  the
respondent, at a hearing which I attended in-person at Field House,  London,
and which the representatives  attended  via  Skype  for  Business  on  27th
October 2020 and upon judgment being handed down on the same date.


It is ordered that


    1) The judicial review application is granted  in  accordance  with  the
       judgment attached.


    2) I order, therefore, that the respondent's decisions  dated  22nd  May
       2019 and 29th August 2019 are quashed.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

    3) While no application has  been  made  for  permission  to  appeal,  I
       nevertheless  considered  whether  to  grant  permission.   I  refuse
       permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal as I do not regard  there
       as being any arguable error of law in my decision.


Costs


    4) I note the principles set out in M v London Borough of Croydon [2012]
       EWCA Civ 595.   I also note that the applicant has failed  to  comply
       with the pre-action protocol, without explanation. The applicant  has
       also failed to provide a schedule of her costs, for me to consider at
       this hearing.


    5) I therefore regard it as appropriate to order the respondent  to  pay
       the applicant her costs  from  the  date  of  the  Acknowledgment  of
       Service (noting the failure to comply with the pre-action  protocol);
       to be assessed  if  not  agreed,  but  excluding  the  costs  of  any
       assessment.  This reflects the  fact  that  that  the  applicant  has
       nevertheless succeeded, but has also prevented  the  issue  of  costs
       being resolved at this hearing.




                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    3rd November 2020






      Applicant's solicitors:
      Respondent's solicitors:
      Home Office Ref:
      Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -------
       Notification of appeal rights


      A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review
      is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


       A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal  on
      a question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to
      the Upper Tribunal  for  permission,  at  the  hearing  at  which  the
      decision is given. If  no  application  is  made,  the  Tribunal  must
      nonetheless  consider  at  the  hearing  whether  to  give  or  refuse
      permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).


      If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response  to   an
      application or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then  the  party  wishing  to
      appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This
      must be done by filing an applicant's notice with  the  Civil  Appeals
      Office of the  Court  of  Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the
      Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal was sent (Civil  Procedure
      Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

