
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05221/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                ANEELA ABBAS
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Duray, Counsel, instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publicity  about
this decision.

2. The appellant challenges the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
dismissed her appeal against the decision of the respondent on 18  February
2015 refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  wife  of  a
person present and settled there.

3. The application was refused for  two  reasons.  The  respondent  was  not
satisfied that she was lawfully married and, secondly, the  Respondent  was
satisfied that she had falsely represented that she had not been previously
married when she told a Home Office official on 3 April 2014 that  she  had
married one Jawad Ijaz, date of birth 7 October 1982, in Pakistan in 2011.

4. Additionally, the respondent was satisfied that the appellant had  failed
to adhere to the terms and conditions of her temporary  admission  in  that
she did not leave the United Kingdom when she was instructed so to  do  and
she obtained secured employment when she was appeal  rights  exhausted  and
had not declared  her  previous  marriage  on  her  application  form.  The
application was therefore refused under paragraph 320(11) of HC 395.

5. The application subject to appeal was based on her marriage to a  British
citizen, one Humza Malak, who was born on 7 April 1993 and who she  married
on 24 May 2014.

6. The appellant has an unsatisfactory immigration history which I  consider
below.

7. It was the respondent's case that she had said on 3 April 2014  that  she
was married to one Zain Malak on 23 December 2013 but later said  that  she
had in fact married one Jawad Ejaz on the same date.   Elsewhere  the  name
Ejaz is spelled Ijaz.

8. The respondent supported the  contention  that  the  appellant  had  made
these claims by asserting that she had said  them  in  an  application  and
relying on a Home Office minute sheet lodged on 23  April  2014  where  the
appellant is said to have stated that she had married on 23 December  2013.
However the respondent did not have any direct evidence that the  appellant
had made such a claim.  There was certainly nothing such as a copy  of  the
application form or even a copy of an interview record.   The  rest  was  a
document signed by a Home Office official permitting a "family split" which
would be appropriate if the appellant was to be removed leaving behind  her
husband in the United Kingdom.

9. This is quite persuasive  prima  facie  evidence  that  the  Home  Office
thought that she had said that she had married someone but it does  not  go
much further than that.  The appellant said she  had  not  married  anybody
before her present husband.  Her present husband said that he thought  that
he was her first husband.  There were documents relating to their  marriage
in which she was identified as a previously unmarried person.

10. None of these things prove that the appellant did not falsely  claim  to
have married someone else but when the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  balanced
that evidence against the skimpy evidence that the appellant  actually  had
ever claimed to have married another person she was quite  unpersuaded  and
resolved that part of the case in the appellant's favour.

11. There is no challenge to that finding before me nor any reason to  think
that any challenge would have stood any reasonable chance of success.

12. It follows therefore that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  correctly,
dealt with the case on the basis that that serious allegation had not  been
made out.

13. I note in parenthesis that this  is  a  matter  of  some  concern.   The
suggestion that a person had previously been married, or  claimed  to  have
been married, in the United Kingdom is quite a precise suggestion.   If  it
were true it could have very significant implications for  the  appellant's
present relationship with the man who thinks that he is her  husband.   The
respondent really should not have made allegations of the kind made here if
they could not be proved.

14. Nevertheless the First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to the  "regrettable
immigration history" of the appellant.

15. In summary the appellant had entered the United Kingdom in January  2011
with a visa that expired in February 2012.  She  claimed  asylum  in  April
2012, that is about a month after her visa had lapsed.  The application was
refused. She appealed and the appeal was dismissed. She had  been  detained
but on 10 July 2012, five days after her  appeal  was  dismissed,  she  was
released from detention with reporting conditions.  Permission to appeal to
the Upper Tribunal was refused.  On 20 April 2012 she became appeal  rights
exhausted.  She did not leave the United Kingdom  on  4  May  2014  as  the
respondent wished her to do, but rather took up employment she ought not to
have taken.

16. She was encountered by Immigration Officers whilst working  for  Subway.
It seems that she had been released from detention  in  2012  and  had  not
reported when she was required to report.  Again  the  Home  Office  minute
sheets are helpful.  They show that the appellant last reported  in  August
2012. They also complained that she had failed to comply with the reporting
condition after September 2012.

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the  intentions  of
the Immigration Rules by overstaying and by working during her time in  the
United Kingdom without permission.  The judge also found there  were  other
aggravating circumstances present in the case, namely  that  the  appellant
failed to comply with the reporting conditions and had absconded after  her
appeal rights were exhausted.  She remained in the United Kingdom  "keeping
under the radar" until encountered in  April  2014  and  so  was  at  large
improperly for about eighteen months.

18. At paragraph 30 the First-tier Tribunal Judge said she had  applied  her
mind  to  paragraph  320(11)  and  found  the  appellant  fell  within  its
provisions.  She also said:

    "I am satisfied that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  exercise  his
    discretion to refuse entry clearance under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules."

19. She then went on to dismiss the appeal with reference to  Article  8  of
the European Convention on Human Rights.

20. The grounds are thoughtfully prepared and I mean them no  disrespect  by
summarising them.  It was the essence of  the  appellant's  case  that  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge had recited the relevant provisions and  findings
of fact but had not decided if the discretion apparently exercised  by  the
Secretary of State should have been exercised differently.

21. Mr Whitwell, correctly, showed me that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
had set out factors that she regarded  as  aggravating.  He  said  she  had
exercised discretion.  That might be right.  However, the difficulty I  see
in the First-tier Tribunal's decision is that it did not  engage  with  the
requirement of paragraph 320(11) that an application brought where a person
fell foul of its conditions should "normally" be refused.  The use  of  the
word "normal" is, if I may say so, a little unclear.  I do not think it can
mean "usually" because  I  do  not  see  how  the  decision  can  be  based
rationally on whether the reasons for  breach  a  common  place.  That,  of
itself, would not make them good reasons for refuse.

22. I understand it to mean that an application  should  be  refused  unless
there are some special circumstances.

23. I am fortified in this conclusion by the decision of  this  Tribunal  of
(Parker J and Senior Immigration Judge Spencer) in  PS  (Paragraph  320(11)
discretion: care needed) India [2010]  UKUT  440  (IAC).   I  set  out  the
judicial head note to that case.  It states:

    "In exercising  discretion  under  paragraph  320(11)  of  HC  395,  as
    amended, to refuse an application for entry clearance in a  case  where
    the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance in  paragraph
    320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C),  the  decision  maker  must
    exercise great care in assessing the aggravating circumstances said  to
    justify   refusal   and   must    have    regard    to    the    public
    interest in encouraging those unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave
    and seek to  regularise  their  status  by  an  application  for  entry
    clearance."

24. Clearly it does not follow from this that any person can be excused  the
ordinary consequences of paragraph 320(11) simply by reason of leaving  the
United Kingdom.  Indeed, paragraph 320(11) is  unlikely  to  be  considered
except in cases where the person has left the United  Kingdom  although  it
might make a difference if the person had  left  voluntarily  or  had  been
removed.  That said a person who had  been  removed  would  be  subject  to
prohibition for other reasons.

25. In my  judgement  it  is  also  relevant  to  consider  the  reason  for
returning.  There is still, I think, a strong public interest in  promoting
genuine marriages and the right of a person to found  a  family  (which  of
course does not mean to found a family in their country of nationality)  is
something which has to be respected.  If I might be  permitted  a  slightly
crude colloquialism, the appellant had done a bad thing but now seeks to do
a good thing.  In my judgement these are sufficient reasons to say that the
normal consequences should not apply and the decision should be made on its
merits.

26. The  sponsor  was  commended  for  his  honesty  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge. It was his case shown in the application form that  he  had
earnings of �22,000 per annum  or  thereabouts  which  is  sufficiently  in
excess of the statutorily required sum to give a comfortable margin.  There
is no reason to doubt that  theirs  is  anything  other  than  an  entirely
genuine marriage.  As far as I can make  out,  and  I  find,  this  is,  an
application that ought to be allowed under the Immigration Rules.

27. It follows that this is a case where I find the First-tier Tribunal  has
erred in law. The error of the First-tier Tribunal was not showing that she
had  given  proper  consideration  to  factors  that  could  point  to   an
exceptional decision. The factor that are not mentioned at all are the need
to promote marriage and the need to recognise the desirability of a  person
in the United Kingdom irregular leaving and regularising her position.

28. Subject to the consequences of  her  past  misbehaviour,  the  appellant
satisfies the requirements of the Rules and  in  the  circumstances  I  set
aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I allow the appeal.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal and I substitute a decision allowing the appeal.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 November 2016               |

