
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05359/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 April 2018                |On 14 May 2018                  |
|                                       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  MISS V d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Jegarajah, counsel instructed by AMZ Law
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer

                   _______________________________________

                             DECISION & REASONS
                   _______________________________________


1. The Appellant is a child of Palestinian origin, residing in a refugee
camp in Lebanon with her elderly grandparents. The appeal came before me
for hearing on 14 March 2018, when I found an error of law and adjourned
the appeal for a resumed hearing, due to the lack of availability of an
Arabic interpreter. A copy of that decision is appended.

2. At the resumed hearing, Ms Jegarajah sought to serve an UNRWA slip from
Nida R. Abussaid, clinical psychiatrist in respect of the Appellant dated
20 April 2018.  Mr Kotas had no objection to its admission. Ms Jegarajah
confirmed that she was relying on two bundles and a skeleton argument.
The parties further agreed that the issue of accommodation had been
accepted by the First tier Tribunal and that finding had not been
challenged and that the issues to be determined were in respect of
paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) and (v) of the Immigration Rules viz
maintenance; sole responsibility and serious and compelling reasons for
making the exclusion of the Appellant undesirable. Ms Jegarajah informed me
that she was not seeking to rely on Article 8 outside the Rules and drew
attention to the fact that it was an "old-style" appeal under the
Immigration Rules, given that the date of decision was 19 February 2015.

3. Ms Jegarajah called the Sponsor to give evidence, when he adopted his
statement dated 19 May 2017. He sought to clarify one aspect of his
evidence at the hearing before the last Judge, which was that he had bought
the earrings for his daughter, rather than his wife. When asked about his
daughter's circumstances after the last appeal and the UNRWA action slip
from Dr Nida Abusaid dated 20 April 2018, that it was approximately 7-8
months ago that he realised she was being affected mentally. He found out
because he speaks to her on an almost daily basis. He said she had told him
that children at school had stopped talking to her because her clothing is
very dirty. This is because there is nobody to care for her as her
grandparents are really very old people and need someone to look after
them.

4. When asked how that made her feel, the Sponsor said that when he visited
her one month ago she held onto him and did not want him to leave. He said
that she had grown into a really beautiful girl but unfortunately she is
not being looked after well. He said that she takes it upon herself to do
the shopping but this is a refugee camp and is very dangerous. In terms of
her mental health, the Sponsor said that she is happier when he is there.

5. The Sponsor then described the place she is living in, which is a one
bedroom house in the refugee camp made of breezeblocks and concrete.
He said that his father and mother and his daughter all sleep in the same
room. He said that the neighbour, Fatme, is aged between 60-65 and lives on
her own nearby and is a friend of his mother. The Sponsor said that Fatme
comes and checks on them and helps them and sometimes his brothers who live
away from his parents also come to check on them every few weeks. However,
in terms of their day to day life, his daughter makes breakfast; looks
after his parents; gets herself ready for school and goes to school by
herself and comes back by herself. He said that the school is 5-10 minutes
away as it is in the camp, but that this was not safe for a little girl on
her own as there are shootings and girls go missing and get kidnapped and
women are raped. He said that it is easy for people who are strangers to
come into the camp and there are no restrictions and that outlaws and
terrorist groups are to be found in every camp.

6. The Sponsor was asked how he was able to cope with this knowledge to
which he responded: "What can I say and do: I have been to court twenty
times doing my best to bring her here."  He was asked about his former wife
and whether she helped and he said that she got married again and her
husband restricted her from seeing any members of her family including her
daughter. When asked why Fatme, the neighbour, could not take his daughter
to school he said that she works for the Red Crescent and that his daughter
goes early to school and the neighbour is an old woman. He confirmed that
he still had
ï¿½8000 in his savings account. He was asked about the whereabouts of his
flat and he said that it was two roads away from his current wife's
children's school. He said that his wife's children eat dinner at his
house. He said that he last talked to his daughter yesterday and that they
facetime every day.

7. In response to questions from me, the Sponsor stated that Fatme, the
neighbour, lives four doors away from his parents and daughter. He
confirmed that his daughter lives with her grandparents and that Fatme is a
family friend who looks after his daughter.

8. In cross-examination, the Sponsor confirmed that he came to the United
Kingdom in 1997 as a refugee and that he was granted ILR in 2000. He stated
that he and his daughter's mother had divorced in June 2010, having been
married for about three years. He said that it had been an arranged
marriage and that his family had selected several girls and he chose one.
He said he had tried to bring his wife to the United Kingdom but her
application had been refused by the Home Office. He said that he had
divorced soon after his daughter's birth because his wife's father was a
very strict man and because he could not bring his wife to live with him in
the United Kingdom her father decided she should ask for a divorce.

9. The Sponsor said he was not present for his daughter's birth but he
arrived one week after, as he had been working. He had stayed for 15 days
to 1 month he thought. When asked to give the court examples of important
decisions he had taken in his daughter's life he said that it was for her
to live a good, respectful life and that he would like her to come and live
with him and be British. He was asked who decided which school she should
attend, however, this was inapplicable given that there is only one school
in the camp. The Sponsor said that he spoke to his daughter's school once
or twice a week and sometimes speaks to the headmaster. He said that he was
responsible for providing money to her and whilst he did not have to pay
for schooling he paid for her clothes etc. The Sponsor confirmed that he
spoke to her every day. When asked for examples of instructions he had
given his daughter, the Sponsor said these were not to go outside as a
female; to look after herself; that she should be careful when she goes
out; to care for herself and clean herself and to study and look after her
education. The Sponsor was asked how many visits he had made and he said
that he had visited many times, sometimes three or four times in a year.
The Sponsor was asked how he was able to be responsible for his daughter
after he had his accident at work in 2011 and he said that, at that time,
he went to stay with his parents and daughter for around 11 months.

10. In response to my questions, the Sponsor stated that he had been
granted
refugee status on the basis that he is a stateless Palestinian. He said
that the Appellant is his only child. In terms of how he contacts her he
said that she is not allowed to have a mobile phone and he rings her on his
parents' mobile phone.

11. The Sponsor's (current) wife, Ms [S], then gave evidence and confirmed
the contents of her statement. She said that she speaks to the Appellant on
the phone and that this was usually after school and before she sleeps. She
said that she had accompanied her husband to Lebanon a month ago to visit
the Appellant. When asked how she was, the witness said that she was not
like any child would like to be and that her children's lives were better
than her life, because she has no-one to look after her. The witness said
that she went to the Appellant's school and spoke to her headteacher and he
told her that the Appellant's behaviour is not good and that her mental
health and wellbeing has changed because they had promised that her father
would bring her to the United Kingdom. The headmaster referred the
Appellant to a psychiatrist because her mental wellbeing has changed
completely. She said that the Appellant was happy when they visited her and
felt she had a family and friends and she was very proud they were there.

12. The witness confirmed that she had gone to the Appellant's home. In
terms of her routine, the witness said that the Appellant does everything
as her grandmother is disabled and her grandfather is old. She said that
the Appellant's hygiene is very bad because no-one cares for her and she
smells and that she needs the neighbour to come and help. The witness said
that there was no bathroom in the house and that the foreign toilet is
broken and so they do not use it. She said that there is a shower but the
water is not running in order to use it. So that to wash, it is necessary
to get water from the tap and to heat this up. The witness said that she
had sent the Appellant two bottles of head lice medicine and always had to
check her for lice. She said that the difference when they are there is
noticeable.

13. The witness said that last summer her daughter got married in Lebanon
and they all attended. Her younger 11 year old daughter was concerned about
the Appellant and told the witness that she deserves a better life than she
has there. The witness referred to the photographs in the supplementary
bundle and the photograph of the Appellant in a red dress, which was taken
at the wedding of her elder daughter. She also drew attention to page 4,
which is a photograph of the witness and the Appellant attending another
wedding. The Appellant is wearing a dress the witness bought her. She said
that the Appellant calls her "Mummy".

14. In respect of the situation in the United Kingdom, she confirmed that
her husband has a flat near the children's school. She said that they do
not live together because she has young daughters and it is culturally
inappropriate. The witness said that she takes the little kids to school
and spends the day with her husband when the kids are at school. She said
that he visits and he cooks. When asked how separation from his daughter is
affecting him,  she said that it makes him unwell. When asked how her
daughters get on with the Appellant the witness said that they love her;
that her grown up daughter sent her clothes when the witness' brother went
to Lebanon to see their mother who had had an operation. The Appellant had
come to her crying because the children at school describe her as homeless
and say: "now you are clean but when your family go you will be dirty
again."

15. The witness said that the Appellant's journey to and from school is
very bad and that she would not trust her daughter who is 15 to go alone.
She said that she felt so afraid about her because there are a lot of
people from outside in the camp and there is a lot of rape and kidnapping.
Not long ago her husband was stressed out badly because there was shooting
in the camp. When asked about Fatme, the witness said that she is not a
young lady and is 63 years old, however, she feels bad for the Appellant as
there is no-one to care for her and so every now and then she goes to see
if she needs anything. The witness said that the Appellant would not be
able to live with Fatme because she has not offered and would not accept
that.

16. In response to my questions, the witness said that her family were not
living in the camp but were living in a small village about half an hour
away. She said that she and her husband stay in the house with the
Appellant and her husband's parents when they visit.

17. The witness was cross-examined by Mr Kotas. When asked who was
responsible for making decisions about the Appellant's life after the
divorce, she said that it was her husband. When asked about any important
decisions he had made on her behalf she mentioned school; any school trips
and that they have the headteacher's phone number and that of one of the
teachers. She confirmed that her husband contacts the Appellant every day
after school and that she finishes school at 2 pm and Lebanon is 2 hours
ahead.

18. In his submissions, Mr Kotas submitted that the relevant date was the
date of decision i.e. 9 February 2015. At that time the Appellant was 5
years old. Mr Kotas expressly accepted the credibility of both witnesses
and that the Sponsor had sole responsibility. However, he submitted it was
still incumbent on the Appellant's representatives to show that the
Appellant could be maintained without recourse to public funds.

19. In her submissions, Ms Jegarajah focused on the issue of maintenance.
She submitted that the Sponsor sends money to the Appellant for her entire
living expenses and that these funds were not coming from the ï¿½8,000 in the
Sponsor's savings account. She submitted that it was not in dispute that
the Appellant is being maintained by her father from remittances. Ms
Jegarajah further submitted that the Sponsor cannot be seen in isolation
from the family as a whole, given that this wife has children, including
adult children, who help support the family. She submitted that the
Sponsor's wife has taken on the role of mother in respect of the Appellant
and she knows as much about this child's life as her own daughters. Ms
Jegarajah submitted that there will be food and there will be provision for
the Appellant, who was not going to add much in terms of costs as she will
go to school with everyone else and have a school lunch and she will be fed
with all the other children in the evening. Given that the Sponsor's wife
has five daughters, there would be clothes and ample provision for a little
girl.

20. Ms Jegarajah drew attention to the fact that the money in the Sponsor's
savings account had been preserved and this could be utilised to support
the Appellant if necessary. Whilst the adequacy of accommodation had been
accepted she drew attention to page 37 of the Appellant's bundle, which is
a floor plan of the Sponsor's flat, demonstrating that he has a large
reception room and a bedroom. She submitted that the Immigration Rules have
to be compliant with the rights of the child and it was clearly in her best
interests to join her father, particularly given that she is living in an
unsafe environment.
She asked if I were minded to allow the appeal, to make a direction that a
visa is granted forthwith given that the Appellant is clearly vulnerable.

21. I decided to allow the appeal and issued my decision at the end of the
hearing. I now give my reasons.

Findings

22. In light of Mr Kotas' helpful concession that the sole responsibility
requirement viz paragraph 297(i)(e) was met, the only remaining issue is
that of maintenance. Mr Kotas expressly accepted the credibility of the
Sponsor and his wife, Ms [S], who has taken on a maternal role in respect
of the Appellant. She has five daughters and two sons, of whom the three
eldest daughters are working and or studying and contribute small amounts
to the family's finances. The remaining four children are daughters
currently aged 17 and 13 years and sons aged 11 and 4 years. They are
supported by their father in the sum of ï¿½400 a month. The evidence that the
family eat dinner together and that the Appellant will benefit from the
care and support, including financial support from the [S] family has not
been challenged.

23. In respect of the Sponsor's finances, it is accepted that he has
retained ï¿½8000 in savings following compensation paid after he suffered an
accident at work in 2011. There is evidence to this effect in the bundle.
He is supported by benefits, specifically Employment & Support Allowance
(ESA), Housing Benefit and council tax benefit. Given that the appeal falls
to be determined under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules, the test in
respect of maintenance, pursuant to the transitional provisions set out in
paragraph 280(b) of the Rules, is whether the Appellant could be maintained
adequately without (further) recourse to public funds. In KA and Others
(Adequacy of maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00065, the Upper Tribunal
established that income support is an appropriate comparator when deciding
whether maintenance is adequate. ESA is currently paid as ï¿½73.10 for a
person over the age of 25, whether or not a single person or a lone parent.
The same applies to Housing Benefit and council tax benefit. Moreover, ESA
is currently paid at the same rate as income support.

24. I have concluded that, whilst the Sponsor is paid benefits for himself
only, admission of his daughter would not result in further recourse to
public funds in that it would make no difference to his housing or council
tax benefit and he has preserved ï¿½8000 in a savings account expressly to
provide for any future additional expenses for his daughter. I also accept
that, if needed, the Sponsor and Appellant would turn to the [S] family,
given that the Appellant will become part of that family upon her admission
to the United Kingdom.

Decision

25. The appeal is allowed under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules. I
direct pursuant to section 87(1) of the NIAA 2002, that entry clearance be
granted. I would request that this is done as soon as possible, given that
the Appellant is a young child who is living separately from both her
parents, in adverse circumstances, which runs contrary to her best
interests and her admission will enable her to join her father in the
United Kingdom.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

4 May 2018
