
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08833/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Court of Justice,      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Belfast                                   |                                 |
|On 15 September 2016                      |On 3 November 2016               |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President,


                                   Between

                                 Ifeanyi [C]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - Abuja
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Mr S Hollywood of Andrew Russell & Co Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

The background to this appeal can be ascertained from my earlier decision
dated 20 October 2015 (annexed hereto) whereby I set aside the first
instance decision by reason of the error of law identified.  Such decision
is hereby remade.

By way of prelude, it is common case that the Appellant is unable to secure
the grant of entry clearance to the United Kingdom by satisfying the
requirements of the Immigration Rules.  His case is based exclusively on
Article 8 ECHR.  The thrust of his appeal is that the Secretary of State
erred in law in failing to grant him entry clearance outwith the framework
of the Rules.

[ME], the Appellant's spouse and sponsor, was the only witness called.  She
gave evidence of her personal history, particularly her first marriage
which culminated in divorce in September 2011.  She also augmented and
clarified the evidence relating to the initiation and development of her
relationship with the Appellant.  In doing so Mrs [E] proffered certain
explanations and clarifications which were duly probed in questioning from
the bench and in cross-examination.  I find that Mrs [E] provided a
truthful account in all material respects and, ultimately and properly, the
contrary was not argued.

In brief compass, the salient facts are that Mrs [E] has not lived in
Nigeria since 2007; the United Kingdom has been her country of habitual
residence since then; she was divorced from her first husband in September
2011; she began a serious relationship with the Appellant around that time;
her daughter was conceived out of wedlock and the Appellant is the father;
the couple were married in 2013; the three persons concerned lived together
as a family between November 2013 and February 2014 in Northern Ireland,
where Mrs [E] works; there is daily communication via mobile phone, Skype
and WhatsApp; and, finally, Mrs [E] has struggled to conceive any further
children with the Appellant for medical reasons.

It was acknowledged by Mr Duffy on behalf of the Secretary of State that
while the impugned decision was based on an assessment that there was no
genuine relationship between the two adults concerned this, in reality, is
no longer contested.  I readily find that the relationship between the
Appellant and Mrs [E] is a genuine and subsisting one.  This finding is
based not only upon her testimony but also certain aspects of the
documentary evidence, in particular the DNA evidence, the telephone records
and the medical evidence.

In his submissions Mr Hollywood placed some emphasis on the absence of any
reference to the couple's daughter, a British national child, in either the
initial ECO decision or the review decision.  This formed the basis of his
argument that both decisions are in contravention of Section 55 of the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  Mr Hollywood's submissions
were augmented by a helpful, focused skeleton argument, which included
reference to the decision of this Tribunal in JO and Others (section 55
duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC).  Addressing the discrete issue of
proportionality, Mr Hollywood highlighted the sponsor's steady employment,
the potential to increase the couple's joint earnings should the Appellant
achieve entry, compliance with the English language requirement and their
daughter's strong connections with the United Kingdom.

Ultimately, the thrust of the Appellant's case is that the refusal to grant
him entry clearance interferes disproportionately with the right to respect
for family life enjoyed by him, his spouse and sponsor and their daughter.
Determination of the proportionality issue is for the Tribunal: Secretary
of State for the Home Department v Huang [2007] UKHL 11.  In considering
whether the decision refusing entry clearance to the Appellant was
disproportionate, it is necessary to situate the proportionality issue
correctly in the Tribunal's adjudication.

The first question is whether a breach of Section 55 has been demonstrated.
 I unhesitatingly answer this question in the affirmative.  Recalling what
this Tribunal said in MK regarding the approach to this question, the fact
(which I emphasise) that in this case both the original decision maker and
the secondary decision maker (a) failed to take into account the best
interests of the child concerned and, simultaneously, to accord to such
interests the status of a primary consideration and (b) failed to act in
accordance with the second, essentially procedural, duty imposed by Section
55, namely to have regard to the Secretary of State's statutory guidance,
seems to me incontestable.  There was nothing in Mr Duffy's submissions to
the contrary, realistically so.

By virtue of the decision of this Tribunal in MK  (section 55 - Tribunal
options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC), giving effect to and
developing earlier decisions of the Court of Appeal, a finding of a breach
of Section 55 of the 2009 Act does not impel inexorably to the conclusion
that the decision in question was not in accordance with the law or was in
contravention of Article 8 ECHR.  Rather, the Tribunal is competent to make
its own assessment of the best interests of any affected child, provided it
is satisfied that it is evidentially equipped to do so.

The ensuing question is whether this Tribunal, in the exercise of remaking
the first instance decision, is sufficiently equipped to assess the best
interests of the child concerned.  On balance, I consider that this
question invites an affirmative answer. It follows, logically, that the
infirmities afflicting the ECO's decision, identified in [8] above, lose
their significance.

 The evidence discloses a sufficiently clear picture of this young girl's
background and circumstances.  She is a normal, healthy five year old.
There is nothing unusual or untoward about her circumstances - medically,
psychologically, socially or otherwise. While I take into account that by
virtue of her place of birth and upbringing she knows only one social
setting and language and is familiar only with one culture, namely that of
the United Kingdom, she will be capable of adapting to that of Nigeria
should the family choose to establish itself there.  On the alternative
scenario of remaining with her mother in the United Kingdom, while she will
disadvantaged by the physical absence of her father from her daily life,
this is the normal consequence of this type of separation and, further, has
been the reality of her life to date.

The conclusion that this child's best interests will be most profitably
served and promoted by living with both of her parents in a composite
family unit is inescapable.  However, it is long settled that Article 8
ECHR does not confer on any of these family members a right to select their
country of residence.  Such is the potency of the factor of immigration
control, rooted in the long-established principle that every state has a
right to control its borders which, in term, entails regulation of the
composition of its population.

In this context I refer to the analysis of Richards LJ in Secretary of
State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [14] -
[17].  The decision in SS (Congo) also formulates in neat and concise terms
the test to be applied in a case such as the present: have compelling
circumstances been demonstrated so as to justify the grant of entry
clearance to the Appellant outwith the framework of the Rules?  See [33].

In remaking the first instance decision I am mindful that the test of
compelling circumstances is less exacting than that of very compelling
reasons, which arises in the context of the deportation of foreign
criminals.  Nonetheless it constitutes an indisputably elevated threshold.
Facts, factors and reasons do not qualify for the appellation of
"compelling" if they are merely attractive or persuasive, even firmly so.
Rather, a higher standard must be satisfied.

In my judgment, the most salient feature of the situation and circumstances
of the family unit under scrutiny in this appeal is that they are
unremarkable.  I am unable to identify any unusual or untoward fact,
feature or circumstance, much less anything approaching the level of
compellability.  Those aspects of the matrix urged on their behalf,
summarised in [6] above, do not, either individually or cumulatively,
satisfy the test.  Rather they fall short by some measure.

The Decision Remade

My natural sympathies with the members of this family unit are simply not
enough for their purposes.  The application of the relevant legal rules and
principles impels firmly to the conclusion that the appeal must fail.  I,
therefore, remake the first instance decision dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 26 September 2016


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 27 September 2016


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08833/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Belfast                                    |                                |
|On 20 October 2015                         |On 28 October 2015              |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                                 IFEANYI [C]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER OF ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Mr S Hollywood of Andrew Russell and Company Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, aged 51 years,  who  challenges
    the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  of  Abuja,  Nigeria  (the
    "ECO") refusing his application for entry clearance under paragraph EC-
    P.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The twin pillars of the
    Appellant's case were (and remain) that he is married to the sponsor, a
    lady also of Nigerian nationality, aged 38 years and  that  he  is  the
    father of the sponsor's daughter who is now aged seven years. There  is
    a second decision of the ECO, supplementing the first,  to  the  effect
    that the financial requirement of �18,600 was not considered satisfied.

 2. It is common case that the first of the ECO's decisions was based on an
    assessment that the Appellant and the sponsor do not have a genuine  or
    subsisting  relationship  or  that  they  intend   to   live   together
    permanently in the United Kingdom,  giving  rise  to  a  refusal  under
    paragraph EC-P.1.(d) of Appendix  FM.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made
    findings adverse to the credibility of the  sponsor,  disbelieving  her
    claim that her daughter had been conceived by the  Appellant  and  her.
    The Judge then stated:

         "Before I can proceed to consider the Article 8  ECHR  issues,  the
         Appellant must at least prove his relationship with [the child]  as
         natural father ....


         For these reasons, I find he must at least prove his  paternity  of
         the child before the Razgar] assessment can be embarked upon ....


         DNA tests may put the matter  beyond  doubt  but  as  the  evidence
         stands, I am not able to find that the Appellant is the  father  of
         [the child].  For these reasons,  I  find  the  Appellant  has  not
         proved, on a balance of probabilities, that he is in a genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with [the sponsor].

    The appeal was dismissed under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8
    ECHR.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "The Judge referred to the lack of DNA evidence to  show  that  the
         Appellant was the father of the child ....


         However, he then went on to find that for that reason  he  was  not
         satisfied that the spousal relationship was genuine and subsisting.
          The Judge gave no reasons for this conclusion and it appears  that
         he may have confused the issue of paternity of the child with  that
         of subsisting marriage."

    The Secretary of State's representative,  Mr  Duffy,  was  disposed  to
    acknowledge the force of this critique, as I do.  The  arguable  errors
    identified in the grant of  permission  to  appeal  are,  in  my  view,
    clearly  established.   The  materiality  of  these  errors  is  beyond
    plausible argument.

DECISION

 4. Accordingly:

    (a)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby set aside.

    (b)  I accede to the Appellant's application for the admission of fresh
         evidence, namely the DNA Profiling Test Report.

    (c)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  will  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal on the first available date.

                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Dated: 20 October 2015

