
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00344/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     ME
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, a Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



INTRODUCTION

In my decision dated 25 September 2019 I gave my reasons why I concluded
that First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes erred in law in his decision dated 13
June 2019.  As will be seen, Judge Holmes made a number of adverse
credibility findings in respect of the appellant's account of events in
Egypt.  Those credibility findings have not been challenged and the only
criticism pursued was that the judge had failed to consider the risk merely
on account of the acceptance by the Secretary of State that the appellant
had been a member of the Muslim Brotherhood (MB).  I was persuaded that the
judge had not adequately dealt with this aspect and the scope of the
further hearing before me is captured by paragraph [20] of my decision of
25 September.  That decision is as follows:

                            "DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   This is an appeal by a national of Egypt against the decision of the
Secretary of State refusing his protection claim for reasons given in a
letter dated 18 December 2017.  The appellant's appeal against that
decision was previously heard and dismissed by a First-tier Tribunal Judge
which was then set aside, and the matter remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for hearing de novo.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal
Judge Holmes on 11 June 2019 and his reasons for dismissing that appeal
were set out in his decision dated 13 June 2019.

2.   In granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes
observed:

'2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in the deciding of the case.
It is not possible to delineate the claims into separate heads due to the
manner in which the grounds have been drafted however the principal point
is the acceptance or otherwise of the appellant's claimed membership of the
Muslim Brotherhood.  It is arguable unclear what the Judge's view was in
relation to this aspect.

3.   I will grant permission on all matter raised as complaints as they all
flow from the principal complaint however it would assist the UT if the
grounds were distilled into separate, clearly defined headings and thus
some greater clarification could be achieved.  I am sure the UT would
appreciate rifle like approaches rather than blunder bus style grounds.'

3.   It is not easy to discern clear grounds from the application which
refers in part to general unspecified matters such as '... the judge has
failed to address the central core of the case and has considered matters
immaterial and irrelevant to any proper disposition of the appeal'.
Nevertheless, it is clear that the principal focus of the grounds relates
to the judge's treatment of the appellant's evidence of his membership of
the Muslim Brotherhood, and on this aspect, it is asserted that the judge
effectively ignored the submissions made on the point.  It is argued there
was a failure to make a finding on a material aspect of the case and that
the only instance in the determination in which the judge 'comes close to
touching on the core of the matter is at paragraph 59'.

4.   In addition, the grounds assert that there were matters not put to the
appellant at the hearing or raised with his advocate.  Among the several
observations on the quality of the judge's findings and analysis of the
evidence it is explained at paragraph 25:

'25.     However, the primary material error of law made by the Judge is
that there is no consideration of the risk to the Appellant on return
merely on account of his being a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.  Bearing
in mind the objective materials and the submissions made in this regard,
this is a manifest oversight.'

5.   The basis of the appellant's claim has been that he would be at risk
if returned to Egypt because of his membership of the Muslim Brotherhood
and the activities he undertook in their name.  His case is that he became
involved with the Muslim Brotherhood at the age of 18 in 1998.  In 2013 he
took part in demonstrations on their behalf on some five occasions, the
last of which on 15 November 2013 led to his imprisonment for thirteen
months.  He was released from prison on 28 or 29 December 2014 and left
Egypt.  He was also the subject of a court judgment from the District Court
of Fakous dated 15 December 2015.  The appellant was fingerprinted in
Germany in June 2016 and arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 August the
same year.  It is claimed that a warrant for his arrest has been issued in
Egypt in his absence.

6.   The issue before Judge Holmes was confined to the Refugee Convention.
Although Article 8 had been advanced in the Grounds of Appeal it was
accepted by the appellant's representative that this was not engaged.   The
judge recorded at [13] of his decision that:

'Whilst the concession then made that the Appellant is a member of the
Muslim Brotherhood is not withdrawn, it is the Respondent's case that the
Appellant's case is demonstrably a fiction."

7.   A witness, Ms Heba Ahmed, gave evidence to corroborate the appellant's
account.  She had arrived in the United Kingdom with her daughter in May
2017 on a valid tourist visa and had then made an application for asylum
based on a risk to herself and her daughter of FGM and a risk of harm as
one who would be perceived on return having been previously suspected of
being a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood.

8.   In a lengthy decision, the judge carried out a comprehensive survey of
the evidence which included a photocopy document dated 15 December 2015
with the heading of the District Court of Fakous which purported to relate
to a case against the appellant.  It is the appellant's case that he had
been sentenced by this court to a term of imprisonment of two years with
labour.  The judge's conclusions (and findings of fact) are set out between
paragraphs [53] and [62].  In the light of the challenge it is appropriate
to set out these in full.

'53. Looking at the evidence in the round, and even bearing in mind the
applicable low standard of proof I am not satisfied that either the
Appellant or Ms Heba, are reliable witnesses.  Indeed it is perfectly clear
the Appellant is quite prepared to lie when it suits him to do so.  The
account of a tip-off from the police chief of Fakous of the existence of a
warrant of arrest was plainly a late fabrication.  I accept that a genuine
claimant may through fear choose to invent elements of his evidence to seek
to elaborate a claim that is at its heart true, and I have endeavoured to
bear that in mind when considering the evidence he relies upon.

54.  In my judgement it is quite clear that the Appellant admitted that he
last spoke to Ms Heba's husband shortly before his death, and that he was
present at the funeral of Ms Heba's husband.  That would place him in Egypt
in May 2016 at a time when he claims to have been in Belgium.  I accept
that the Appellant resiled from admission of attendance at the funeral
having realised it was inconsistent with the account he relied upon, but he
offered no explanation for how he could have spoken to his friend shortly
before his death if he was in Belgium and seeking to find a place in a
lorry to the UK at the time (5 months in Belgium), or why he would have
done so.

55.  This admission also shows that Ms Heba's evidence was untrue in a key
respect.  If he was present in Egypt in May 2016, six months after she
claims he 'disappeared' against a background of adverse interest in him by
the authorities, I can place very little weight upon any of her evidence of
that adverse interest in him by the Egyptian authorities.  In so saying I
have borne in mind that Judge Williams accepted the evidence she gave in
her own appeal, but I note the Appellant gave no evidence at the hearing of
her appeal, and that Ms Heba's claim to protection was not wholly dependent
upon any claim to membership of the Muslim Brotherhood, although I also
note that this element of her claim was also accepted.

56.  Curiously, neither the Appellant nor Ms Heba have ever claimed to have
met each other, or to have worked together, in the pursuit of any Muslim
Brotherhood activities whilst living in Egypt.  On their evidence, although
they are both educated to degree level, they lived in a tiny rural village
outside the city of Fakous.  The impression of rural poverty that one would
ordinarily infer from the Appellant's description of this village, sits
extremely uneasily with the education each of them have received, and the
way they present.  It is inconceivable that if they were both genuinely
involved in the Muslim Brotherhood whilst living in a small rural village,
that they would not have been working together.  The indication is
therefore that one, or both, was not acting as claimed.

57.  I am not satisfied that I can place any material weight upon the
document that is relied upon as being a copy of a genuine judgement of the
Fakous Court sentencing the Appellant in his absence.  Indeed, all the
indications are that this document is a poor forgery.  I note Mr Selway's
argument that a commercial forgery might be expected to be of better
quality, but I reject that argument.  There is of course no obligation upon
an asylum seeker to provide corroboration of their claim. This Appellant
has however chosen to do so, and he has had ample time to absorb and
reflect upon the criticisms of its quality made by the Respondent.  This
document which is said to be a copy of a genuine court judgement does not
bear either the full name that he claims to possess, or, his identity card
number.  It would have been a simple matter for the Appellant to engage a
reputable lawyer in Egypt to make enquiry into this, but no such evidence
has been provided.

58.  Standing back to look at the evidence in the round, I am not satisfied
that the Appellant left Egypt illegally, or when he claims to have done.  I
am not satisfied that he was detained, or that he was harassed, by the
Egyptian authorities as he has claimed.

59.  Equally I am not satisfied that he has any genuine interest in
Egyptian politics, or that he is suspected of involvement in the Muslim
Brotherhood by the Egyptian authorities.

60.  The Appellant clearly remains in contact with his family in Egypt.  I
am not satisfied he has ever destroyed his passport, it is far more likely
that it is available to him to use again should he choose to do so.  In any
event, as one who has previously been legitimately issued with a passport,
I can see no reason why he would not be issued with a replacement if he
were to approach the Egyptian authorities and make such a request.  He can
establish who he is, using his family in Egypt, and the identity card he
accepts is still available to him to use.  I am not satisfied that he has
come to the adverse attention of the Egyptian authorities, or that he has
done anything that would bring him to the adverse attention of the Egyptian
authorities in the course of making any necessary identity checks prior to
the issue of that replacement.

61.  It follows that I am not satisfied that the Appellant faces any
prospect of detention or questioning upon return to Egypt.

62.  I note the Respondent's acceptance that the Appellant is a member of
the Muslim Brotherhood, but even if the Appellant was interested in
politics as an eighteen year old (when he claims to have joined that
organisation) the evidence points quite clearly to his having no current
genuine interest in Egyptian politics.  This is not therefore a situation
of an individual avoiding the pursuit of a genuine commitment through fear
of persecution, but of an individual with no genuine commitment; HJ (Iran).
 I am not satisfied that in the event of return to Egypt he would have any
interest in pursuing any political activity that would bring him to the
adverse attention of the authorities.'

9.   I reserved my decision after submissions from both parties.  In the
light of the way that the grounds leap from point to point, I sought
clarification of the precise nature of the challenge.  Mr Selway explained
that the credibility findings by Judge Holmes were not challenged and the
sole basis of challenge was that the judge had failed to consider the risk
merely on account the appellant have been accepted as a member of the MB.
As to whether this aspect had been adequately dealt with in particular in
[62], Mr Selway referred in detail to the country evidence before the judge
which he contended supported the case that membership of MB alone was
enough to put the appellant at risk.  Mr Diwnycz considered that the judge
had dealt with the issue 'appositely'.

10.  The context is the Secretary of State's acceptance of the appellant's
membership of the Brotherhood.  After noting the evidence given by the
appellant at interview and information taken from the CIPN report on Egypt
dated July 2017 the Secretary of State concluded at [41] of the refusal
decision:

'41. Taking into account your consistent claims of involvement in the MB;
your knowledge of the group, and country information which reinforces your
reasons for recruitment and role, and finally, the sheer number of members
which makes it reasonable to accept possible involvement, it is accepted
you are a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.'

11.  Thereafter the specifics of the claim were considered in some detail
(as to the demonstration and arrest and the court order) after which they
were rejected.  In the course of this exercise the Secretary of State
explained at [57]:

'57. Country Policy and Information, Egypt:  Muslim Brotherhood, July 2017
states,

'The authorities are unlikely to have the capacity, capability or interest
in seeking to target all persons associated with the MB given the size and
variety of the membership and support base.  The evidence does not
establish that merely being a member of ... the MB will place a person at
risk of persecution or serious harm.'  (Paragraph 2.2.5)'

12.  This set the scene for dispute before the First-tier Tribunal with
credibility and risk assessment based on the matters accepted.  As to the
former, Judge Holmes carried out a detailed analysis of the evidence and it
is unsurprising that Mr Selway conceded there was no challenge to his
credibility findings.  These included the finding at [58] that the
appellant did not have any 'genuine interest in Egyptian politics or that
he is suspected of involvement in the Muslim Brotherhood by the Egyptian
authorities'.  And, furthermore, as confirmed in [60], 'that he has done
anything that would bring him to the adverse attention of the Egyptian
authorities' in relation to identity checks for a replacement passport.
Judge Holmes found also in [61] that the appellant did not face 'any
prospect of detention or questioning upon return to Egypt'.  He then turned
in [62] to a risk assessment based on the Secretary of State's acceptance
of membership of the MB and explained that even if he had been interested
at the age of 18 when he claims to have joined, he reiterates his finding
that he had no 'current genuine interest in Egyptian politics'.  What is
left after those findings is a returnee with a past interest and membership
(he was 18 in 1998) and no recent history of past encounters with the
authorities or political activism.

13.  The country evidence that Mr Selway relied on in his submissions when
arguing error comprised reports by the Immigration and Refugee Board of
Canada, 'Egypt: Treatment of Members of the Muslim Brotherhood, including
leaders, returnee members and suspected members, by authorities, following
the removal of President Mohamed Morsi (2014 - May 2017)', 11 June 2017 and
the US Department of State Report '2016 Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices: Egypt', 3 March 2017.  He took me to specific passages in both
reports that included the Government Declaration in December 2013 that the
Muslim Brotherhood was a terrorist group, thereby 'criminalizing all its
activities, its financing and even membership to the group'.  The Canadian
Report refers to mass trials and the sentence to death of 683 people in
April 2014.  Further death sentences were reported in May 2016 as well as
incidents of arrest of Muslim Brotherhood members in 2016 and 2017.  He
referred me to passages from the US Report which includes reference to
numerous reports of the government or its agents committing arbitrary or
unlawful killings while making arrests or holding persons in custody in the
section under 'Disappearance'.  The US Report specifically dealt with the
charging of an individual together with 737 other defendants belonging to
the Muslim Brotherhood, the trial having to have begun in December 2015 but
had been scheduled for further hearing in January 2017.  The US Report also
refers to an estimated 60,000 political prisoners.

14.  I reminded Mr Selway of the Secretary of State's position stated in
the refusal letter at [57] as quoted above.  To his knowledge, the CPIN
Report was not before the judge and it was not for him to put that report
forward.  The only country information was the material that the appellant
had relied on.  Mr Selway was dismissive of the CPIN Report commenting
'they would say that wouldn't they' and he regarded the Canadian Report as
more 'liberal'.  He was unaware whether the CPIN Report included reference
to the Canadian Report.

15.  Judge Holmes' survey of the evidence includes reference to the CPIN
Report at [47] as follows:

'47. That there was a widespread crackdown by the Egyptian authorities
against those suspected of involvement in the Muslim Brotherhood from mid
2013 is well documented.  The CPIN suggests some 60,000 had been detained
by July 2016 [#6.2.16].  A pattern of widespread arrests continued during
2015 and 2016.  Significant sentences were handed down to those suspected
of involvement in demonstrations on behalf of the Muslim Brotherhood, which
were generally very violent affairs.  It is difficult to see consistency
between the Appellant's account of his own experiences given what he claims
was the authorities' attitude towards him and their supposed knowledge of
his activities, with the objective evidence of what was taking place in
Egypt during 2015 [CPIN].   Put simply, why, when others were being tried
and sentenced for their involvement in demonstrations and he claimed to
have been arrested at one, was he not also tried?  Why, during a year when
there were mass arrests and trials of those suspected of being involved in
the Muslim Brotherhood, was the Appellant not arrested during 2015, if he
had the profile with the local authorities he claims?'

16.  Whether or not the report was in the papers before him, he was
unquestionably entitled to refer to it.  Judge Holmes explained at [15]:

'15. I have also referred myself to the 27 July CPIN report on the Muslim
Brotherhood; although neither party had placed this in evidence it was
accepted that it was plainly relevant.'

17.  The CPIN Report as with the Canadian Report is a digest of country
information as is the UK Report, the latter being subject to inspection by
the Independent Chief Inspector of Borders and Immigration.  I do not
consider Mr Selway was correct to dismiss the authority of the CPIN Report
in the manner he did any more than to characterise the Canadian Report as
'more liberal'.

18.  The Country Policy and Information Note on Egypt: Muslim Brotherhood
was published in July 2017 and describes itself as Version 3.  The Canadian
Report is among the many sources referred to.  In the chapter headed
'Assessment of Risk' at 2.2, the following text appears:

'2.2.1.  The MB remains the main political opposition to the government
despite being banned in 2013, with an estimated one million members.  The
group has faced a prolonged crackdown by President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi's
government following the ousting of President Mohamed Morsi in July 2013
and its designation on 25 December 2013 as a terrorist organisation (see
Muslim Brotherhood: history, structure, ideology and activities and
Treatment of Muslim Brotherhood).

2.2.2    Journalists affiliated with, or perceived to be sympathetic to,
the MB have also been targeted by the state.  The government has also
closed hundreds of civil society groups with links to the MB (see Muslim
Brotherhood and affiliated groups banned).

2.2.3    Many hundreds of MB members have been killed or injured during
protests, while thousands have also reportedly been detained, some in
unofficial places of detention.  There are also reports of MB supporters
dying in police detention, instances of persons tortured to death and other
allegations of killings in prisons and detention centres.  Death sentences
have been handed down to senior leaders in the MB for charges that include
violence, espionage and jailbreak (see Arrests and trials).

2.2.4    Under the Penal Code, the government is able to detain anyone
suspected of membership of the MB.  However, in practice, arrests and
prolonged detentions have primarily been of high - and mid-level leaders,
and those taking part in protests against the government which became
violent (see Arrests and trials).

2.2.5    The authorities are unlikely to have the capacity, capability or
interest in seeking to target all persons associated with the MB given the
size and variety of its members hip and support base.  The evidence does
not establish that merely being a member of, or, in particular, a supporter
of the MB, or being perceived to support the MB, will place a person is at
risk of persecution or serious harm.

2.2.6    Whether a person is at risk of ill-treatment because of their
involvement with, or perceived support for, the MB will depend upon their
circumstances, profile, activities, and previous contact and difficulties
with the state.  The onus is on the person to demonstrate that they are
likely to be of interest to the state and subject to treatment amounting to
persecution or serious harm.

2.2.7    For further guidance on assessing risk, see the Asylum Instruction
on Assessing Credibility and Refugee Status.'

19.  This is followed by a detailed survey of the evidence, including a
chapter headed 'Treatment of the Muslim Brotherhood since 2013' which
chronicles the evidence of the mass arrests and detentions.  Extracts from
the Canadian Report are at 6.3.7 and 6.3.8, as follows:

'6.3.7   An information response by the Immigration and Refugee Board of
Canada (IRBC), compiled using a range of sources mostly dating from 2014
and 2017, stated:

'A news article published on 13 July 2016 in the Daily News Egypt cites a
statement from the Egyptian Foreign Ministry as stating that Amnesty
International was 'not impartial.  Distorting Egypt's image is in its
personal interests'' (Daily News Egypt 13 July 2016).  According to the
same source the Foreign Ministry's statement further stated that, 'anyone
who read the report will promptly know that the organisation is biased,
tackling issues from only one point of view and talking with people who are
hostile towards Egypt' (Daily News Egypt 13 July 2016).  The Daily News
Egypt indicates that Egyptian authorities have responded to the accusations
of enforced disappearances by stating that 'all allegedly disappeared
people are either detained pending trials or by deny[ing] knowing any
information regarding their whereabouts' (Daily News Egypt 11 Dec. 2016).
In January 2016, The New York Times reported that 'after months of flatly
denying that anyone had disappeared in Egypt, the [Ministry of the Interior
of Egypt] in early January said it was investigating the cases of 101
missing people.  Last week, officials raised that tally to 130' (The New
York Times 26 Jan. 2016).

6.3.8    The same IRBC response also stated:

'In an annual report documenting cases of enforced disappearances in Egypt
from 1 August 2015 to 15 August 2016, the Stop Enforced Disappearances
Campaign of the Egyptian Commission for Rights and Freedoms (ECRF), 'an
advocacy group based in Cairo' (The New York Times 26 Jan. 2016), stated
that 'victims [of enforced disappearances] are usually forced to admit that
they committed crimes related to their belonging to extremist groups...
most notably belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood' (ECRF 30 Aug. 2016).
ECRF indicates that it documented a total of 912 cases of enforced
disappearances: 20 cases in 2013, 16 in 2014, 530 in 2015 and 346 in the
period of January 2016 to August 2016 (ECRF 30 Aug. 2016).  The same source
indicates that, of the 912 cases documented, '[t]here were 891 males and 21
females' and that 321 were students, 192 had 'other occupations' (such as
'freelancer, marketer, accountant, physician, engineer, translator,
technician, lawyer, pharmacist and researcher'), 86 were government
workers, 16 were unemployed, and 2 were conscripts of the armed forces
(ECRF 30 Aug. 2016).  The same source stated that 'sometimes some of the
victims of the enforced disappearance appear in videos published by
[Egypt's] Ministry of the Interiors [sic] or the Ministry of Defense
confessing that they committed crimes of overthrowing the regime, belonging
to terrorist groups, and other charges' (ECRF 30 Aug. 2016).'

20.  Judge Holmes' analysis of the CPIN Report was in the context of the
appellant's claim to have been involved in demonstrations on behalf of the
Brotherhood and he expressed concerns over the plausibility of the
appellant not being tried had he been involved in such demonstration. His
reasoning why the authorities would not be interested in the appellant
today was based on his finding that the evidence clearly pointed to the
appellant having no current genuine interest in Egyptian politics having
given unchallenged reasons why the appellant did not come to adverse
attention in 2015 a year during which the country evidence shows there were
a number of arrests as observed in paragraph [47] of his decision.  It is
apparent that, in the absence of any evidence that the authorities were
interested in the appellant in 2015, the judge reasoned (for his conclusion
in [61]) that the appellant did not face any prospect of detention or
questioning upon return. The judge did not however explain (i) whether
there was a residual risk simply based on the appellant's historical and
inactive membership and whether this is likely to be known and (ii) whether
the Secretary of State was correct in his assertion set out in para [11]
above.  To my mind in the light of the range of evidence of the scale and
nature of the hostility of the state in recent years towards Brotherhood
members, it was an aspect that required to be answered in the light of the
Secretary of States concession on membership.  The country information does
not provide a clear answer; further evidence (if available) and submissions
are required.

21.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge erred in his decision on
this narrow but potentially important aspect and his decision to dismiss
the appeal is set aside solely for a determination of the issue outlined in
[20] above.  The judge's finding on the appellant's profile and his
findings of fact on the appellant's account remain undisturbed and are
preserved.  The parties are directed to file with the Upper Tribunal and
serve on the other party within 21 days all evidence (with essential
reading identified) on the issue.  Each party is also directed to file
submissions within the same time."



DISCUSSION

I am grateful to Mr Selway for his compliance with my direction.  He has
provided detailed submissions together with all country information relied
on including the UK Home Office Country Policy and Information Note -
Egypt: Muslim Brotherhood (July 2017), being the most recent publication by
the respondent on membership of the MB and its implications in protection
claims.  By way of submissions from the Secretary of State, limited
submissions had been filed, maintaining the Secretary of State's position
in the refusal letter in the absence of sight of Mr Selway's submissions,
which appeared to have crossed in the post.

At the resumed hearing, I reserved my decision after the parties'
submissions.  In summary, Mr Selway accepted that the appellant's
membership of MB had been at the age of 18, some 22 years ago.  Ms
Pettersen confirmed that this aspect remained conceded.  Mr Selway also
accepted that there was no evidence of the appellant having undertaken any
sur place activities in the United Kingdom in relation to the MB and
furthermore, and he acknowledged Judge Holme's comprehensive rejection of
the account of difficulties the appellant claims to have had in Egypt.  No
further evidence was led on that aspect.  As to evidence of risk on arrival
if returned, Mr Selway accepted that there was no evidence that the
appellant would be asked questions or that he would face any interrogation.
 As to the situation post-arrival, however, he submitted that the position
changed and he referred me to the extensive evidence in support of his
written submissions on this aspect, in particular paragraph 58 of those
submissions, which explain inter alia:

"While there is a degree of (unexpressed) public cynicism about this
practice, it has reportedly created a social environment whereby any
affiliation or connection with the Brotherhood or any attempt to express
political dissent (see Political Opinion (actual or imputed)) is considered
evidence of supporting terrorism.  This has resulted in a number of
arbitrary arrests, prosecutions and dismissals ...",

and:

"Ordinary inactive members, party supporters and those with family links to
members are less likely to be personally targeted, but still face a risk of
arrest, prosecution or dismissal from state employment should their
affiliations become known to authorities.  All persons with MB links are
likely to be subjected to surveillance and monitoring of their activities."

Support for this position appears in the Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade (DFAT) Australia Country Information Report Egypt (17 June 2019), in
particular the passages between [3.52] to [3.58].  Mr Selway also confirmed
that there had been no finding by Judge Holmes that any family members of
the appellant had affiliation to MB.  Otherwise he relied on his written
submissions.

By way of response, Ms Pettersen clarified that the CPIN Report referred to
above is the most recent and in respect of risk on arrival, referred me to
a report by the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Egypt: Exit and
entry procedures at airports and land borders (2017 - September 19) dated
10 September 2019, in particular at paragraph 3.4, Egyptian Returnees,
which cites the Australian report:

"Australia's DFAT reports the following regarding the treatment of
returnees by Egyptian authorities:

'Egypt accepts involuntary returnees.  Egyptian officials generally pay
little regard to failed asylum seekers upon their return to the country,
although it is possible that some individuals will be questioned upon
entry, or will have their entry delayed.  ...  Egyptians who outstay their
work or tourist visas in other countries are regularly returned to Egypt
with no attention paid to them by authorities.  DFAT is not aware of failed
asylum seekers being reported by airport authorities to the Ministry of the
Interior or any of the security services beyond the normal processes for
returning Egyptian nationals.' (Australia 17 June 2019, para 5.39).

Corroborating information could not be found among the sources consulted by
the Research Directorate within the time constraints of this response."

As to the Australian report, Ms Pettersen also referred me to s.3.54 of the
Australian report, indicating the scale of adverse interest in MB members
but argued that the appellant was not high profile.  He was not an active
member and any surveillance would not bring up anything that would be seen
as working against them.  She referred also to s.3.58 of the Australian
report:

"DFAT assesses that Muslim Brotherhood leadership figures and members who
continue to pursue political activities actively either within or outside
the party structure are highly likely to be arrested and prosecuted.
Ordinary inactive members, party supporters and those with family links to
members are less likely to be personally targeted, but still face a risk of
arrest, prosecution, or dismissal from state employment should their
affiliations become known to authorities.  All persons with MB links are
likely to be subjected to surveillance and monitoring of their activities."

In her submission, the appellant would not be at a real risk.

By way of response, Mr Selway argued that the assertion in the CPIN Report
cited in the refusal letter at 2.2.5,

"the authorities are unlikely to have the capacity, capability or interest
in seeking to target all persons associated with the MB given the size and
variety of its membership and support base.  The evidence does not
establish that merely being a member of, or, in particular, a supporter of
the MB, or being perceived to support the MB, will place a person at risk
of persecution or serious harm",

was not supported by objective material.

Ms Pettersen disagreed and argued that the statement was a policy summary
and referred to the references appearing at the conclusion of the report,
which, she submitted, supported the Secretary of State's position.

By way of response, Mr Selway acknowledged he could not press this aspect
further but observed that it would have been more useful to have exact
evidence.  He maintained the appellant would be at risk.

I remind myself that the appellant has the burden of proof in this appeal.
The evidence shows continuing adverse interest by the Egyptian authorities
in the MB.  The Australian report, being the most recent, is particularly
useful and has been cited with approval by the Canadian Immigration Board.
Mr Selway is right to acknowledge the absence of evidence of any risk that
the appellant would be questioned or interrogated on return about the basis
of his asylum claim.  Even if he were questioned the evidence would not
seem to support a case that information gleaned would be passed to the
security service.  If questioned and if replying truthfully all the
appellant would be able to say is that he was a member at the age of 18 of
the MB and that his account of difficulties this had brought about had,
however, been rejected as not true by a judge in the United Kingdom.  He
would need to acknowledge that he had not undertaken any MB related
activities in the United Kingdom and he had no account to give on MB-
related activities whilst in Egypt prior to leaving in November 2015.

Post-arrival, in the light of the blank canvas of any activities by the
appellant on behalf of the MB or a finding of adverse interest by the
authorities whilst in Egypt and in the absence of any evidence that his
family members were affiliated to the MB, I conclude that having regard to
the country information, the appellant has not established to the lower
standard that he is at a real risk of being reported to the authorities as
a member of the MB.  He is squarely within the definition of "ordinary
inactive member".  I do not find that a real risk would arise were someone
were to do so in the light of the time that has passed since his claimed
membership and the rejection by Judge Holmes of the claimed adverse
interest before the appellant left Egypt.  There is no evidence that the
appellant has been politically active in the United Kingdom.  As observed
by Judge Holmes at [59] (cited above), he was not satisfied that the
appellant had "any genuine interest in Egyptian politics or that he was
suspected of involvement in the Muslim Brotherhood by the Egyptian
authorities".  In the light of the absence of any challenge to Judge
Holmes's credibility findings, there is no reasonable degree of likelihood
the appellant would now take up the cause on behalf of the MB and place
himself at risk.  Accordingly, the appellant has failed to demonstrate that
his historical membership alone would place him at a real risk of harm in
the event of return to Egypt.

By way of summary therefore, I set aside the decision of Judge Holmes on
the limited basis explained above.  I reach the same conclusion, however,
and dismiss this appeal.



Signed                                  Date 23 January 2020

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson





