
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00327/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th June 2019                    |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                    [N G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Moore, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of Judge Beg to dismiss the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his protection
claim.

An anonymity direction was not made in the First-tier Tribunal and it
therefore seems to me that little purpose would be achieved by making one
now.

The appellant's case

The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 12th December 1980.
 He claims that in May 2002, whilst returning from a visit to his parents
in Jaffna, he was stopped by LTTE soldiers and escorted to a camp where he
was persuaded to act as a spy for the organisation.  He was arrested by the
police on suspicion of espionage in November 2004 and was detained and ill-
treated for about six weeks before his employer (who was also a Tamil)
bribed the police to release him.

Following his release, he was too afraid to return to work and, in June
2005, fled to Vanni mainland, which was then under the control of the LTTE.
 He received training in espionage and thereafter acted as a spy for the
LTTE in Colombo.  He there met a man called [U].  [U] was part of an LTTE
breakaway faction called Karuna, which worked with the Sri Lankan
authorities.  [U] was subsequently abducted by the LTTE and the Appellant
was told to report to Kilnochchi immediately.  The Appellant was concerned
that he may be in trouble with the LTTE because he had failed to inform
them of [U]'s name and involvement with the Karuna.  He was also concerned
to learn that members of the Karuna faction were making enquiries about him
and had visited the house where he was staying.  His uncle therefore
arranged for him to leave Sri Lanka with the assistance of an agent.  He
now fears ill-treatment from the authority in Sri Lanka, not only because
of his activities before leaving the country, but also because of his
support for the Transitional Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) whilst in the
United Kingdom.

The oral evidence at the First-tier Tribunal

The Appellant did not give evidence in the First-tier Tribunal because he
was medically unfit to do so.  He did, however, call four witnesses.

Firstly, he called a man called '[SY]', who holds a senior position in the
United Kingdom with the TGTE.  Mr [Y] said that the Appellant had been
involved with many of its activities since he had come to this country.

The Appellant's brother, [PN], also gave evidence.  He is a refugee who is
in contact with their parents in Sri Lanka.  He recounted an occasion when
the Sri Lankan police had shown their father photographs of the Appellant's
involvement in TGTE activities in the UK and told him (the Appellant's
father) that both his sons should surrender to them.

Thirdly, the Appellant's sister ([MN]) gave evidence. She has leave to
remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person settled here. She
too has kept in contact with their parents.  She recounted how their father
was regularly detained by the Sri Lankan police and how they had told him
that his sons should surrender to them.

Finally, the Appellant called his cousin, '[KJ]', who said he had known the
Appellant when they were both living in Sri Lanka.  He said that he knew
the Appellant as a member of the TGTE, and that they had attended meetings
and protests together whilst in Sri Lanka in 2009.  Mr [J] had returned to
Sri Lanka in 2011 and been questioned about his links with the Appellant.

The previous decision of Judge Warner

Judge Beg considered an earlier adverse decision made by Judge Warner.  She
recited the various reasons Judge Warner had given for his decision,
including a finding that it was, "highly implausible", that the Appellant
would have shared accommodation with [U] for three or four months in
circumstances where both were supposedly spying for opposing factions of
the political divide (see paragraph 33) and/or that he would be permitted
to leave Sri Lanka using his own passport if he was truly wanted by the Sri
Lankan authorities.

The decision of Judge Beg

It will suffice at this stage to say that whilst accepting that the
Appellant had been involved in some sur place activities with the TGTE
whilst in the United Kingdom, Judge Beg did not accept that these put him
at risk of being ill-treated on return to Sri Lanka.  Moreover, Judge Beg
did not find any part of the Appellant's account of events in Sri Lanka
credible.

The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

There are three Grounds of Appeal against Judge Beg's decision in respect
of which permission to appeal has been granted.

The first ground is that the judge not only treated the decision of Judge
Warner as her starting point but also her finishing point.

The second ground is that the judge ought not to have attached any
significant weight to the decision of Judge Warner, given that that
decision had been made within the "Fast Track Procedure", which has
subsequently been found to be unfair and unlawful.

The third ground is that the judge's approach to the risk on return as a
result of the Appellant's sur place activities in the United Kingdom was
flawed.

I shall take the grounds in reverse order.

Analysis of the grounds of appeal

I have difficulty in following the reasoning of the third Ground of Appeal.
 It is said, for example, that the judge misdirected herself in relation to
evidence that the Appellant had provided testimony to the UN OISL, "as it
was not suggested that the Sri Lankan authorities would be aware of it".
It seems to me entirely logical to find that a person will not be at risk
on return by reason of activities conducted in the United Kingdom of which
the authorities in the country of origin are oblivious. The nature of the
supposed 'misdirection' is therefore a mystery.  The remainder of this
ground is couched in particularly vague terms.  It is said at paragraph 11,
for example, that, "the FtJ erred in failing to apply anxious scrutiny to
the sur place activity issues that were before her".  The only particular
of this allegation given is that the judge failed to provide reasons for
her finding that the Appellant's attendance at TGTE meetings was a cynical
attempt to bolster a weak claim.  However, given that the Appellant's case
was not apparently put on the basis that the Sri Lankan authorities would
be aware of his attendance at such meetings, I find it difficult to
comprehend how such a claimed error is said to be material to the outcome
of the appeal. I therefore hold that this ground has not been made out.

I turn to the second ground.  This is founded upon the following passage in
the judge's decision, which appears at paragraph 36:

"Mrs Rothwell submitted on the Appellant's behalf that less weight should
be given to the determination of Judge Warner because at the time of that
appeal hearing the Appellant was in the Fast Track at Harmondsworth hearing
centre and that that process was subsequently found by the higher courts to
be unfair.  She also submitted that the Appellant since that determination,
has now become involved with sur place activities in the United Kingdom.
She also relied upon the medical evidence in the bundle.  I find that there
is no credible evidence before me that the Appellant was unable to fully
put his case before Judge Warner.  It is clear from the determination that
the Appellant was represented by Counsel."

This ground appears to me to be misconceived.  It is perfectly possible for
a safe decision to be made in proceedings that are inherently unfair, in
just the same way as it is possible for an unsafe decision to be made
within proceedings that were conducted entirely fairly.  If Judge Beg had
suggested that less weight should attach to evidence that could have been
placed before Judge Warner, then there may have been force in an argument
that it would be an error of law not to make due allowance for the
difficulties faced by appellants in presenting his case in the 'fast-track'
procedure.  However, I do not read paragraph 36 making that suggestion.
All that Judge Beg was saying was that the mere fact that the Fast Track
procedure had been subsequently declared unfair and unlawful was not of
itself a reason to question the safety of the findings made by Judge
Warner. With that, I agree.

I turn, finally, to the first ground.  I confess that this ground has given
me considerable pause for thought.  I should say from the outset that Judge
Beg gave very detailed and thorough consideration to the evidence.
However, the paragraph that causes me particular concern is paragraph 58.

"For the reasons set out in the determination of Immigration Judge Warner,
I do not find the Appellant's account of what happened to him in Sri Lanka
to be credible.  Consequently, I do not find that the Appellant was
arrested, detained and ill-treated in detention.  I do not find that the
Appellant has a record of someone who has been previously detained by the
authorities or someone who is wanted by the authorities.  I do not find
that there is a photograph that the authorities have of the Appellant in
Sri Lanka which can be matched to someone who has attended a demonstration
in the United Kingdom.  I find that the Appellant's participation in
demonstrations in the United Kingdom has been one of someone who is part of
the crowd.  I do not find that the Appellant has a profile as such in Sri
Lanka."  (Emphasis added)

It is right to observe that the judge considered much of the fresh evidence
before reaching the above conclusion.  She in particuar considered (at
paragraph 38) the medical report of Dr Martin and (at paragraph 43) the
psychiatric report of Dr Dhumad.  The judge for various reasons, which for
present purposes it is unnecessary to rehearse, appears to have attached
little weight to those reports as support for the credibility of the
Appellant's account.  I am nevertheless concerned that, upon a literal
reading of paragraph 58 of her decision, Judge Beg appears to have
discounted the credibility of the appellant's account of what occurred in
Sri Lanka, solely, "for the reasons set out in the determination of
Immigration Judge Warner". Moreover, Judge Beg appears not only to have
discounted the appellant's account of events in Sri Lanka on this basis,
but also to have discounted his account of subsequent events for the same
reason (see the list of other matters following the word, "consequently",
which I have emphasised in my citation from paragraph 58, above).  Thus,
read in isolation, paragraph 58 appears to suggest that the reason for
Judge Beg's wholesale discounting of the various aspects of the Appellant's
claim was based upon an unquestioning acceptance of the decision of Judge
Warner without regard to the fresh evidence that the appellant had adduced.


I have anxiously considered whether this literal interpretation of
paragraph 58 is fair when it is set within the context of the decision as a
whole. In this regard, it is right to say that Judge Beg returned to the
question of the Appellant's credibility at paragraph 61.

"In assessing the evidence as a whole on the lower standard of proof I do
not find the Appellant credible.  Whilst I accept that the Appellant has
attended TGTE meetings and demonstrations in the United Kingdom, I do not
find that that in itself will place him at risk on return.  I find that the
Appellant's involvement with the organisation is an attempt by him to
bolster a weak claim for asylum.  I find that the Appellant's sister was
able to return to Sri Lanka in 2016.  She gave evidence that she went to
Sri Lanka because her mother had suffered a serious injury after a fall."

    The judge proceeded to give a number of further detailed reasons why
    she did not find the Appellant credible (see paragraphs 62 to 67).
    However, the difficulty is that the judge had by that stage already
    given the distinct impression of having already decided to disbelieve
    the Appellant solely on account of the reasons given by Immigration
    Judge Warner before turning to consider whether there might be other
    reasons for doing so.  That is contrary both to the principle that, (a)
    the earlier decision of a judge should be treated as the start rather
    than the end-point for the assessment of credibility, and (b) the whole
    of the evidence should be considered in the round before making an
    adverse credibility finding.

There is a further complaint made by Ms Chapman on behalf of the Appellant
concerning the judge's failure to take a holistic view of the evidence.
This relates to the evidence of the country expert, Dr Chris Smith.  The
passage to which Ms Chapman referred me is contained within paragraph 67.

         "Dr Smith's report is based upon the Appellant's claim that he was
         arrested and detained in Sri Lanka.  For the reasons which I have
         given I do not find that to be the case."

The difficulty with the above passage is that it fails to recognise that
the plausibility of an account is an essential ingredient in determining
whether the person giving it is a credible witness of truth.  In other
words, plausibility and credibility should be looked at holistically rather
than, as the judge appears to have done, by firstly determining the
credibility of the Appellant and then, having discounted it, dismissing the
evidence of a country expert concerning plausibility as of little or no
value because it was based upon the account of a witness who had already
been found not to be credible. The issues of credibility and plausibility
should thus have been considered in the reverse order to that in which the
judge considered them, namely, by firstly acknowledging and giving credit
for the plausibility of the appellant's account, and then taking this into
account as a non-decisive factor that weighed in the appellant's favour
when assessing his credibility as a witness of truth.

I confess that the conclusion to which I have come has been arrived at with
great reluctance, given the very thorough and detailed consideration that
Judge Beg gave to many aspects of the evidence.  I am nevertheless clear in
my conclusion that the judge failed to look at the evidence in the round,
and instead sought to determine the Appellant's credibility independently
of the plausibility of his account, and by appearing to have determined the
former solely by reference to the reasons given by Judge Warner in the
earlier proceedings.  That was an error of law that ultimately strikes at
the root of all her factual findings.  I am therefore driven to conclude
that her decision must for this reason be set aside and that none of her
findings of fact can be preserved.

Given my above conclusion, I feel that I have no alternative but to remit
this case to be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Taylor
House, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Beg.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside
and remitted to be considered afresh by any judge other than Judge Beg.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 1st July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
