
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/00703/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined under rule 34             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 June 2021                       |On 22 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                  AH (IRAQ)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This is a paper  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was P (paper determination that is  not
provisional). A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
practicable, and all issues could be determined on paper.

The documents that I was referred were primarily the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal promulgated on 18 May 2020, the Secretary of  State's  grounds
of appeal, the grant of permission to appeal by  Tribunal  Judge  Adio,  and
the directions of Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  dated  28  July  2020,  the
contents of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 13
    January 2020 to refuse the appellant's fresh claim for asylum  made  on
    11 April 2016.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  in  Jul  1966.   Pursuant  to
    unchallenged findings of fact reached by  three  constitutions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, he is excluded from the Refugee  Convention  under
    Article 1F(a).  That is because during the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait  in
    1990, he was responsible for ordering the extrajudicial execution of 35
    prisoners of war while serving as a sergeant in the  Iraqi  army.   The
    appellant originally appealed  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bircher
    against the Secretary of State's 13 January 2020 decision.  On  18  May
    2020, Judge  Bircher  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal of his fresh claim for  asylum,  but  purported  to  allow  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  in  the  alternative.   The
    judge also allowed the appeal on Article 3 human  rights  grounds,  and
    there has been no challenge to those findings.

 3. In a decision and reasons dated 9  November  2020,  I  found  that  the
    decision of Judge Bircher involved the making of an error of law to the
    extent she allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds,  and
    set it aside, with all findings of  fact  preserved.   Please  see  the
    error of law decision in the Annex to this decision, which sets out the
    procedural and factual background to this appeal in greater depth.

 4. In light of the preserved findings of fact contained in the decision of
    Judge Bircher, I proposed in my  9  November  decision  to  remake  the
    decision, allowing the appeal on Article 3 grounds.  I gave the parties
    14 days to provide reasoned objections to  the  contrary.   On  8  June
    2021, I was informed that the Secretary of State indicated that she was
    content for the appeal to  be  allowed  on  Article  3  grounds  on  25
    November 2020, and that the respondent had indicated his assent  on  17
    November 2020.

 5. Accordingly, I allow the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse his protection claim on  Article  3  grounds
    only.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

 6. I maintain the anonymity order already in force.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights (Article 3) grounds.
The appeal is dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Stephen H Smith                  Date 8 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a reduced  fee
award of �70 for the following reason.  Although the appellant's appeal  has
been allowed on Article 3 grounds, his primary challenge  to  the  Secretary
of State's decision to treat him as excluded  from  the  Refugee  Convention
failed.  I consider that the appellant's recovery of the appeal  fee  should
be reduced by 50% to �70 to reflect his limited success.


Signed      Stephen H Smith                  Date 8 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00703/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined under rule 34             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  AH (IRAQ)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (T)

This is a paper  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of hearing was T (triage provisional  decision).  A  face
to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
could be determined on paper.

The documents that I was referred were primarily the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal promulgated on 18 May 2020, the Secretary of  State's  grounds
of appeal, the grant of permission to appeal by  Tribunal  Judge  Adio,  and
the directions of Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  dated  28  July  2020,  the
contents of which I have recorded.

The order made,  and  the  proposed  resolution  for  the  remaking  of  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  is  described  at  the  end  of  these
reasons.

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bircher) promulgated on 18 May 2020 allowing
    the appeal of the claimant, AH, against a decision to refuse his asylum
    and humanitarian protection claim, on humanitarian protection grounds.

 2. The sole ground of appeal may  be  stated  simply.  The  judge  reached
    unchallenged findings of fact that the appellant,  a  citizen  of  Iraq
    born in 1966, was excluded from the Refugee  Convention  on  the  basis
    that  he  had  engaged  in  war  crimes,  yet  allowed  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  The Secretary of State contends  that
    it was perverse for the judge  to  allow  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds, given the  appellant's  commission  of  war  crimes
    excluded  him  from  the  scope  of  subsidiary  protection  under  the
    Qualification Directive (Directive 2004/83/EC).  The appeal was allowed
    on Article 3 grounds also, and there is no challenge to that finding by
    the Secretary of State.

Factual background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2001.  The basis of  the
    appellant's claim for asylum has evolved over the years  and  has  been
    the subject of several appeals.  His initial claim, submitted in August
    2001, was based on his claimed role as a photographer capturing  images
    of Kurdish collaborators for the Ba'ath Party who later rose to  senior
    roles in the Kurdish military.  That claim was refused, and  an  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed.

 4. In 2003, the appellant made a fresh claim on the basis that during  the
    Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990 he was serving as a  sergeant  in  the
    Iraqi army, and had ordered and overseen the summary  execution  of  35
    prisoners of war.  That factual claim was accepted by  Judge  Mark-Bell
    in a decision promulgated on 14  February  2007,  who  found  that  the
    appellant was excluded from the Refugee Convention under Article 1F  on
    the grounds that he had engaged in war crimes.

 5. The appellant made a further fresh claim in 2007, claiming that he  was
    acting under duress at the time  of  giving  the  orders  to  kill  the
    prisoners.  In a decision promulgated on 19 November  2014  (the  delay
    being attributable to the Secretary of  State  taking  seven  years  to
    determine the fresh claim), Tribunal Judge Buchanan  rejected  the  so-
    called "obedience to superior orders" defence that the  appellant  then
    sought to rely upon (see [6.25]).

 6. The appeal before Judge Bircher arose from a further  fresh  claim,  in
    which the appellant sought to distance himself from responsibility  for
    giving the  kill  orders,  this  time  in  attempted  reliance  upon  a
    polygraph test.  Judge Bircher rejected the appellant's latest  attempt
    to unpick the findings of Judge Mark-Bell, in these terms, at [52]:

         "I therefore conclude that the appellant is excluded  from  refugee
         status under  article  1F.  Notwithstanding  this  position[,]  the
         respondent and in turn this tribunal must then go on to consider if
         it is appropriate to award the applicant humanitarian protection or
         discretionary leave."

 7. The judge allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection and  article  3
    grounds.

Consideration under rule 34

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio.  On
    28 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul gave directions stating that
    it was his provisional view that the questions of whether the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law, and,
    if so, whether the decision should be set aside,  could  be  determined
    without a hearing. The appellant was directed to  provide  any  written
    submissions on those issues within 14 days. Judge Rintoul directed that
    the respondent had 21 days within which to respond. Neither  party  has
    responded to the directions.

 9. Paragraph 4 of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  Pilot  Practice
    Direction: Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 19  March  2020  (subsequently  renewed)  provides
    that, "where a chamber's procedure rules allow  decisions  to  be  made
    without a hearing, decisions  should  usually  be  made  in  this  way,
    provided this is in  accordance  with  the  overriding  objective,  the
    parties' ECHR rights in the chamber's procedure rules about notice  and
    consent."  Rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 provides, where relevant:

         "(1)     Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal  may
             make any decision without a hearing.

         (2)      The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view  expressed
             by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider
             any matter, and the form of any such hearing."

10. The starting point for my consideration  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine the issues identified by Judge Rintoul without
    a hearing is the  overriding  objective.  Rule  2(1)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  provides  that  the  overriding
    objective of the Upper Tribunal is  to  "deal  with  cases  fairly  and
    justly".  That includes, at (2)(c), "ensuring, so far  as  practicable,
    that the parties are able to participate  fully  in  the  proceedings",
    and, at (d),  "using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    effectively". Also relevant is the need  to  avoid  delay,  so  far  as
    compatible with proper  consideration  of  the  issues:  see  paragraph
    (2)(e).

11.  While  I  am  conscious  that  neither  party  has  responded  to  the
    directions, I am satisfied that they were served in accordance with the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, and that each party has
    had ample opportunity to respond. Accordingly, I am satisfied  that  it
    is consistent with the  overriding  objective,  and  the  interests  of
    justice, for me to proceed by considering this  matter  on  the  papers
    under rule 34 in the absence of further submissions.

12. As will be seen, in the operative part  of  my  decision  I  allow  the
    appeal, and propose that  the  appeal  be  re-made  without  a  further
    hearing, with  Judge  Bircher's  findings  of  fact  preserved,  to  be
    dismissed on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds, and allowed on
    Article 3 grounds only. I propose to provide the parties with a further
    opportunity to address the tribunal on that basis, and to  that  extent
    the interests of justice will be served by providing the parties with a
    further opportunity to participate in the proposed written process.

Discussion

13. The unchallenged findings of fact reached by the  judge  precluded  the
    appeal from being allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.  So  much
    is clear from the following.

14. First, Article 17 of the Qualification Directive provides:

         "1.      A third country national or a stateless person is excluded
             from being eligible for subsidiary protection where there  are
             serious reasons for considering that:

             (a) he or she has committed  a  crime  against  peace,  a  war
             crime,  or  a  crime  against  humanity,  as  defined  in  the
             international  instruments  drawn  up  to  make  provision  in
             respect of such crimes..."

15.  Secondly, paragraph 339D(i) of the Immigration Rules provides:

         "339D. A person is excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection
         for the purposes of paragraph 339C  (iv)  where  the  Secretary  of
         State is satisfied that:

             (i) there are serious reasons for considering that  they  have
             committed a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime  against
             humanity,  or  any  other  serious  crime  or  instigated   or
             otherwise participated in such crimes..."

16. By rejecting the appellant's account that he had been acting under some
    form of duress at the time of giving the kill orders,  specifically  by
    rejecting the new account based on the polygraph  evidence,  the  judge
    confirmed the earlier findings of two  different  judges  (Judge  Mark-
    Bell,  Judge  Buchanan)  that  the  appellant  is  excluded  from   the
    protection of the Refugee Convention on the basis of his engagement  in
    war crimes. The exclusion provisions for humanitarian protection mirror
    those applicable to the 1951 Convention and,  as  such,  the  appellant
    fell to be  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection  also.  The  judge
    appears to have approached humanitarian protection  as  the  "fallback"
    from refugee status in an exclusion situation, whereas  the  effect  of
    the Qualification Directive and paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules
    is that  such  an  individual  is  also  excluded  from  the  scope  of
    humanitarian protection. It was an  error  of  law  for  the  judge  to
    purport to allow the appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,  in
    circumstances when the findings of fact in the decision meant that,  by
    definition, such a conclusion was precluded.

17. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  Judge  Bircher  involved  the
    making of an error of law.

18. As to whether it should be set aside, there has been  no  challenge  by
    either party to the findings of  fact  reached  by  the  judge.   Those
    findings admit of only one conclusion, namely that the appeal  must  be
    allowed  on  article  3  grounds  but  dismissed  on  both  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds.

19. Accordingly, I find that the decision of  Judge  Bircher  involved  the
    making of an error of law and is set aside.

20. I preserve all findings of fact reached by Judge Bircher and propose to
    allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds alone.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Bircher  involved  the  making  of  an  error  of  law
insofar as it allowed the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.  I
allow the appeal of the Secretary of  State  and  set  aside  the  operative
terms of Judge Bircher's decision, preserving all findings of fact.

Subject to consideration of any submissions to the contrary,  I  propose  to
remake the decision on the papers, on the basis of  the  preserved  findings
of fact, allowing the appeal on Article 3 grounds, dismissing it  on  asylum
and humanitarian protection grounds.

Both parties have  14  days  after  being  sent  this  decision  to  provide
reasoned objections to  my  preliminary  view  that  the  appeal  should  be
allowed on Article 3 grounds only, and without a further hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Stephen H Smith                  Date 9 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

