
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00572/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2020                   |On 9 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     bk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Fazli, Counsel instructed by Sohaib Fatimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could  be  determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  I  did  not  experience  any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in January 1993 who has been
in the UK since 2015.

He claims that the Taliban targeted him whilst he was working at a college
teaching students to use the internet and that because he did not agree to
help them his family have been threatened and a friend killed; and a letter
posted in the local mosque (in his home area of Maimana) calling him an
infidel and telling people to report his whereabouts to the Taliban so that
he could be killed.

The appellant applied for asylum on arrival in the UK in 2015. His
application was refused. His ensuing appeal was heard by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal.  In a decision promulgated on 7 October 2016
(hereafter "the previous decision") his appeal was dismissed.  Judge Hawden-
Beal accepted that the appellant had been targeted by the Taliban and that
he faced a risk in his home area but found that he could safely relocate to
Kabul.

The appellant made further submissions which were rejected by the
respondent.  The appellant appealed and his appeal came before Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal Hamilton (hereafter "the judge") who, in a decision
promulgated on 28 April 2020, dismissed the appeal.  It is this decision
that is now being appealed.

Decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hamilton

The appellant adduced documentary evidence and an expert report that post-
date the previous decision.

The documents included: (a) a letter dated 5 April 2018 from the elders in
his home area describing efforts to intervene on his behalf; (b) a letter
dated 18 April 2018 from the imam of the mosque in his local area stating
that unknown persons had placed a warning letter addressed to the appellant
in the mosque; (c) a letter dated 24 April 2018 from a person who lives in
the local area describing having seen the letter posted in the mosque; (d)
a letter dated 18 April 2018 from a member of the city council confirming
the appellant's risk from the Taliban; and (e) a letter dated 11 April 2018
from the appellant's father. I will refer to these documents as "the new
documents".

The expert report is by a recognised expert on Afghanistan, Dr Giustozzi.
The aspects of the report relevant to this appeal are discussed below.

The judge directed himself to take the previous decision as a starting
point. He noted that in the previous decision it had been accepted that the
appellant faced a risk in his home area but not that he would be unable to
safely relocate to Kabul.

The judge did not attach weight to any of the new documents and found the
appellant to not be credible. He also found that, in any event, it was
reasonable and not unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to
Kabul.

Grounds of Appeal

There are three grounds of appeal.

Firstly, it is argued that the judge erred in his approach to the previous
decision by stating that it was implicit in that decision that certain
findings of fact (concerning events in the appellant's home area) had been
made. The grounds submit that it was not reasonable for the judge to assume
findings had been made in the previous decision when there had not been an
explicit finding.

Secondly, the grounds submit that the judge failed to adequately consider
the new documents.

Thirdly, the grounds argue that the judge failed to give (or give adequate)
reasons for not accepting the opinion of Dr Giustozzi.

Analysis

My starting point in considering this appeal is that the applicable Country
Guidance case makes clear that a person with the appellant's profile will
not face a risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul. The first
paragraph of the headnote to AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020]
UKUT 00130(IAC) (which replicates the wording of AS (Safety of Kabul)
Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC)) states:

         "A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban (i.e.  not
         a senior government or security services official, or a spy) is not
         at real risk of persecution from the Taliban in Kabul."


AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) (hereafter "the
2018 AS decision") contains the analysis relevant to this appeal because it
is in this decision, and not the remade decision in 2020, that the risk
from the Taliban in Kabul is considered. Although the 2018 AS decision was
appealed, the appeal did not challenge this part of the decision.

The appellant was of interest to the Taliban because of his role in a
college. This is far removed from being a senior government or security
service official or spy, and it is fanciful to argue that he would be
anything other than of lower-level interest for the Taliban.

The appellant's case depended on showing, therefore, that circumstances
have changed since the 2018 AS decision (or the 2018 AS decision was wrong)
in respect of whether a person of lower-level interest would be at risk of
persecution from the Taliban in Kabul.

To depart from a country guidance case there must be strong grounds
supported by cogent evidence: SG (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2012] EWCA Civ 940. The "cogent evidence" relied upon by the
appellant was a report from Dr Giustozzi.

Dr Giustozzi gave evidence in the 2018 AS decision on the risk from the
Taliban in Kabul. His evidence in that case was that the Taliban keeps a
blacklist of all those who are wanted by them.  The 2018 AS decision
rejected his evidence on this point, concluding (after a detailed
consideration of the issue) that there was not sufficient evidence to
accept that a blacklist exists and that, even if it does, there was not a
real risk of a person on such a list who is of lower level of interest to
the Taliban being identified and targeted in Kabul.

Dr Giustozzi's report in this appeal acknowledged that his evidence about a
blacklist had not been accepted in the 2018 AS decision.  He sought to
address this in paragraphs 23 - 27 of the report, where he described an
interview with an officer in the National Directorate of Security in Kabul
in June 2018 carried out by a researcher on his behalf, where the officer
confirmed that the Taliban have a strong network of agents and a database
storing information about those opposed to them.  The officer told Dr
Giustozzi's researcher that most people assassinated by the Taliban are of
lower level interest to the Taliban.

This interview was the only evidence before the judge that could
potentially justify a departure from AS. In the absence of other evidence
post-dating the 2018 AS decision that corroborates the account given by the
officer interviewed by Dr Giustozzi's researcher, it was open to the judge
to conclude that there was not sufficient evidence before him to depart
from AS. The appellant therefore cannot succeed on the third ground of
appeal.

The new documents, if accepted, support the appellant's claim that he faces
a grave risk in his home area. However, they do not show that he would face
a risk in Kabul. Therefore, even if the judge erred, as claimed in the
second ground of appeal, by not attaching weight to the new documents, that
is not material because, even taking the appellant's evidence about the
circumstances in his home area at its highest, this would not translate
into a risk in Kabul, where, as AS makes clear, the appellant would not be
at risk of being identified or located by the Taliban.

The first ground of appeal is immaterial for the same reason: it concerns
findings of fact relevant to the risk faced by the appellant in his home
area, not the risk of the Taliban being able to identify and locate him in
Kabul.

In summary, the grounds of appeal do not establish a material error of law
because (a) it was plainly consistent with AS to find that the appellant
would not be at risk from the Taliban in Kabul (and the judge was entitled
to not treat the evidence of Dr Giustozzi as sufficient to depart from AS);
and (b) any error in the approach to the new documents and/or the previous
decision was immaterial because it would not affect whether the appellant
would be safe from the Taliban in Kabul (as opposed to his home area).



Notice of Decision

The grounds of appeal do not identify a material error of law.

The decision stands and the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

D Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
                                                        Date 29 October 2020
