
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00449/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2020                  |On 15 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     SA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make this
order because the appellant is an asylum seeker and so is entitled to
privacy.

2. This Decision and Reasons follows a finding of an error of law in a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal by a panel of this Tribunal comprising
myself and Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell.  Our Decision and Reasons for
finding an error of law was promulgated on 27 January 2020 but in order
that this document can be understood in its entirety without reference to
anything else I explain something of the history of this case.

3. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
dismissing the appeal of the appellant against a decision of the respondent
on 25 June 2015, but explained further in a letter dated 7 July 2017,
refusing to revoke a deportation order made against him.

4. It is accepted that the appellant was born on 1 January 1980 and is a
citizen of Iraq. He has been previously the subject of a deportation order
that was signed on 21 August 2007.  He was not able to appeal that
successfully and he left for Iraq on 7 December 2007 but returned
irregularly in January 2009 contrary to his obligations under the
deportation order.  He came to the attention of the authorities on 25
January 2010 when he was arrested for an offence of burglary. He made
representations on human rights grounds but the respondent refused to
revoke the deportation order in a decision dated 22 March 2010.  In January
2014 the respondent made a further decision to refuse asylum and human
rights based claims and there was a further decision on 25 June 2015
refusing him asylum and leave to remain on human rights grounds and the
deportation order remained in force.

5. On 1 July 2016 he was sentenced to twenty years' imprisonment for
conspiracy to supply drugs of class A, namely heroin.

6. As we explained when we found there was an error of law it is clear to
us there is no prospect of the appellant being released from prison for
another five years.  He is accepted to be an Iraqi Kurd and, without being
in any way disrespectful to him on that account or to the people of Iraq
generally, there are proper reasons to anticipate significant changes in
conditions in that country in the intervening time.  I understand why the
appeal was being pursued.  Once an application is made and decided it can
be difficult for an applicant not to continue with an appeal without
creating the risk of any future application being processed summarily.  The
respondent, however, could simply withdraw the decision but she chose not
to do that.  I must do my best to make a decision on the evidence but I do
note a substantial air of unreality in the process.  If I may say so
(because I recognise this is arguably not part of my function) I understand
the point of making a decision to deport a prisoner sufficiently before a
release date to give effect to that decision after any appeal and before
the offender is released in the United Kingdom.  However, the periods of
time involved here, without explanation, make it very difficult to see what
the point is in these proceedings.

7. Nevertheless they have been brought and I must do my best with them.

8. It is for the appellant to prove his case.  Insofar as he relies on
Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights he must show there is
a real risk of his being subjected to serious ill-treatment in the event of
his return.

9. There are more unusual aspects to the case.  When the appeal came before
me the appellant was not present.  He was in prison.  It was explained that
he was unwell but Mr Burrett was careful to say that he was not seeking an
adjournment but wanted to make submissions based on the evidence that was
before me.  He is of course entitled to present the case like that and Mr
Burrett is more than sufficiently experienced to understand the
difficulties that would follow.  I do have a bundle and that includes
witness statements, they do not appear to be all signed and there is
obviously no opportunity to cross-examine.  The evidence from the appellant
is weak.

10. Again, to summarise by way of introducing my decision so it is easy to
follow, it is the appellant's case that he cannot be returned safely
because he does not have the necessary travel documents to travel across
Iraq to a place where people of Kurdish ethnicity can avoid a real risk of
serious ill-treatment.  Again for the purpose of outlining the case, the
appellant says he cannot get the necessary travel documents.  It was Mr
Burrett's case that, notwithstanding the weak evidence in support of that
contention, when looked at carefully it is so plausible a claim that I need
to accept it, bearing in mind the lower standard of proof.

11. The supplementary letter of 7 July 2017 says nothing about any
difficulties the appellant might have in returning to a safe part of Iraq.



12. Appropriately, Mr Burrett relied particularly on his skeleton argument,
which I summarise below.

13. The error of law was summarised as a finding that the First-tier
Tribunal had erred by failing to give proper reasons to explain why the
appellant would be able to obtain a CSID card and therefore travel freely
in Iraq.

14. The issue before me was whether the appellant had shown me that he
would not be able to obtain the necessary documents to enable his return to
Iraq. Although he carries the burden of proof, it is sufficient of her
proves his case to the low "real risk" standard.

15. The grounds reminded me of the decision in SMO, KSP & IM (Article
15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC), which is the
most up-to-date country guidance and where we said at paragraph 7 and 8 of
the headnote:

  "7.    Return of former residents to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will
  be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad.  The Iraqi
  authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to
  enter Iraq only if P is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi
  passport relating to P, or a Laissez Passer.

  8. No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in possession
  of one of these documents."

16. We then said at paragraph 11 and 16:

  "11.The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
  Identity Card - the INID.  As a general matter, it is necessary for an
  individual to have one of these two documents in order to live and travel
  within Iraq without encountering treatment or conditions which are
  contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  Many of the checkpoints in the country are
  manned by Shia militia who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely
  to permit an individual without a CSID or an INID to pass.  A valid Iraqi
  passport is not recognised as acceptable proof of identity for internal
  travel.

  16.    The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by the
  use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to Iraq, has reduced due
  to the introduction of the INID system.  In order to obtain an INID, an
  individual must attend their local CSA office in person to enrol their
  biometrics, including fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices in
  which INID terminals have been installed are unlikely, as a result of the
  phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue a CSID, whether to an
  individual in person or to a proxy.   The reducing number of CSA offices
  in which the INID terminals have not been installed will continue to
  issue CSIDs to individuals and their proxies upon production of the
  necessary information."

17. The skeleton argument then referred to the parts of the headnote where
we said there were regular direct flights to the Iraqi Kurdish Region and
to Baghdad and it is for the respondent to state where she intends to
remove the appellant and in this case the appellant is to be removed to
Baghdad.

18. Once a person who comes from the IKR is returned there, family members
would be obliged by custom to accommodate him and living conditions
generally would be acceptable.  Where there is no family support there are
critical housing shelters but they are often of an unacceptably low
standard and would need to find somewhere between US$300 and US$400 a month
for rent. A person returned voluntarily would get access to a capital sum.

19. As far as this case is concerned, Mr Burrett drew my attention to parts
of the witness statement.  It is the appellant's case that he left Iraq on
25 June 2001, re-entered the United Kingdom on 20 July 2001 and then was
returned to Iraq on 6 December 2007 on documents issued by the UK
authorities flying into Erbil.

20. He says he stayed with his aunt in Halabja but remained indoors and
kept a low profile and did not use any form of ID while in Iraq.  He left
Iraq with the assistance of an agent and travelled clandestinely through
Turkey, Greece, Italy and France and returned to the United Kingdom on 25
January 2009.

21. He denies having any contact with his parents or siblings since leaving
Iraq in 2001 and no contact with his aunt since 2015.

22. He said he has never had an Iraqi passport and is not aware of having
an Iraqi identity document.  He does not know whether his father had one or
whether his family was registered.

23. This is the outline of the case and I see no need to make further
reference to the witness statements at this stage.

24. Mr Burrett submitted that the appellant's contention that he has lost
all contact with his family is at least plausible.  The appellant left Iraq
thirteen years ago and has been in prison since 2015.

25. He drew attention in the appellant's bundle to the record of telephone
calls the appellant had made from prison and there are no international
calls shown. This, Mr Burrett submitted, strongly implies that the
appellant has no continuing relationship with any relative or acquaintance
in Iraq.

26. Significant it was established on evidence in an earlier country
guidance case, AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT
00212 (IAC), that there has been a large scale displacement of people in
the KRI including the Sulaymaniyah district where the appellant's family
and aunt are last known to reside.  The appellant's claimed lack of contact
is consistent with general evidence of dispersement and people getting
lost.

27. It is the appellant's case that returning him to Iraq would be contrary
to his rights under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights
because he could not get the necessary identity documents to return home or
support himself in Baghdad.

28. Mr Burrett reminded me that in SMO we decided that the likelihood of
getting replacement identity documents by proxy was diminishing anyway
because of the introduction of the new INID system.  The respondent
intended to return the appellant to Baghdad without a CSID.  To establish
himself the appellant would have to travel internally to an office to try
and obtain one and would risk ill-treatment on the way.  Normally this
gives rise to humanitarian protection claim.  It was not argued that he
still has strong ties to the United Kingdom although he has had a
relationship with a British citizen and has British children.

29. The appellant has spent close to half of his life in the United
Kingdom.  He did go back to Iraq as he was deported and, discreditable as
his return may be, it supports his case that he could not re-establish
himself in Iraq.  He did have some support when he returned in 2007 when he
could be accommodated and supported in his home area but he would not be
returned there and time has passed.  He really has no-one to help him.

30. Mr Lindsay's submissions were essentially very simple and succinct.
The burden of proof is on the appellant, albeit to the low "real risk"
standard.  The appellant is thoroughly discreditable (a point substantially
acknowledged properly by Mr Burrett) and there is not enough evidence from
other sources to support the conclusion that he really has no contact of
any kind in Iraq that could help him obtain the necessary documents.

31. Mr Lindsay said that the clear fact that the records of telephone calls
from prison do not show any overseas call proves only that no overseas
calls are known to have been made by him.  It does not follow that the
appellant would have to contact somebody directly in Iraq or elsewhere
outside the United Kingdom to arrange for help.

32. I asked Mr Lindsay what more the appellant could actually do to prove
his case, assuming that he was telling the truth and Mr Lindsay pointed out
that there are organisations, particularly the Red Cross, that provide
tracing services.  There was no indication that they had even been
contacted.  There really was no evidence of any serious effort to make
contact relative and the appellant's claims that there was no-one to
contact were from an incredible source.  He had just not proved that he
could not obtain a CSID.

33. I now look on to consider the evidence in the case.  Very little can be
said with certainty about this appellant because he has told so many
stories and has admitted telling stories.  However, his date of birth is
said to be 1 January 1982 and he claims he entered the United Kingdom in
July 2001.  That means he was 19 years old when he entered the United
Kingdom.

34. In different statements he denies ever having a Civil Status Identity
Document (CSID).  In his statement at page 186 in the bundle he says: "I am
not aware if I had a Civil Status Identity Document.  As far as I am aware
I have never had any form of ID in Iraq."  In his statement dated 17 August
2018 he says: "I wish to state I do not believe I have ever had an Iraqi ID
or have never seen one."

35. Both of these statements are surprising.  As was explained by this
Tribunal in MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00126 (IAC) and
has not been disproved in later country guidance, the CSID is an important
document for its own sake and as a gateway to other documents within Iraq.
I have looked at the Country Policy and Information Note on Iraq dated June
2020.  I do not think this is controversial.  It is a public domain
document and here dealing something that will be well understood by anyone
with experience in cases involving returning people to Iraq.  At 5.4.3 it
quotes a 2015 Landinfo report describing that the CSID is

  "Deemed to be the most important personal document, since it is used in
  all contact with the public authorities, the health service, the social
  welfare services, schools, and when buying and selling houses and cars.
  In addition, the ID card must be presented when applying for other
  official documents, for example passport."

36. I appreciate that Kurdish people often had a looser relationship with
the State of Iraq than do other ethnic groups and the appellant was young
when he claims to have left but he was not a child and he was not unaware
of at least some of the details of civil society.  It would be
extraordinary if he did not know if he had a CSID card but useful for his
purposes to be vague about whether he had one or not.

37. The appellant had no difficulty saying categorically, not necessarily
truthfully, that he had never been issued with an Iraqi passport (paragraph
28 of statement 2 May 2014 page 78).

38. He said there how, when he had returned to Iraq, he contacted a friend
who had also been returned to Iraq.  They went to his aunt's house.  His
aunt had claimed to have no knowledge about the whereabouts of his
relatives but his aunt advised him that it was not safe and helped him keep
a low profile whilst he found an agent and paid �1,000 and then travelled
through Turkey, Greece, Italy, France and then back to the United Kingdom.



39. I do not know if these claims are true.  I appreciate that many people,
apparently, are able to move between countries without proper documentation
and it might be right that he has not got proper documentation but I see no
reason to accept his evidence about anything and I am not satisfied that
even that part of his case is truthful.

40. I do not accept his claim that he did not have a CSID card because that
is not a likely to be right and he is not a truthful person.

41. His claim to have completely lost contact with his family is made
particularly clearly at paragraph 7 of his statement dated 2 May 2014.  It
makes sad reading. He described his father, mother, and two brothers as
"whereabouts unknown", another brother as "deceased", three sisters as
"whereabouts unknown", and two sisters as "deceased" and then he claimed to
have a nuclear family in the United Kingdom.

42. He has said that he had had no contact with his parents or siblings
since leaving Iraq in 2001.  I accept that there is no evidence that
directly refutes this claim.  As was pointed out by Mr Burrett, there is
clearly no evidence of him actually making contact with anybody outside the
United Kingdom at all.

43. Nevertheless, having been deported to Iraq, and he was able to live
there for a little while while he organised his way to come back to the
United Kingdom.  This does not prove that he has identity documents and I
do not say that it does but it does leave me doubtful when he claims to
have no documentation at all.  Certainly, documentation would have been
useful in that time.

44. I have looked carefully at the report of Dr Alan George dated 30
September 2017.  Dr George is a well-known commentator on conditions in
Iraq and the parts of the report that deal with the background situation in
the country are, I find, extremely helpful.  He comments on the
plausibility of the appellant's account but that, although helpful on in
its own terms, is not particularly relevant for me.

45. There is nothing in Dr George's report or the expert's report or other
evidence which compels the conclusion that the appellant is telling the
truth when he says he has no contact with his family and so many of his
relatives have died.  I accept that there has been considerable disruption
in the part of the world that the appellant calls his home and the claim
that his family have moved away and he has lost contact is not inherently
unbelievable but that is not sufficient to satisfy that there is a real
risk to the appellant in the event of his return.

46. If the appellant were known to be a truthful person in other respects
the fact that his claim to have lost contact with his relatives is
plausible might be sufficient, given the low standard of proof, to support
a finding in his favour.  It is not sufficient on its own.  To overcome the
disadvantages the appellant has acquired by his various and dishonest
accounts and dishonest life in the United Kingdom, I find I need something
specific rather than general and although he tells a plausible account I
find that is insufficient on its own to lead me to the conclusion that the
appellant has established a real risk.

47. I am particularly impressed with Mr Lindsay's obvious but apt
observation that the appellant not even attempted to engage with the Red
Cross or other organisations that specialise in reuniting relatives.  The
Red Cross should not have to be bothered with people who are not sincere.
Sometimes Red Cross officials put themselves at considerable personal risk
trying to reunite families and it must be very galling for them when the
real purpose of the enquiry is to show that relatives cannot be found.
However, that step has not even been taken here. It might not have achieved
very much but it adds to the picture of someone contend to find reason why
he cannot be returned to Iraq rather than keen to find ways to establish
himself there.

48. In his reply to submissions Mr Burrett said that the past history had
never really been disputed.  I should remember it is hard to prove a
negative.  Looked at objectively, the probability is that the appellant is
telling the truth.

49. I do not agree.  The appellant is telling a story capable of being true
but it does not have to be true.  It is not even highly likely to be true.
It is merely plausible.  The appellant is not plausible.  The appellant is
a liar.  That does not stop him being plausible but it does not mean he has
to be believed.

50. Where I disagree with the First-tier Tribunal is that I am not prepared
to say that I am satisfied that the appellant has got a CSID or would be
able to obtain necessary documentation.  I do not know.  However, I am
satisfied that he has not persuaded me that he cannot and that is what he
had to do.  Without credible evidence from him I see no proper basis for
assuming that the plausible nature of his account means that the account
should be believed.

51. I do appreciate the subtleties that arise from concluding that
something is plausible but not accepting that it is reasonably likely to be
true.

52. I have re-read the judgment of the Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) v SSHD
[2010] UKSC 49. Sir John Dyson SCJ said at paragraph 21:

  "For Appellants who appeal to the AIT in Refugee Convention or Article 3
  cases, the stakes are often extremely high.  The consequences of failure
  for those whose cases are genuine are usually grave. It is not,
  therefore, surprising that appellants frequently give fabricated evidence
  in order to bolster their cases. The task of sorting out truth from lies
  is indeed a daunting one. It is all too common for the AIT to find that
  an appellant's account is incredible.  And  yet  there may be objective
  general undisputed evidence about the conditions in the country to which
  the Secretary of State wishes to send the appellant which shows that most
  of the persons who have the characteristics of, or fall into the category
  claimed by, the appellant  would be at real risk of treatment contrary to
  Article 3 of the ECHR or persecution for a  Refugee  Convention  reason
  (as  the  case  may  be),  but  that  a  minority  of  these,  because
  of  special  circumstances,  are  not  subject  to  such  risk.  How
  should the AIT approach such general evidence where they do not believe
  the evidence given by the appellant that bears on the question of whether
  such special circumstances apply?  That was the problem which confronted
  the AIT in the present case.  The Secretary of State wished to return MA
  to Somalia.  This involved sending him to Mogadishu.  The objective
  evidence about conditions in Somalia was that only a person who had close
  connections with powerful actors (such as prominent businessmen or senior
  figures in the insurgency or in powerful criminal gangs) was likely to be
  safe if returned to Mogadishu. MA gave a great deal of conflicting
  evidence to the effect that he had no connections in Mogadishu at all.
  The AIT found that he had not told them the truth about his links and
  circumstances in Mogadishu (para 109).  But they were unable to find
  positively that he did have connections there, still less that he had
  close connections with "powerful actors"."

53. At paragraph 48 he said:

  In our view, on a fair reading of paras 109 and 121 in the light of para
  105, it is clear that the AIT was not throwing up their hands and
  rejecting MA's appeal because he had lied without more.  They were saying
  that, because he had told lies, they were unable to make any relevant
  findings and the appeal failed because MA had not discharged the burden
  of proof.

54. On that occasion the Supreme Court upheld the Upper Tribunal's
approach.

55. I confirm that I am not dismissing the appeal because the appellant has
told lies.  I dismiss the appeal because I cannot believe what he tells me
and although there is background evidence making his account plausible in
important parts that is not enough to persuade me that it is reasonably
likely to be true in this particular case. It does not have to be true.  It
does not follow that because there has been huge disruption in his home
area and many people have departed that the appellant's family are amongst
them.  It does not follow that because many people have lost contact with
their close relatives the appellant's family members have lost contact with
him.  There is no independent evidence that makes good the gap created by
the appellant being unreliable.

56. Putting all these things together, I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

57. This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 June 2021                   |

