
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00145/2017
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2017                  |On 10 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ASD
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:              Miss J. Anderson and Miss N. Barnes of
counsel, instructed by              the Government Legal Department
For the Respondent:                  Mr. P. Haywood of counsel, instructed
by Wilson                      Solicitors LLP


ANONYMITY ORDER

FURTHER TO the anonymity order made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson
on 5 July 2017

AND PURSUANT TO section 11 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981, section 25  of
the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and  rule  14(1)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

1.   The Respondent be granted anonymity in the following terms:

     a)  Nothing should be  published  that  would  or  might  tend  to  (i)
identify the      Respondent in these proceedings,  or   (ii)  identify  the
address at which he        lives or  (iii) tend  to  have  either  of  these
consequences.

     b)  The Respondent shall be identified only as ASD for the purposes  of
these         proceedings. (This order does not prevent  publication  of  or
reference to      ASD as being the Respondent in these proceedings.)

     c)  In particular, and without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the
foregoing this         Order  prohibits  (except  where  necessary  for  the
effective  and  proper             management  of  national  security,   the
international relations of the UK or         the  detection  and  prevention
of crime) the:

         i)   Publication and/or release  by  way  of  newspaper,  magazine,
leaflet,               journal or any other paper form,

         ii)  Broadcast and/or release in any sound or television format  on
radio,            satellite, cable, television or by telephone,

          iii)  Publication  and/or  release  on  any   internet   site   or
electronic/digital              forum, public  computer  network  or  social
media,

         Of the information referred to in  paragraph  1  a)  above  by  any
person,       legal or natural.

2.   No non-party is to have access to pleadings, evidence or  interlocutory
orders,   or  any  other  court  documents,  which   might   lead   to   the
identification of the  Respondent and his address.

3.   This Order is to remain in force until further order.

4.   There shall be liberty to apply to vary this Order.


Failure  by  a  person,   body   or   institution   whether   corporate   or
unincorporated or any party to this appeal to  comply  with  this  direction
may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.



                            DECISION AND REASONS







BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent, who was born on [ ] 1966, is a national of Algeria.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 7 October 1999 and applied for asylum  on
    arrival.  His  application  was  refused  on  14  March  2000  but  his
    subsequent appeal was allowed and on  10  April  2001  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, as a refugee. He was convicted of a  number
    of offences over the subsequent years; obtaining pecuniary advantage by
    deception,  having  a  bladed  article  in  a   public   place,   using
    threatening,  abusive  or  insulting  words/behaviour   or   disorderly
    behaviour to cause harassment, possessing material for contaminating or
    interfering with goods with intent to cause  alarm,  anxiety  or  loss,
    four counts of contaminating or interfering with goods with  intent  to
    cause public alarm and anxiety and having an offensive  weapon.  On  14
    April 2009, he was sentenced to nine years' imprisonment for  the  last
    three offences.

2.   On 29 June 2012, the Respondent was notified that  his  refugee  status
    fell  to  be  revoked  pursuant  to  section  72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and on 28 December 2012 he was notified
    of the cessation of his refugee status. A deportation order was  served
    on the Appellant on 1 March 2013. He was granted a right of appeal  but
    did not exercise it. Removal directions were set for 10  May  2013  but
    were cancelled when the  Algerian  authorities  refused  to  issue  the
    Respondent with an  Emergency  Travel  Document  until  they  had  made
    further checks.

3.   The Respondent made a fresh asylum claim on 7 January 2016  and  on  13
    January 2016 he was served  with  a  section  72  notification.  On  19
    February 2016, the Algerian authorities agreed to  issue  an  Emergency
    Travel Document for the Respondent and on 29 February 2016  his  asylum
    claim was refused without a right of appeal.

4.   On  25  November  2016,  the  Appellant  sent  a  supplementary  letter
    maintaining her decision to  refuse  the  Respondent's  protection  and
    human rights claims and maintain his deportation order. The  Respondent
    then lodged a claim for judicial review in relation  to  this  decision
    and  on  23  December  2016  the  Appellant  agreed  to  withdraw   the
    certification and grant him a right  of  appeal.  The  Respondent  then
    appealed on  6  January  2017.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson
    allowed the appeal in a decision,  promulgated  on  5  July  2017.  The
    Appellant appealed on 18 July 2017 and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Keane
    granted her permission to appeal on 25 July 2017.

THE HEARING

5.   It was the Respondent's case that  his  deportation  to  Algeria  would
    give rise to a breach of Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights. He had not challenges the decision taken by the Respondent that
    he was a serious criminal  for  the  purposes  of  section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or that he was subject  to
    automatic deportation for the purposes of section 32 of the UK  Borders
    Act 2007. .

6.   Counsel for the Appellant took me  through  her  skeleton  argument  in
    some detail and then counsel for the  Respondent  replied  and  I  have
    given detailed consideration to their submissions and referred to them,
    where necessary, in my findings below.

7.   I have reminded myself that, for the purposes  of  section  11  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, I must consider whether any
    error of law arises from the decision made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hodgkinson.

8.   I have reminded myself  of  the  serious  nature  of  the  Respondent's
    crimes and the length of his sentence and note that First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Hodgkinson referred to them in detail in paragraphs 5  to  14  of
    his decision. But I have also to take into account that the  Respondent
    is relying on the provisions of Article 3 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights and that the right not  to  be  subjected  to  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or torture is an absolute one, which is not subject
    to paragraphs A398 to 399A of the Immigration Rules or sections 117A to
    117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

9.   Counsel for the Appellant asked me to take judicial notice of the  fact
    that the United Kingdom has a  sophisticated  anti-terrorism  apparatus
    but did not provide me with any evidence relating to this apparatus.  I
    was not able to take judicial notice of any such apparatus, as this was
    outside the range of my judicial experience.

FIRST GROUND OF APPEAL

10.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had erred in law and misapplied Devaseelan (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -
    Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 701 in so far as  in
    paragraph 58 of his decision he accepted in  their  totality  the  2001
    findings of Adjudicator Renton. These were that the Respondent had been
    trained  as  a  technician  working  with  industrial  chemicals,   had
    distributed anti-regime literature on  behalf  of  the  Union  of  Free
    Students in  Algeria  and  supported  the  activities  of  the  Islamic
    Salvation Front. He also found that the Respondent had been arrested by
    the Algerian security service in 1994 and  detained  and  tortured  and
    interrogated about his political activities.  In addition, he  accepted
    that the Respondent had also been arrested in July  1999  and  detained
    and beaten before he was able to escape and flee from Algeria.

11.  I have taken into account that  in  paragraph  32  of  Devaseelan,  the
    Tribunal held that:

      "We consider that the proper approach lies between that  advocated  by
      Mr Lewis and that  advocated  by  Miss  Giovanetti,  but  considerably
      nearer to the latter.  The first  Adjudicator's  determination  stands
      (unchallenged, or not successfully challenged) as an assessment of the
      claim  the  Appellant  was  then  making,  at   the   time   of   that
      determination.  It is not binding on the second Adjudicator;  but,  on
      the other hand, the  second  Adjudicator  is  not  hearing  an  appeal
      against it.  As an assessment of the  matters  that  were  before  the
      first Adjudicator it should simply be regarded  as  unquestioned.   It
      may be built upon, and, as a result, the outcome of the hearing before
      the second Adjudicator may be quite different  from  what  might  have
      been expected from a reading of the first determination only.  But  it
      is not the second Adjudicator's role to consider arguments intended to
      undermine the first Adjudicator's determination".

12.  In paragraph 39 the Tribunal also found that:

     "(1)     The first Adjudicator's determination  should  always  be  the
    starting-point.   It  is      the  authoritative  assessment   of   the
    Appellant's status at the time it was made.  In  principle, issues such
    as whether the Appellant was properly represented,  or      whether  he
    gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

     (2) Facts happening since the  first  Adjudicator's  determination  can
    always be     taken into account by the second Adjudicator.   If  those
    facts lead the second  Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at the  date
    of  his  determination  and  on  the      material  before    him,  the
    appellant makes his case, so be it.  The previous decision,     on  the
    material      before the first Adjudicator and at  that  date,  is  not
    inconsistent.

     (3) Facts happening before the first  Adjudicator's  determination  but
    having no     relevance to the issues before him can  always  be  taken
    into account by the    second Adjudicator.  The first Adjudicator  will
    not have been concerned with    such    facts, and his determination is
    not an assessment of them".

13.  Before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson,  the  Appellant  submitted
    that the credibility of the account given  to  Adjudicator  Renton  was
    undermined by the fact that the Respondent had not, for the purposes of
    that appeal, disclosed that he had been imprisoned for assault in  1992
    and that his current account of the route he had taken  to  the  United
    Kingdom was different to the one  he  had  relied  upon  in  2001.   In
    paragraphs  54  to  58  of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hodgkinson gave detailed consideration  to  these  submissions  in  the
    context of  the  evidence  provided  by  the  Respondent  in  a  recent
    statement and the lack of any evidence about any injuries he  may  have
    suffered in 1992.  When doing so he complied with the approach outlined
    in Devaseelan.  He took into account material which had come  to  light
    since Adjudicator Renton's determination but decided that they were not
    sufficient to undermine the decision reached that  the  Respondent  had
    been persecuted for a Convention reasons  before  he  left  Algeria  in
    1999.

14.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted that Adjudicator Renton had  merely
    relied upon the Respondent's own evidence when hearing his  appeal  but
    in his determination he  had  found  that  the  account  given  by  the
    Respondent was plausible in the light of the objective  evidence  about
    the situation in Algerian and the expert report provided by Mr.  Joffe.



15.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  also  took  into  account  the
    discrepancies in the account given by the Respondent about the route he
    took from Algeria to the United Kingdom and the  reasons  he  gave  for
    accepting the Respondent's explanations were not irrational.

16.  In her skeleton argument and in the  oral  submissions  before  me  the
    Appellant raised a further and  broader  ground,  which  had  not  been
    raised before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson. This was that, when
    considering whether to rely on  the  findings  of  Adjudicator  Renton,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson should have taken into account the
    contents of the criminal judge's sentencing remarks,  the  pre-sentence
    report and the OASys report.

17.  In her sentencing remarks, Her Honour Judge Hagen said that  she  found
    the Respondent to be arrogant and inflexible in his thinking and  noted
    that he had insisted  on  all  the  witnesses  attending,  despite  the
    strength  of  the  evidence  against  him,  which  was,  on  any  view,
    overwhelming. This was in keeping with the pre-sentence  report,  where
    it was noted that "being obstructive and failing to co-operate may also
    give him a sense of control and power over  others".  The  report  also
    said that he indicated that he was frustrated in  all  aspects  of  his
    life by the state and would hint at his treatment being part of a wider
    conflict between the east and west.  It was also said  that  he  viewed
    western societies with suspicion and extreme hostility.  In  the  OASys
    Assessment he was reported as saying that he had experienced  a  period
    of growing ostracism from the community, leading him to  feel  isolated
    and develop grievance thinking and that this  increased  after  he  was
    held in custody for offences he had not committed. There was nothing in
    these reports to suggest that the Respondent had felt ostracised  prior
    to applying for  asylum  in  1999  or  at  the  appeal  hearing  before
    Adjudicator Renton.

18.  In addition,  there  was  nothing  in  the  report  of  Dr.  Obuaya,  a
    consultant psychiatrist, which indicated that the  Respondent  had  any
    mental illness or psychological condition which would  have  undermined
    the credibility of the account he provided in his asylum appeal  before
    Adjudicator Renton. As a consequence, I find that there was nothing  in
    the material before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  which  gave
    rise to a  "Robinson  obvious"  point  about  whether  the  credibility
    findings in relation to Adjudicator Renton's  determination  should  be
    disregarded.

19.  Counsel for the Respondent also noted that any tendency on the part  of
    the Respondent to "big up" his role to make himself seem  powerful  and
    dangerous would place him at  additional  risk  if  interrogated  after
    being removed to Algeria.

SECOND GROUND OF APPEAL

20.  In the second ground of appeal it  is  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had  misdirected  himself  in  relation  to  the  expert
    evidence before him. In particular, it was submitted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not engage with all the evidence and  had  just
    copied passages from the experts' reports without  subjecting  them  to
    any analysis. However, in my view, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson
    gave very detailed consideration to the expert evidence  in  paragraphs
    69 to 82 of his decision. When doing so, he listed key aspects of their
    evidence and referred to the relevant paragraphs in their  reports.  He
    also carefully listed evidence which both supported and undermined  the
    case being made by the Respondent.

21.  In addition, in  paragraphs  71  to  79  of  his  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  did  analyse  the  key   issues   in   the
    Respondent's appeal. When doing so he  referred  to  relevant  passages
    from the expert reports before going on in paragraph 80 of his decision
    to set out the content of the short letter from the North Africa  Joint
    Unit of the Foreign  &  Commonwealth  Office,  dated  5  May  2017.  At
    paragraph 82  of  his  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also
    confirmed that he had taken into account the statement by Jill Rice  of
    the Criminal Casework Department and the Country  Information  response
    by Robin Tichenor. Then, in paragraph 92 of his decision he stated that
    "in arriving at my decision in this appeal, I have taken  into  account
    the totality of the available  evidence,  which  includes...the  expert
    evidence  referred  to  and  the  country  material  and  case  law  of
    relevance".

22.  The  Appellant  submitted  that  the  content  of  the  expert  reports
    amounted to mere speculation but the expertise and experience  of  both
    experts was clear from their  reports,  which  were  well  sourced  and
    reasoned.  In addition, Alison Pargeter is a Senior Research  Associate
    at the Royal United Services Institute and is regularly called upon  to
    brief policy-makers  in  the  UK  and  abroad  and  to  participate  in
    international conferences. She has also undertaken consultancy projects
    for the Government. Furthermore, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted
    in paragraph 70 of his decision, Dr. Spencer's expertise  was  not  the
    subject of any challenge by  the  Appellant  and  she  regularly  gives
    evidence before  SIAC.  In  his  email,  dated  16  March  2017,  Robin
    Titchener, a member of the Appellant's Legal Strategy Team and  Country
    Policy and Information Team, also stated that in his  view  her  report
    appears to be pretty balanced and measured.

23.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson  did  state  that  he  found  "the
    reports  of  Dr  Pargeter  and,  in  particular,  Dr  Spencer,  to   be
    particularly  helpful,   persuasive   and   reliable,   such   evidence
    satisfactorily addressing...the country material  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent in the RFRLs and elsewhere". It is my view that this did not
    mean that he  had  reversed  the  burden  of  proof  and  required  the
    Appellant to prove that the  Respondent  would  not  be  persecuted  if
    deported to Algeria. Instead, he had adopted the approach  approved  in
    Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2000]  EWCA
    Civ 11, which required him to take into account  the  evidence  in  the
    round, having applied appropriate weight to each  individual  piece  of
    evidence.

24.  The Appellant obtained the evidence from the Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office and the Home Office in order to respond to  the  initial  expert
    evidence  being  relied  on  by  the  Respondent  and  was  granted  an
    adjournment in order to  do  so.  When  this  evidence  raised  further
    issues,  the  Respondent  obtained  a  supplementary  report  from  Dr.
    Spencer. The totality of this evidence then became the  factual  matrix
    on which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  had  to  follow  the
    guidance provided in Ravichandran.

25.  It was the view of the experts that there was evidence, principally  in
    the form of media reports which were in the public  domain,  which  was
    capable of raising a reasonable suspicion that the Appellant had  links
    with Islamic terrorists.

26.  In her  skeleton  argument  the  Appellant  submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson had failed to take into account that  if  the
    Algerian authorities suspected that the Respondent was a terrorist, its
    specialist anti-terrorism services could share information with its  UK
    counterpoints to ascertain if this was the case. However, there was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge to suggest that this  was
    an option or, in the alternative, that this option  had  been  explored
    and any assurances sought from the Algerian authorities.

27.  Therefore, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  did  not
    misdirect himself in relation to the expert evidence.

THE THIRD GROUND OF APPEAL

28.  The Appellant also submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred
    in law in  his  approach  to  AF  (Terrorist  Suspects  -  HS  (Algeria
    confirmed) Algeria CG [2009] UKAIT 00023. However,  in  this  case  the
    Upper Tribunal found that:

          "i).     An appellant who can establish that he has a history that
        suggests  he  may         have      connections  to   international
        terrorism is at real risk of being  detained        on  arrival  in
        Algeria, and investigated.

          ii).     It is reasonably likely that when  the  suspicion  is  of
        international terrorism         such a returnee will be passed into
        the hands  of  the  Department  du            Rens�ignement  de  la
        Securit� ("DRS") for further interrogation.

          iii)     The historic evidence about the DRS's propensity  to  use
        torture as a means          of  interrogation,  together  with  the
        continuing absence of  any  evidence  of         accountability  or
        monitoring, strongly  suggests  that,  in  the  absence  of       e
        evidence to the contrary, the DRS  still  uses  torture  and  other
        serious ill-       treatment in its places of secret  incommunicado
        detention".

29.  In relation to 1) it was  the  Respondent's  case  that  there  were  a
    number of different factors which viewed together, would  suggest  that
    he had connections to international terrorism. These included the media
    reports who referred to him as a jihadist or terrorist, the  length  of
    time he had been absent from Algeria, the length of  the  time  he  had
    been in a prison system known to contain jihadists and the fact that he
    had been deemed unsuitable for release from detention when he completed
    his criminal sentence. Counsel for the Appellant  relied  on  the  fact
    that the Respondent did not claim to have any  links  to  international
    terrorism, had not been charged with any terrorist offences and had not
    been detained in  prison  premises  reserved  for  those  suspected  of
    terrorism But, as  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  found,  the
    question was whether the Algerian authorities were reasonably likely to
    hold a suspicion that he had such links. This was  the  aspect  of  his
    case which was analogous with that of AF. Furthermore, the ratio of  AF
    was not restricted to teachers who had been absent from Algeria  for  a
    long period of time., had travelled to certain countries and had worked
    for organisations which had been  deemed  by  some  governments  to  be
    terrorist in nature. It applied to those  who  had  not  formally  been
    charged as terrorists but whose history would give rise to a  suspicion
    that they were nevertheless linked to terrorism.

30.  At paragraphs 88 to  91  of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hodgkinson gave cogent reasons for finding that AH also applied to  the
    Respondent's case but that the link to terrorism arose from  the  media
    reports of his particular form of jihad and the choice of his  targets.
    It was not simply that he had been out of the country for so long.   As
    counsel for the Respondent noted, AH was not a  country  guidance  case
    which listed known risk factors in Algeria. Instead,  it  made  general
    findings on risk which may or may not fit the individual  circumstances
    of an appellant's case.

31.  Therefore, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  did  not
    misapply the country guidance in AH.

FOURTH GROUND OF APPEAL

32.  The Respondent submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    law in paragraph 91 of his decision, when concluding that the  Algerian
    authorities  would  consider  that   the   Appellant   had   links   to
    international terrorism because he had not said which reports about the
    Appellant would come to the  attention  of  the  Algerian  authorities.
    However, in paragraphs 90 and 91 of a long  and  cogent  decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was reviewing the totality  of  the  evidence
    made available to him and it was not unreasonable to suppose that  some
    of the reports, for example the pre-sentence and OASys reports may  not
    come to the attention of the  Algerian  authorities.  However,  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge noted, that still left a wealth  of  evidence
    in the public domain; namely the facts of his offences  and  the  media
    interest in his case. He also said  that  he  was  satisfied  from  the
    evidence he had previously reviewed in his  decision  that  this  other
    evidence would be known to the  Algerian  authorities.   This  was  the
    evidence which he had reviewed  in  detail  in  paragraphs  68  of  his
    decision before reminding himself in paragraph 69 5) that Dr.  Pargeter
    had said that the appellant's case had been well-publicised,  including
    in the influential Algerian newspaper El  Watan,  which  had  commented
    that early indications had pointed to him being, from  his  choices  of
    target, an Islamist. She  went  on  in  sub-paragraphs  6)  and  7)  to
    consider the information that the Algerian authorities would also  have
    been able to obtain from websites and other media reports.

33.  In paragraph 91 of his decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson
    carefully weighed the evidence before  concluding  that  "even  if  the
    [Respondent]  does  not  have  what  might  properly  be  described  as
    terrorist motivations, his  criminal  history  very  arguably  suggests
    links to such motivations and, logically, at the very least is such  as
    to arouse a material suspicion of his motivations".

34.  The Appellant submitted that  just  because  the  Respondent  could  be
    deemed a "loner", this did not mean  that  he  would  be  viewed  as  a
    terrorist.  She  also  characterised  the  "loner"   argument   as   an
    opportunistic  attempt  to  draw  benefit  from   recent   attacks   by
    individuals in Europe.  It was the expert, Claire  Spencer,  who  is  a
    senior research fellow at the prestigious Chatham House in London,  who
    first raised a comparison to "lone wolf" attackers in paragraph 2.4  of
    her first report, dated 7 March 2017, where she said that "a number  of
    recent recruits to  ISIS  from  within  the  expatriate  North  African
    communities of Europe have been loners, with petty criminal backgrounds
    and personality disorders of the kind that may  be  inferred  from  the
    behaviour that led  to  [the  Respondent]  being  arrested,  tried  and
    imprisoned for criminal damage in the UK in 2009".  She  elaborated  on
    this possibility in her supplementary report, dated  30  May  2017,  in
    which she said at paragraph 1.4 that, as he fitted this profile, he may
    well be detained on a precautionary basis  by  the  DSS  (DRS)  on  his
    arrival in Algeria.

35.  In order to make good an assertion that Dr. Spencer was  acting  in  an
    opportunistic manner, it would be necessary to show that the expert was
    acting contrary to her instructions and her professional expertise.  It
    was the Appellant's case, as supported by the letter from  the  Foreign
    and  Commonwealth  Office,  dated  5  May  2017,  that   the   Algerian
    authorities would likely treat the Respondent as a criminal rather than
    a terrorist. In particular, it stated that  "the  Algerian  authorities
    would view the Appellant as a criminal, as opposed to a  terrorist,  if
    they were to interview him on his return to Algeria  [and,  therefore,]
    it follows that he would likely be interviewed by the  police  and  not
    the DRS, but we cannot say definitively".  In her supplementary report,
    Dr. Spencer was asked to "comment on the Home Office's  assertion  that
    [the Respondent] is unlikely to be considered a credible threat by  the
    Algerian authorities".  She did so in detail and concluded that  "there
    is nothing in the information provided by the Foreign and  Commonwealth
    Office or contained within the  'Country  Information  Response'...that
    alters my conclusion (at paragraph 4.9 of my report dated 7 March 20170
    that 'fair  treatment  of  [the  Respondent]  in  detention  cannot  be
    guaranteed'".

36.  The weight that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  gave  to  the
    expert evidence of both Dr. Spencer and Dr. Pargeter was a  matter  for
    him. This was particularly the case when the evidence from the  Foreign
    and Commonwealth Office was equivocal. For instance, as noted above, it
    was said that it could not be definitively be said that the  Respondent
    would not be interviewed by the DRS. Earlier in the letter, it was also
    said that it was unclear whether the Algerian authorities would have an
    interest in him on the basis of him being detained there over 18  years
    previously.

37.  Therefore, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  did  not
    make any errors of law in paragraph 91 of his decision.




 FIFTH GROUND OF APPEAL

38.  The Respondent submitted that the conclusion reached by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge fell outwith the range of  conclusions  which  could  be
    reached on the basis of the evidence before him.

39.  This was a  composite  ground  which  relied  on  the  content  of  the
    previous four grounds of appeal.  As stated above,  I  have  not  found
    that these grounds were made out. Therefore, I find that  there  is  no
    basis to find that there was an error of law on this composite  ground.



40.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson  did
    not make any material errors of law in his decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 5 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


