
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00467/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 February 2020                           |On 21 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     AM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal of Counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Herhily  dated  16  August  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 17 December 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of  Iran,  born  on  2  October  2000,  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom 5 May 2017 and claimed  asylum.   He  had
    previously made a protection claim in Austria on 10  March  2017.   The
    basis of the Appellant's claim was that he was at risk  of  persecution
    on return to Iran  because  prior  to  his  departure,  he  had  hidden
    political leaflets for his employer/landlord who  was  involved  in  an
    opposition political party.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    account was both inconsistent and vague and his claim  in  relation  to
    his work and a raid on his home was not accepted.  The  Respondent  did
    not consider that the Appellant was of any interest to the  authorities
    in Iran and he was not at risk for having left the  country  illegally.
    The Appellant's credibility was damaged by the application of section 8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc)  Act  2004.
    In relation to human rights, the  Appellant  had  not  established  any
    family life in the United Kingdom and he did not meet the  requirements
    for a grant of leave to remain on the basis of private  life  contained
    in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Finally, there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 4. Judge Herhily dismissed the appeal in a decision dated 16  August  2019
    on all grounds.  By the time of the appeal hearing, the Appellant  also
    relied on sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom,  primarily  his
    political posts  on  a  Facebook  page.   In  summary,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the  Appellant  had  embellished  his  claim  about
    political involvement and  had  created  a  false  Facebook  page  with
    activity at the very low end of the spectrum.  The  Appellant  was  not
    considered to be credible, he had no political profile and it was found
    that the authorities would have no interest in him on return.



The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on three grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No  2  of
    2010: 'Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant  guidance'  (the
    "Joint  Presidential  Guidance")  to  the  Appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding  that
    there was only limited  probative  value  in  the  medical  report,  in
    particular in  circumstances  where  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    Appellant's  diagnosis.   Finally,  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    assessment of the Appellant's Facebook activity was flawed  because  it
    was not in accordance with HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT  00430  (IAC)
    and AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran  [2015]
    UKUT  0257  and  discounted  the  possibility  of  risk-based  of   the
    Appellant's motive and the low-level nature of  his  activity,  whereas
    both can still result in an objective risk on return.

 6. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied  on  the  written
    grounds of appeal, focusing on the failure by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to engage with the Appellant's diagnosis  of  mental  health  problems,
    which is a freestanding requirement even if  those  problems  were  not
    attributable to claimed events in Iran.  This  failure  undermines  the
    adverse credibility findings made, which relied on inconsistencies  and
    discrepancies in the Appellant's account without  taking  into  account
    whether  such  matters  were  impacted  by  or  attributable   to   the
    Appellant's poor mental health.

 7. Finally, in relation to the third ground of  appeal,  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant emphasised the country guidance in relation to sur place  and
    facebook activity, in that the sincerity of a person making such posts,
    even at a low level, is not relevant to the question of risk.  In  this
    case there were a number of factors  which  pointed  to  the  Appellant
    being  at  risk  on  return,  including  his  Kurdish  ethnicity,  past
    persecution in Iran, the length of time he has been out of Iran and  in
    the United Kingdom, the fact that he  is  from  an  area  known  to  be
    supported by Kurdish dissidents, and his public  Facebook  posts  of  a
    political nature.

 8.  In  response,  Ms  Bassi  appropriately  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that  there  had  been  no  application  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of the Joint Presidential Guidance which amounted to an  error
    of law such that the decision under appeal should be set aside.



Findings and reasons

 1. At paragraph 19 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal recorded  that
    the Appellant's Counsel submitted that in light of the medical evidence
    available, the Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable  witness  in
    accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance, however  there  is  no
    statement one way or the other as to whether this was accepted  by  the
    Judge and no apparent application of it in any event.   The  Judge,  in
    the findings section of the decision  between  paragraphs  32  and  42,
    considers the Appellant's  credibility  and  substance  of  his  claim,
    rejecting this in its entirety, but without any reference at all to the
    medical evidence or whether the Appellant is a vulnerable witness.

 2. The medical evidence is dealt with  in  paragraphs  43  to  44  of  the
    decision, which makes a number of criticisms of the report from Dr  Ali
    as to the Appellant's mental health, in particular  that  there  was  a
    failure to consider all of the Appellant's circumstances (including his
    uncertain immigration status and homelessness)  and  trauma  (including
    being the victim of an assault during a robbery and being involved in a
    car accident) in the assessment and in particular, the contribution  of
    these wider matters and the claimed events in Iran to the diagnosis  of
    severe depression and complex  PTSD.   In  conclusion,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal states, "Given that I have not found the  Appellant's  account
    of events in Iran to be credible I do not find that  his  diagnosis  is
    attributable to the events which he claims to place in  Iran.   I  note
    that in fact the Appellant is not currently taking any  medication  for
    his mental health condition  although  he  did  indicate  that  he  was
    receiving counselling."

 3. It is trite to note that medical evidence in  relation  to  a  person's
    mental health can be relevant to a protection and human  rights  appeal
    in a number of  different  ways,  first  in  relation  to  whether  the
    Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness in accordance  with
    the Joint Presidential Guidance; secondly in relation to  claimed  past
    persecution and finally in relation to current risk on return.  In  the
    present case, although the diagnosis of severe depression  and  complex
    PTSD was not challenged  at  all,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  only
    considered the medical evidence in terms of whether  it  supported  the
    Appellant's claim of past persecution.  There is a complete failure  to
    consider the Appellant's diagnosis itself (regardless of causation) and
    that this means that he  should  have  been  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness and his credibility  assessed  in  accordance  with  the  Joint
    Presidential  Guidance  in  light  of  this.   The  failure  to  do  so
    undermines the adverse credibility findings made in the decision and is
    a clear error of law which means that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside in its entirety, with no preserved  findings
    of fact, for that reason alone.

 4. In these circumstances it is not necessary to deal with  the  remaining
    grounds of appeal in any detail as the appeal must be heard de novo  in
    any event.  The second ground of challenge is  closely  linked  to  the
    first as to the treatment of medical evidence, which has  already  been
    established to be an error of law in not fully considering  it  in  all
    relevant ways.

 5. For completeness I also find a material  error  of  law  on  the  third
    ground of challenge.  Despsite setting out in some detail  the  country
    guidance and the Appellant's evidence in paragraphs 45  to  47  of  the
    decision, the conclusion in paragraph 48 runs counter  to  the  country
    guidance  in  finding  that  the  Appellant's  low-level  of   Facebook
    activity, by creating a false Facebook profile, together with a lack of
    any political profile in Iran would not be sufficient for a  real  risk
    of persecution on return as  the  Appellant  would  not  be  reasonably
    likely to be of interest to the authorities.  Those conclusions do  not
    engage properly with the country guidance on risk on return, which  can
    be established even if a person has not genuinely engaged in  political
    activities, or has done so only at a very low level.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) to be heard de novo by any Judge except Judge Herhily.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     9th April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email



