
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00047/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 21 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Kamran KHAN
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing on human  rights  grounds  but  dismissing  on
humanitarian protection and asylum grounds an  appeal  by  the  respondent,
hereinafter "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
refusing him leave on those grounds.

2. There is no  need  for  an  order  restraining  the  publication  of  the
respondent's identity. There has been no challenge by the respondent to the
decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

3. I have to say that the only way of making any sense of  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is to assume that the decision to allow the  appeal
on human rights grounds was a mistake and was an error that ought  to  have
been spotted by the judge but was not.  I say this because there is nothing
that I can see in the Decision and Reasons which gave any reason  to  think
that the appeal was going to be allowed.

4. This appeal has been before the Upper Tribunal  on  an  earlier  occasion
when a Deputy Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal had erred in  law,  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and then dismissed the appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
and human rights grounds.

5. The claimant asked for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  and
the application was placed before me. I noted that it  was  said  that  the
Deputy Judge misled the representative by indicating that there was no need
to trouble him when in fact the judge had decided to allow the Secretary of
State's appeal. The claimant's representative  was  thus  deprived  of  any
opportunity of making further submissions by reason  of  the  Deputy  Judge
indicating in the time-honoured way that he had decided the appeal  in  the
claimant's favour.

6. I thought that there had been a  procedural  irregularity  by  the  Upper
Tribunal. I will repeat here what I said in my decision of 7 February 2019.
 I said:

  "I am minded to preserve the Deputy Judge's decision  to  set  aside  the
  decision of the First-tier Tribunal but to set  aside  the  rest  of  the
  decision on the grounds that there was a procedural  irregularity  within
  Rule 43(2)(d) and to reconstitute the  hearing  for  submissions  on  the
  proper disposal of the appeal.  It is by no  means  obvious  to  me  that
  there should be a further  hearing.   KK  did  not  seek  to  appeal  the
  decision to dismiss the appeal on certain grounds and did  not  apply  in
  accordance with Rule 15(2A) or at  all,  to  serve  further  evidence  to
  support the appeal but,  subject  to  argument,  it  seems  that  KK  was
  wrongfully deprived of the chance to make representations on  the  proper
  progress of the appeal."

7. I then suggested that unless there were representations to the  contrary,
I would set aside the decision of the Upper Tribunal and  that  is  what  I
did.

8. There is no appearance from the claimant today.  He clearly  knows  about
the case because his solicitors have contacted the Tribunal to say they are
no longer acting because they are without instructions  and  so  would  not
attend at "tomorrows hearing dated 23 May 2019".  They could only  do  that
because they had  been  served  with  notice  of  hearing  and  service  on
representatives is good service.

9. Further the claimant by letter had asked for the hearing on 23  May  2019
to be adjourned. The application was  refused  on  16  May  2019  by  Upper
Tribunal Judge O'Connor. The claimant had  asked  to  adjourn  for  medical
reasons but had said no more and in particular had given no  indication  of
the nature of the medical condition or why it prevented his  attending  the
hearing or indeed at that point why he needed to attend at all  because  he
was represented.

10. The claimant knows about the hearing; he knows the case that he  had  to
deal with and, given the history, it is not entirely surprising that he has
not come with any points of merit.

11. This is a case where the appeal was allowed wrongly  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal on the  basis  of  a  simple  mistake.   The  Secretary  of  State
appealed, Regrettably the claimant was not treated entirely fairly when  he
came before the Upper Tribunal and that decision of the Upper Tribunal  was
set aside.

12. I now have to determine the Secretary of State's appeal but  I  have  no
representation or arguments from the claimant even though the claimant  had
been told particularly clearly told what might happen.

13. In the circumstances I follow Ms Everett's  submissions.  The  Secretary
of State's appeal is allowed and I set aside the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal, or what of it remains, and I substitute a decision dismissing the
appeal on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

14. The Secretary of State's appeal is  allowed.  I  substitute  a  decision
dismissing on all grounds the claimant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2019                   |



