
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00221/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 August 2020                              |On 2 September 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     FS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                             Anonymity Direction

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. Liberty to apply.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, instructed by UK Lawyers and Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                  (Decision given orally on 7 August 2020)

Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born in 1959.  She appealed to the
First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State for the
Home Department dated 24 December 2018, refusing her protection and human
rights claims made on 27 June 2018.

To put this case in its proper historical context I will set out again what
is said at paragraphs 3 to 6 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The
appellant has visited the UK several times with properly issued family
visit visas.  She was granted a multi-entry visit visa on 25 April 2018
having applied in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, using an Eritrean passport.  The
appellant left Saudi Arabia in May 2017, 10 days after the cancellation of
her Saudi Arabian residency permit (on the appellant's case) and arrived at
Heathrow on 6 May 2017.

The core of the appellant's claim for protection is founded on the
following factual assertions.  She was born in Eritrea and lived there
until she was 15 years old. Her family left the country illegally at the
outbreak of the civil war in 1975.  She has lived in Saudi Arabia since
1975 and married a Yemeni national residing in Saudi Arabia.  The appellant
believes that her husband is still in Saudi Arabia but as of the date of
the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal she had not had contact with him
for three months.  The appellant states that she returned to Eritrea in
2000 and stayed for one week.  Whilst there, she received a visit from the
Eritrean authorities asking her to report to their offices the following
day, but she failed to do so and subsequently left the country illegally.
Her claim is that her family were involved in the political opposition
party, the ELF; indeed, it is said that her father was one of the founding
members of that organisation.  She claims to have been involved in the ELF
since an early age and a more significantly since 2001.  She has six adult
children, all of whom are Yemeni nationals born and raised in Saudi Arabia.
 Two of the children are now British citizens and two have humanitarian
protection in the United Kingdom. The other two children are not in the
United Kingdom.

Appeal History

The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision of
28 November 2019.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal
Judge Keith, in a decision dated 2 March 2020.  In paragraphs 2 and 3 of
that decision Judge Keith says as follows:

"2.  The grounds assert that the FtT erred in (1) indicating to the parties
that she was minded to allow the appeal, saying 'you will have to wait
until [you] receive confirmed view.  Although, having said yes, I cannot
say no in a determination.'  The FtT then went on to dismiss the appeal
based on the same evidence and the appellant argues that this demonstrates
arguable inconsistency and irrationality.  (2) The appellant argues that
the FtT had erred in assuming that the appellant could not have obtained
her passport from outside Eritrea (at [28(a)] of the decision); (3) The FtT
erred in drawing adverse inferences from the failure to adduce previous
passports; and grounds (4) and (5) assert that the FtT was mistaken as to
the evidence presented to her.

3.   Whilst ground (2) has no merit, as [28(a)] of the FtT's decision does
not assert that that the appellant could not obtain a passport from outside
Eritrea (nor could it reasonably be read as making that finding); and while
grounds (3) to (5) appear to be weaker, ground (1) gives rise to an
arguable error of law on procedural grounds, on the assumption that the
appellant's assertions as to what was said by the FtT were correct.
Permission to appeal is granted on grounds (1) and (3) to (5)."

I make the observation at this point that at the time Upper Tribunal Judge
Keith granted permission he had not had sight of the First-tier Tribunal's
Record of Proceedings, a document which came into the Tribunal's file
subsequently, upon request.

Procedural matters before the Upper Tribunal

As can be seen from the passages above, Judge Keith granted permission to
appeal on four grounds.

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, both in his initial submissions
and then in his reply, Mr Jafar applied to admit three further grounds.
The first of these additional grounds relates to the number of trips that
the appellant made to Eritrea, and the mechanics by which the First-tier
Tribunal eventually concluded that she had made more than one trip there.
The second and third additional grounds relate to asserted inconsistencies
as between the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning process and extant country
guidance authority.

Having heard lengthy submissions from Mr Jafar I refused permission to
allow the grounds of challenge to be amended.  During the course of the
hearing I invited Mr Jafar to provide explanation for the lateness of the
application to amend.  In response Mr Jafar indicated that he is being
instructed on a private basis, that the determination is thick and dense in
its reasoning and that cost limitations permitted him only to make the
points he did in the formal grounds of challenge. There was insufficient
time and funds to allow him to engage in the sort of forensic exercise that
he has now been engaged in, for the purposes of the preparation for today's
hearing.

I observe (i) that this explanation was not supported by a witness
statement, as it ought to have been, (ii) that the Home Office were not put
on notice that such an application was to be made and (iii) the application
has not been reduced to writing at any point.

Whilst I have no reason to doubt anything Mr Jafar says, and in particular
his assertion that the additional grounds which he now seeks to raise came
into his thoughts only today once the full preparation for the hearing had
been undertaken and, indeed, in one respect only once Mr Whitwell's
submissions had been made, they plainly are all grounds of challenge which
ought to have been properly pleaded.  There have been two clear
opportunities to plead these grounds, because the initial application for
permission to appeal was refused. The explanation for failure to plead the
grounds in a timely fashion is in my view unsatisfactory, particularly
given the additional period of time that has expired since the grant of
permission - during which time the appellant, the appellant's legal
representatives and Mr Jafar would have known that a hearing was on the
horizon.

Looking at all the circumstances of the case, including the fact this is a
protection claim, the length of the delay, the explanation provided for the
delay and indeed the merits of the grounds being pursued in the context of
the other grounds, I refuse permission to amend the grounds and I now move
on and deal with the grounds as pleaded.

Error of Law - Decision and Reasons

The first ground asserts, broadly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
dismissing the appeal on the Article 8 ground in its written determination
because it had already stated in open court that the appeal would be
allowed on that ground.

This evidential foundation for this challenge is found in an extract taken
from what is stated to be Mr Jafar's contemporaneous record of the
proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal. In this note the following is
ascribed to the First-tier Tribunal judge.

"I am minded to allow under Article 8

You have to wait until receive confirmed view

Although having said yes I cannot say no in a determination

Even if allow under family and private life Home Office can still appeal me
- keep in touch with lawyers, after fourteen days you can breathe relief

If get asylum wrong can also be appealed, need time".

Case law from the Upper Tribunal clearly identify the evidential
expectations on a party making the sort of assertions that have been made
in this case - see BW (witness statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014]
UKUT 00568.  A witness statement ought to have been prepared by author of
the contemporaneous note, if such a note is to be relied upon. In this
case, of course, the note is authored by Mr Jafar. BW also identifies that
the author of such a statement should not appear as the advocate before the
Upper Tribunal, for obvious reasons.

In the instant case Mr Jafar has chosen not to provide a statement, a
situation which also prevailed in Ortega (remittal; bias; parental
relationship) [2018] UKUT 00298 - in which the Tribunal concluded that the
version of events put forward by the representative was not to be accepted
because it was not supported by any witness evidence.

Moving on, in response to this ground of challenge the Secretary of State
contacted Counsel who appeared on her behalf at the hearing before the
First-tier Tribunal. Counsel drew attention to the terms of a minute of the
hearing he had produced and sent to the SSHD, which made no mention of the
judge having given an indication that the appeal would be allowed on the
Article 8  ground - the minute materially stating that the "FTTJ reserved
her determination". Counsel had no further recollection of events of the
hearing. I observe that the SSHD has failed to provide a witness statement
in support of the contents of the minute, as she ought to have done.

The Upper Tribunal has made its own enquiries of the judge in this case.
The judge responded to these enquiries by way of a written note which ought
to have been, but was not, sent to the parties in advance of the hearing.
Nevertheless, I read the material terms of the note to the parties at the
hearing and neither party sought an adjournment to take stock of what was
said. In summary, the judge indicated that she had no recollection of
making the comments ascribed to her but, due to passage of time, she was
unable to confirm that she had not made such comments.  The judge further
identified that her usual practice, when indicating at a hearing that an
appeal is to be allowed, is to write this outcome at the top of the written
Record of Proceedings, in red. I observe that there is no such note made at
the top of, or indeed anywhere on, the judge's Record of Proceedings in the
instant case.

As it turns out, I need make no finding on Mr Jafar's assertion that the
judge stated at the hearing that she intended to allow the appeal on the
Article 8 ground. This is so because this challenge must be rejected for
the following reasons. On words said to be ascribed to the judge by Mr
Jafar (see paragraph 13 above) it is plain that any indication given by the
judge in the terms alleged did not amount to an oral decision, and Mr Jafar
did not assert to the contrary. In such circumstances, the judge's decision
did not become final until it was promulgated in its written form.

Furthermore, in my conclusion, there was no procedural unfairness caused to
the appellant by the judge changing her mind on the merits of the Article 8
claim (if insofar as that is what she did) because, despite what is said in
the grounds of challenge, the indication is now said by Mr Jafar to have
been given after the close of the evidence and after closing submissions.

I now turn to grounds 3, 4 and 5 which, for the reasons which follow, I
conclude are each made out.

Ground 3 focusses on the reasoning set out in paragraph 28(d) of the First-
tier Tribunal's decision:

"An incomplete copy of the appellant's Eritrean passport... issued 6
February 2014 and date of expiry of 5 February 2019.  It is a concern that
a complete passport was not provided by the appellant which would have
shown the exit and entry details of her various trips to Eritrea.  During
oral evidence the appellant claims to have left her previous passport back
at home and did not bring it either to the UK or the hearing which is a
further concern considering she was legally represented throughout her
proceedings;"

In my conclusion, the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to treat that the
appellant's failure to produce a complete copy of her current passport as a
matter weighing adversely on the appellant's credibility. This was not a
point taken by the SSHD at the hearing, and neither was this issue clearly
put to the appellant so as to provide her with an opportunity to explain.

It is asserted by Mr Jafar that the passport is held by the SSHD and,
consequently, that the appellant could not have produced a copy of full
document. Although there is no witness evidence to support this assertion,
I observe that Mr Whitwell did not seek to assert to the contrary during
the course of his submissions.

I further find that the rationale deployed by the First-tier Tribunal for
treating the appellant's failure to produce her 'previous passport' is
unsustainable. The appellant claimed to have left her previous passport in
Saudi Arabia. She also asserts that she has no contact with her husband, or
indeed anyone else in that country. Whilst the appellant was legally
represented throughout the proceedings it is not explained by the Tribunal
why this inexorably leads to an adverse inference being drawn against the
appellant. I accept, as Mr Jafar asserted, that it must also be of some
significance that the appellant was not legally represented at the point in
time when she left Saudi Arabia i.e. at the point in time when the decision
was made to leave the 'previous' passport in that country.

Moving on to ground 4, which relates to the following passage in paragraph
28(i) of the First-tier Tribunal's decision:

"The appellant after claiming that three Eritrean officials attended her
home, during oral evidence, then claimed initially this was four officials
and then that it was twenty officials.  ...  After claiming she was
smuggled out of the country by car by a people smuggler, the appellant then
claimed that she left Eritrea by plane and she was not stopped and there
were not problems leaving Eritrea."

This challenge can be broken down into two limbs.  First, it is said that
the appellant did not change her evidence "from three officials coming to
the house, then four officials coming to the house and to then twenty
officials coming to the house" and that, consequently, the Tribunal took
account of an immaterial matter when assessing the credibility of the
appellant. This ground, once again, should have been supported by witness
evidence appending Counsel's contemporaneous note of the proceedings. It
was not. However, that does not mean that it should be rejected.

An analysis of the Tribunal's typed Record of Proceedings supports Mr
Jafar's contention. The passage relating to "twenty officials" is
identified in the Record of Proceedings as being part of an exchange
between the appellant's representative and the judge (marked "Rep" and "K"
respectively), and not part of the evidence of the appellant.

The second limb of the challenge follows a similar pattern, in that it is
asserted that the appellant did not give evidence to the effect that she
had left Eritrea by plane. Having analysed the Record of Proceedings, which
have clearly been drawn with some care, there is no record therein of the
appellant stating that she left Eritrea by air. The only record of evidence
relevant to this issue reads:  "He try smuggle you out as he knows people
at the airport, he said to me this was too difficult to get out so he
smuggled you by car. overland outside the country". Once again, therefore,
I concur with Mr Jafar and conclude that First-tier Tribunal erred in
relying on an immaterial matter when assessing the credibility of the
appellant.

The final ground, ground 5, takes aim at the reasoning in paragraph 28(l)
of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, which reads:

"Asked who the known political activists of the appellant's family are
considering this is well-known to the Eritrean authorities, whereas the
appellant could only name her father and one uncle, Mr Faid [who also gave
evidence on behalf of the appellant] despite his generic assertions in his
letter and witness statement was only able to name two persons and was
unaware that both were dead.  ...  Asked the relationship of these well-
known political ELF activities Mr Faid then claimed both were brothers of
the appellant whereas she claimed one was an uncle and one was her own
father and he was of the view one brother was dead whereas she claimed both
her father and uncle were dead.  ...  Then during re-examination he claimed
that the father of the appellant was the founder of ELF, a fact I find
surprising he had forgotten when he claimed that only her two brothers were
political activists, and is a claim not made by the appellant whatsoever,
and clearly not know as not referred to by any of her adult children in
their witness statements."

The Tribunal's Record of Proceedings sets out a sequence of exchanges
between the appellant and her Counsel (in examination in chief) and the
Secretary of State's Counsel and the appellant (in cross examination) on
the issue of which of the appellant's relatives had involvement with the
ELF.  Contrary to the findings made in paragraph 28(l) of the First-tier
Tribunal's decision, the record of such exchanges identifies that the
appellant not only referred to her uncle and her father as being involved
in the ELF but she clearly identified that her two brothers were involved
as well.  The appellant named these four relatives during the course of her
evidence. In addition, the evidence given by Mr Faid, as recorded, is
entirely consistent with that given by the appellant.

Whilst it is correct that it was only in re-examination that Mr Faid
mentioned that the appellant's father was an ELF activist, I note that this
was in direct response to a specific question asked by Mr Jafar.  No
questions were asked in relation to the father either in examination-in-
chief or in cross-examination of Mr Faid.

Consequently, looking at the Record of Proceedings as a whole, I conclude
that the First-tier Tribunal erred in the manner claimed in ground 5 of the
grounds of challenge.

Setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's Decision

The issue then turns to one of materiality of the aforementioned errors.
In this regard, Mr Whitwell refers to what can fairly be stated as the vast
swathe of adverse findings made by the First-tier Tribunal, which have not
been the subject of challenge.  He submits that the errors identified above
have a very narrow focus and that it is possible to say that the First-tier
Tribunal would have come to the same conclusion had those errors not been
made.

In response, Mr Jafar in large part relied upon the application to amend
his grounds to include what are said to be further errors in the
determination. I have already refused permission to rely upon such
challenges.

I have not found this to be an easy task.  Mr Whitwell is absolutely
correct to say that there are a vast swathe of findings relating to both
plausibility and inconsistency of the evidence before the First-tier
Tribunal which are untroubled by the errors identified above.  Mr Whitwell
also correctly reminds the Tribunal that it must look at the decision as a
whole.

Whilst it is perfectly possible that the First-tier Tribunal would have
come to the same conclusion had the above identified errors not been made,
in my view it cannot be said that it inevitably would have done so.  I draw
some assistance in this regard from what is said in paragraph 31 of the
First-tier Tribunal's decision where, in summarising the reasons for
rejecting the appellant's claim, the Tribunal states:

         "Due to the adverse finding regarding her credibility and the
         contradictory claims of the appellant and Mr Faid regarding her
         political background and family links to ELF I do not accept that
         her name or her family background is as claimed."

    To my mind, the Tribunal is therein identifying the particular
    importance it gave the findings identified in paragraph 28(l) of the
    decision, which I have found to be in error.

In all the circumstances, therefore, I have concluded that the appropriate
course is to set the First-tier Tribunal's decision aside.  I further
conclude, given the assessment of the appellant's credibility is going to
have to be undertaken afresh, that it is appropriate in this case for the
appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be so determined.

Notice of Decision

The decision for the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.  I  set
that decision aside and remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined afresh by a judge other than Judge K James.


Signed

M O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date 01 September 2020

