

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00690/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Decision & Reasons           |
|by Skype for Business                         |Promulgated                  |
|on 16 December 2020                           |On 7 January 2021            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  SIDRA [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud, instructed by International Immigration
Advisers, Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 15 January 2020.

     ii) The decision of FtT Judge Kempton, promulgated on 17 March 2020.

    iii) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 30 March 2020.

     iv) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Bulpitt, dated 1 May 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  The technology enabled an effective hearing.

 3. The grounds  are  directed  firstly  against  the  adverse  credibility
    finding, and secondly allege that the judge  made  no  finding,  or  no
    clear finding, on the human rights case.

 4. The grant of permission is on the view that it was  arguable  that  the
    findings did not include an adequate assessment of the  proportionality
    of the interference with the appellant's private and family life in the
    UK.

 5. Mr Moksud submitted thus:

      i) The FtT noted that this was an appeal on ECHR grounds, and  at  [9]
         specified the 5 Razgar tests, but did not subsequently engage  with
         those necessary stages of decision.

     ii) At [18] the FtT referred to section 8 of the 2004 Act as mandatory,
         but delay is not necessarily damaging, and in this case there  were
         sufficient reasons.

    iii) The decision at [24]  was  incomplete,  ending  in  "however",  and
         leaving the matter in the air.

     iv) At [26] and at [30] the FtT said that the determination in the case
         of the  appellant's  partner  was  "not  appealed",  but  that  was
         unclear.  She might have meant that permission was not sought,  but
         no information was recorded.

      v) At [26] there was error in saying  "no  real  new  evidence".   The
         evidence from the appellant's partner's brother  was  new  evidence
         and was due consideration on its own merits.

     vi) At [31-37] the decision failed to mention human rights, the 5 stage
         test,  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of   the   immigration   rules,   the
         appellant's 9 years in the UK, her 3  ï¿½  year  old  child,  or  her
         partner's 16 years in the UK , and was unlawful in terms of section
         6 of the Human Rights Act [the duty on public authorities to act in
         a manner compatible with Convention rights].

    vii) It would be no answer to say that the human rights claim was  bound
         to fail, in or put of the rules.   The  point  was  entitled  to  a
         reasoned resolution of her case.

   viii) The decision should be set aside and reheard in the FtT.

 6. Mr McVeety submitted thus:

      i) The  submissions  on  the  credibility  findings  went  beyond  the
         grounds.

     ii)  The  grant  of  permission  did  not  include  the  challenge   on
         credibility.

    iii) There was nothing wrong with the credibility findings.

     iv) The point based on delay was damning, as the case was essentially a
         re-run  of  the  husband's  case,  which  had   failed   badly   on
         credibility.

      v) Mr McVeety had not seen any skeleton argument from the FtT, but the
         absence of mention of paragraph  276  ADE,  and  of  insurmountable
         obstacles, might reflect that no such case had been put.

     vi) Similarly, it was accepted that the 5 stages  of  Razgar  were  not
         specifically resolved, but it was questionable whether any case  in
         terms of those stages was seriously advanced.

    vii) If there was any error, there  was  no  basis  for  revisiting  the
         factual findings, so the decision could be remade  in  the  UT,  at
         this hearing, or by way of a further hearing.

 7. Mr Moksud replied:

      i) The grant of permission is not restricted, but on all grounds.

     ii) The further points he advanced came within the scope of the grounds
         on credibility.

    iii) The case for the appellant on  human  rights  was  plain  from  the
         matters rehearsed in her statement and in her husband's  statement,
         setting out her private and family life in the UK.  There had  been
         no direction, and no need, for a skeleton argument.

     iv) As the respondent accepted a failure to consider the Razgar  tests,
         and that human rights issues were omitted from  the  decision,  the
         outcome should be a further hearing, either in the  UT  or  in  the
         FtT.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. The grant of permission says that the grounds  about  credibility  have
    "little merit"; there was no arguable misapplication of Devaseelan; and
    the remaining criticisms are no more than disagreement, not identifying
    an arguable error of law.  I consider that the grant was only on ground
    2.

10. Taking a generous view, if permission had been granted on ground  1,  I
    would have permitted Mr Moksud to  particularise  the  points  he  did,
    under the heading of credibility.

11. In any event, I do not  find  any  of  the  credibility  points  to  be
    substantiated.

12. Judge Kempton attached no more  significance  to  delay  than  she  was
    entitled to do.

13. There is nothing left hanging in the air at [24].  It  is  to  be  read
    together with [23], and the word "however" might equally have  appeared
    at the beginning of the sentence.  The judge's point is that  the  imam
    explained the issue of an unmarried Muslim couple living together,  but
    he did not say that he could not marry them.  There is not said  to  be
    any  error  in  that  observation,  or  in  giving  it   some   adverse
    significance.

14. There are different stages of applying to appeal  a  decision,  and  of
    success or failure after permission is granted, but the  judge's  point
    is sound, based simply on the fact that the determination in  the  case
    of the appellant's husband stood as a final  outcome.   The  procedural
    stage at which that occurred was irrelevant.

15. The evidence from the appellant's husband's  brother  appears  to  have
    been another source for the same story, subject to the  same  flaws.  I
    was not referred to anything specific he said which might  have  called
    for separate consideration.   No error is shown in placing  this  under
    the heading of "no real new evidence".

16. Judge Kempton found that, much more likely than not, the appellant  and
    her husband are married.  No error is  shown  in  that.   She  and  her
    husband are both liable to return to Pakistan.  She established nothing
    which might have entitled either of them to remain in the UK, in or out
    of the immigration rules, based on private life.  The case involved  no
    issue of separation of family members.  Judge Kempton said at [36] that
    the best interests of the child (born in 2014) were to remain with both
    parents.  Realistically, the case came to  Razgar  stage  5,  at  which
    there was no more to be said.  No matter how much  more  structure  and
    detail had been added, the appellant has referred to nothing  by  which
    the outcome might rationally have been different.

17. Mr Moksud made all that could be  made  of  the  grounds,  and  drilled
    astutely into the decision for points to dispute, but having considered
    all the submissions, I conclude that:

      i) The decision read fairly and as a whole, does not err on any  point
         of law.

     ii) If anything in the decision might be construed as legal  error,  it
         is not of a nature to require it to be set aside.

    iii) If the decision were to be set aside, a decision would fall  to  be
         substituted, based on the evidence before the FtT, and the facts as
         found by the FtT.

     iv) On those facts, the human rights appeal  was  hopeless,  and  would
         fall to be dismissed.

18. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      16 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

