
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01939/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 10th June 2019                    |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Shedrack [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Moksud (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M.
Davies, promulgated on 7th September 2018, following a hearing at
Manchester Piccadilly on 3rd September 2018.  In the determination, the
judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant
subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, and was born on 15th
November 1981.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent,
refusing his claim for asylum and for humanitarian protection pursuant to
paragraph 339C of HC 395.  The decision appealed against is dated 26th
January 2018.

The Appellant's Claim

The essence of the Appellant's claim is that his father was a man of
influence in Nigeria, and was a friend of the previous Nigerian prime
minister, General Sani Abacha, when the Appellant's father was working in
the Ministry of Agriculture in Nigeria, being involved in veterinary
science.  The Appellant himself became friends with General Abacha's first
son.  The son, Ibrahim, was then killed in a plane crash in 1996.  The
Appellant had been with him.  He had stolen money from his house.  It was
therefore presumed that he had a hand in Ibrahim's death.  This led to the
Appellant escaping and hiding in various cities across Nigeria after
Ibrahim's death.  However, his father was then killed by General Abacha due
to a disagreement with him over money and assets, and this happened in the
year 2000.  The Appellant himself eventually ended up in Gambia, where he
spent nine years, and fathered a child.  In 2014, his mother was contacted
by the family of General Abacha and threatened.  The Appellant now claims
that he would be killed by General Abacha's family if returned to Nigeria.

The Judge's Findings

The judge began at the outset by recognising that both the Appellant and
his partner, Andrea Martinez, were vulnerable witnesses (see paragraphs 45
and 52), and it was in this context that the evidence was taken by the
judge.  However, the judge did not find the evidence to be truthful in any
measure or form.  He concluded that it was wholly unbelievable that the
Appellant, aged 15 in 1996, could be blamed for the death of the son of
General Abacha.  The Appellant may well have moved to Gambia in 2000 but
the judge did not accept that he did so because of difficulties stemming
from his father's opposition or disagreement with General Abacha, or
because the Appellant could be blamed for the death of General Abacha's son
(see paragraphs 72 to 73).

The Appellant himself had come to the UK on a student visa (paragraph 75).
He then applied in 2014 for leave to remain on the basis of Article 8
(paragraph 77).  He did not seek international protection at that time at
all.  In fact, he applied for an EEA residence card (paragraph 78).  He
only claimed asylum in April 2016 (paragraph 79).  The judge concluded that
there was no evidence of any credibility to indicate that the Appellant on
the lower standard was at risk if returned to Nigeria (paragraph 80).  The
judge also considered the possibility that the Appellant was a suicide risk
and that this engaged Article 3 (paragraph 82), but concluded that
treatment for mental health issues was available in Nigeria.

As for the Appellant's relationship with his partner, Andrea Martinez, the
judge found that the two of them were living at different addresses and the
relationship had not been a continuous one.  This being so, the judge
stated that, "I question whether that actually amounts to a family life for
the purposes of my consideration of Article 8" (paragraph 85).  However, in
the alternative, the judge did consider the situation if Article 8 were to
have been engaged (paragraph 87), and if that was the case the judge was
clear that the interference would have consequences of such gravity as to
engage Article 8.

That, however, was not the end of the matter.  What had to be taken into
account was the Appellant's "appalling immigration history and his abuse of
the immigration process over a large number of years" (paragraph 89).  If
the family life between the Appellant and his partner was of the order that
had been presented, the judge was clear, that there was no evidence put
before him as to why that family life could not continue, even if the
Appellant's partner remained in the United Kingdom as a British citizen,
and the Appellant was to move to Nigeria.  This is because "the Appellant
could make an application from Nigeria to enter the United Kingdom as a
fianc� and would be admitted if he can meet the terms of the Immigration
Rules" (paragraph 90).

The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge erred in his approach to
the evaluation of Article 8 (at paragraphs 85 to 86) because he gave no
reasons for his finding that the Appellant's relationship with the EEA
national had been for the purpose of regularising his leave.  The judge had
also failed to have proper regard to the medical evidence in relation to
the Appellant's mental health.

On 11th February 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 10th June 2019, Mr Moksud, appearing on behalf
of the Appellant, submitted that first, the suggestion that the Appellant
could maintain his family life with his partner, was not credible, given
that the judge had concluded that "the Appellant could make an application
from Nigeria to enter the United Kingdom as a fianc� and would be admitted
if he can meet the terms of the Immigration Rules" (paragraph 90), because
his partner was no longer working and would not be in a position to
demonstrate the requisite financial requirements as having been met.  This
being so, the family life between the two of them would break down.  They
were already not living together because the Appellant had to meet the bail
conditions by living at an address from where he could answer bail, and it
was on account of this solely that the two of them had been separated.

Second, he submitted that the medical evidence in relation to the
Appellant's mental health had not been properly taken into account, so that
it could not be said that it was proportionate to require the Appellant to
return back to Nigeria, or that it would not infringe Article 3 of the
Human Rights Act.

For her part, Ms Aboni submitted this appeal was only on the basis of
Article 8.  The protection aspect of the appeal had not been challenged.
Given that it was based solely on Article 8, the judge had given a fulsome
basis for concluding that the Appellant could not succeed at paragraph 85.
He had first stated that family life was not engaged, given that the
Appellant had first made an application for an EEA residence card on the
basis of his relationship with a Slovakian national; and secondly, that in
relation to this particular partner they were living at different addresses
and the relationship "has not been a continuous one" (paragraph 85).

Second, the judge had concluded that the Appellant could in any event
return to Nigeria and make an application as a fianc� and there was no
reason why that infringes the particular family life that they were
enjoying at present, bearing in mind that they were already living
separately.  As the judge explained "the Appellant and his claimed partner
can continue to communicate" (paragraph 90).

Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved the
making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such
that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.

I come to this conclusion bearing in mind that the protection aspect of the
judge's findings is unchallenged, and for that reason unassailable, given
the manner in which the judge has comprehensively dealt with that aspect of
the claim.

However, this is an Article 8 appeal, and in this regard, although the
judge does deal extensively with the nature of the relationship between the
Appellant and his partner from paragraph 85 onwards, and concludes at
paragraph 90 that the relationship could continue "if he can meet the terms
of the Immigration Rules" (paragraph 90), there is inadequate consideration
of the Appellant's mental health.  In this regard, the judge simply states
that "treatment for mental health issues is available in Nigeria even if it
may well be of a different standard ..." (paragraph 82).

There was documentary evidence of the impact on the Appellant's mental
health if he were to be returned to Nigeria and there was evidence of past
attempted suicide, which was not referred to by the judge.

It is true that the judge treated the Appellant at the outset as a
vulnerable witness, but he then failed to refer to a letter from the
Greater Manchester Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, which was dated 22nd
August 2018, which states that the Appellant suffers from schizoaffective
disorder, and is at risk of suicide if removed to Nigeria.  This was
directly relevant to the question of whether there were "very significant
obstacles" to the Appellant's integration on return (paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi)).

Finally, the Appellant's lack of cohabitation with his partner was
something that he had provided an explanation for, and this is not actually
set out in the determination.  It is relevant because there was evidence of
the Appellant's commitment to his partner, given the existence of a notice
of marriage.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the regional judge.  I remake
the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier
Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge M. Davies, pursuant
to Practice Direction 11(b) of the practice statement.

No anonymity order is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019


