
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01140/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     H M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Rakhim Jonova, Sterling Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien dismissing her appeal against the
respondent's decision to refuse her asylum and leave to remain on human
rights grounds.

2.   The appellant claimed asylum on 30 June 2017.  The basis of her claim
was that she would be killed by a former employee who had murdered her
husband in 2000 and was threatening to take revenge against her for his
subsequent imprisonment.  The   respondent refused the appellant's claim on
9 January 2018.

3.   The judge set out in brief the reasons why the respondent refused the
appellant's application.  The respondent accepted that the appellant was a
Ukraine national; however, her account of events in Ukraine had been
rejected.  She had given two inconsistent dates for [AF]'s release and
visit to her shop.  She had given two differing accounts of their
conversation, of who else was present in the shop and who had contacted the
police.

4.   The appellant's account of her personal circumstances in Ukraine was
inconsistent with her visa application in October 2006, when she claimed
that she and her husband were lawyers, and her visa application in July
2011 when she claimed that she and her then spouse were economists.  No
evidence had been given of her business in Ukraine nor any explanation for
these inconsistencies.  The appellant had not provided any explanation for
the location of her current spouse and provided no evidence from Ukraine to
corroborate her account, save for a copy of a document purporting to be a
court determination and a death certificate, neither of which were
considered to be reliable documents by the respondent.  A report submitted
by the appellant from Professor Mark Galeotti dated 13 June 2014 did not
advance her case.

5.   Notwithstanding the appellant's claim to have travelled to the United
Kingdom with the intention of escaping her problems in Ukraine, she had
provided no explanation for failing to claim asylum on arrival in August
2011, or for another two years.  Therefore, her credibility was undermined
pursuant to Section 8(2) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

6.   Overall, it was not accepted that the appellant had a genuine fear of
persecution.  Further, there was no real risk of treatment on return which
would breach Articles 2 or 3 ECHR.  In any event, the appellant had not
shown that she would have insufficient protection from the state or that
she could not relocate internally; she was highly educated and experienced
in business.  The appellant did not therefore qualify for asylum or
humanitarian protection.

7.   The appellant did not qualify for leave to remain under Appendix FM or
paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  There were no exceptional
circumstances to justify a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules, even
taking into account the best interests of her son, and she did not qualify
for discretionary leave.

8.   The appellant did not attend the hearing before the judge.  She had
instructed Mr Hussain to make an application on her behalf to adjourn the
hearing.  The judge said the application had been made by Sterling Lawyers
in writing on 14 February 2018.  The adjournment was requested on the
grounds that the appellant's partner was in poor health following recent
chemotherapy and she had been unable to find anybody else to look after
him, and that the Secretary of State had been asked to unite the cases of
the appellant and her partner.

9.   That application had been refused on 15 February 2018 on the basis
that the appellant had had sufficient time to make arrangements for her
partner's care and still had time to do so, and because the partner's claim
might not require an appeal, and so the request to link the cases was
premature.

10.  Mr Hussain renewed the application before the judge.  In addition to
two medical letters dealing with the appellant's partner's diagnosis, he
relied on a letter dated 19 February 2018 from Dr Tom Newsom-Davies.  That
letter reported that the partner received two-weekly chemotherapy which
made it difficult for the couple to leave London, in case he suffered any
adverse effects of the cancer or treatment, and that the appellant would
struggle to be away from him.

11.  The judge said Mr Hussain was not able to say whether the hearing day
was a chemotherapy appointment.  Mr Hussain said the appellant's son was at
school but recognised that the son was of an age at which he could
conceivably look after the partner.  The judge also noted that no witness
statement or bundle had been received from the appellant, for which Mr
Hussain was unable to provide an explanation.

12.  The judge was not persuaded that the appellant was unable to leave her
partner in order to attend the hearing on 21 February 2018.  No apparent
consideration had been given to her son looking after the partner for the
day.  Indeed, it appeared that no steps had been taken by the appellant to
prepare the case at all.  Taking all matters into account, the judge held
that it was not in the interests of justice to adjourn and refuse the
application.

13.  Following the judge's decision not to adjourn the hearing, Mr Hussain
withdrew.  The judge proceeded with the case in the absence of the
appellant.

14.  Ms Rushforth for the respondent below, relied on her submissions on
the refusal letter.  She submitted that the appellant had entered the UK on
a visit visa on 7 August 2011 and had applied on expiry for leave to remain
under Article 8 ECHR for herself and her son.  The appellant had only
raised asylum when her Article 8 application had been refused.  Her
credibility had been further undermined by the inconsistencies between the
information given in the visa application and her asylum application.  Ms
Rushforth submitted that the appellant's account should be rejected.  She
went on to argue that even if the appellant's account were true, it did not
engage the Refugee Convention.  The appellant had failed to demonstrate
that she would have insufficiency of protection or that she would be unable
to relocate internally in Ukraine.  The appellant's son was now over 18 and
so it was unnecessary to consider his best interests, which would in any
event be to return with his mother to Ukraine.

15.  The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal in view of the
inconsistencies in her accounts which he said undermined her credibility.
He was unable to accept that the appellant's claim to be at risk on return
to Ukraine was even reasonably likely to be true.  Even if it were, he was
not persuaded that the appellant would be inadequately protected by the
authorities.  He bore in mind in particular the appellant's own case that
[AF] was prosecuted and sentenced for the killing of her husband.
Alternatively, the judge had no grounds whatsoever to believe that the
appellant would be unable reasonably and safely to relocate elsewhere in
Ukraine.

16.  The judge held that the appellant's son is now 18 years old.  Even if
he were obliged to consider his best interests, there was no reason to
doubt that they would be served by his returning to Ukraine with the
appellant.

17.  Permission was granted on the basis that the judge arguably failed to
properly consider whether the appeal could be justly determined in the
appellant's absence, given that her credibility was a central issue.  There
was evidence that she could not leave her husband during periods of
chemotherapy treatment and it was arguably unreasonable to expect her son -
who attended school - to act as a surrogate carer in her absence.

18.  Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb, who granted permission, said the judge was
entitled to rely on the inconsistencies in the evidence in reaching his
adverse credibility finding.  However, if ground 1 in respect of the
failure to adjourn the hearing was made out, then the decision as a whole
could not stand.  He granted permission to appeal on ground 1 only.

19.  Ms Jonova argued that the judge erred in law in not adjourning the
hearing because the appellant was the primary carer for her partner, who
had lung cancer.  The partner had chemotherapy twice a week.  The
appellant's 18-year old son could not attend to his needs.  The hearing
took place in Newport whilst the appellant resides in London.  Her
solicitors are also based in London.  The appellant had not been able to
give instructions to her lawyers in London because she would have had to
arrange short-term care for her partner in order to do so.  There had been
a suggestion by the appellant's representative to the judge for the appeal
be listed in London so that the appellant and her partner could attend the
hearing.  Ms Jonova accepted that this request was not in the decision and
may have not been made to the judge.

20.  Ms Jonova confirmed that the only witness statement we had for the
appellant was dated 19 January 2012.  There has not been an update of this
witness statement in the six years prior to the hearing.

21.  Ms Jonova relied on her skeleton argument.  She said that this was an
issue of fairness.  The judge's decision was in error because the judge
failed to grant an adjournment to enable the appellant to attend the
hearing and challenge the respondent's decision.  She could not explain why
there had been no witness statement from the appellant in response to the
issues raised by the respondent in her Reasons for Refusal Letter.  She
relied on the case of Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418
(IAC), which held that the test to be applied is that of fairness: was
there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?  The
judge should take into account all material considerations and should not
act irrationally.

22.  Ms Kiss said that it was at today's hearing that she has had
notification that the appellant had a new partner.  There has been no
response by the appellant to the respondent's refusal letter dated 1
January 2018.  There had been no prior indication of her new partner at
all.

23.  Ms Kiss submitted that the judge did take care to ascertain what was
happening to the medical care of the appellant's partner.  At paragraph 18
he noted that Mr Hussain was not able to say whether the day of the
hearing, was a chemotherapy appointment.  Mr Hussain had said that the
appellant's son was at school but recognised that the son was of an age
which he could conceivably look after the partner.  Ms Kiss questioned how
the appellant's partner would have been able to travel with her if the
hearing had been held in London.

24.  Ms Jonova had said that the appellant's partner's case was at the Home
Office awaiting a decision.  Ms Kiss submitted that it would not have been
possible for the appellant's decision to have been linked to a case that is
awaiting a Home Office decision. Miss Kiss submitted that the judge was
entitled to find that the request to link the case was premature.

25.  Ms Kiss submitted that on the information that was before the judge
and the inconsistencies highlighted by the Secretary of State, the judge's
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal for the reasons set out in
paragraph 22 was reasonable.

26.  I note from the death certificate submitted by Ms Rakhim Jonova that a
Mr [IS] died on 10 June 2018 at Hillingdon Hospital.  The informant was Ms
[HM].  The death certificate said she was present at the death.  Mr [S]
died of end stage lung cancer.

27.  I also note that it was at today's hearing that Ms Kiss learned that
the appellant had a new partner.

28.  I find that the judge did not err in law in his refusal to grant an
adjournment.  I find that the judge applied the test in Nwaigwe.  The judge
took into account all the material considerations.  He noted that the
application for an adjournment had been refused on 15 February 2018 on the
basis that the appellant had had sufficient time to make arrangements for
her partner's care.  Mr Hussain was not able to say whether on the date of
the hearing was a chemotherapy appointment.  Indeed, there has been no
letter presented from the appellant on this matter.  Mr Hussain said the
appellant's son was at school and recognised that the son was of an age at
which he could conceivably look after the partner.  The judge also noted
that no witness statement or bundle had been provided from the appellant,
for which Mr Hussain was unable to provide an explanation.  Indeed, I note
that the last witness statement received from the appellant was in 2012,
which was made in support of her asylum application in 2012.  For six years
now there has been no updated witness statement from the appellant in
response to any of the matters raised by the Secretary of State in the
Reasons for Refusal Letter.  Indeed, there has been no witness statement
from the appellant providing an explanation for her absence from the
hearing.

29.  I agree with the judge that the request to relink the cases was
premature, given Ms Jonova's assertion that the appellant's partner's
application for asylum had not yet been decided by the Secretary of State.

30.  On the evidence that was before the judge, I find that the judge did
not act unfairly in his decision to refuse to adjourn the hearing.

31.  On the evidence that was before the judge, I find that his decision to
dismiss the appellant's appeal discloses no error of law.  The judge's
decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  5 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
