
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01445/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 28 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 21 December 1985.  He
appeals with permission against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Herbert OBE promulgated on 1 April 2019 dismissing his appeal against the
respondent's decision to refuse his asylum claim dated 29 January 2019.



Factual background

There were two strands to the appellant's claim for asylum.  The first
related to the claimed risk of violence from his wife's family, who were
said to be members of an extremist Buddhist sect, and had objected to their
daughter marrying the appellant, a Sinhalese Roman Catholic.  The second
strand, which formed the focus of the appeal before me, related to the
appellant's suspected involvement with the LTTE during the civil war in Sri
Lanka.

The appellant claims to have worked as a ticket agent for an airline
company in 2005 until late 2009.  While working for the travel company, he
met David.  David was a Tamil from the Northern Province of Sri Lanka.  The
two became good friends.  David left the company in around 2007 to become a
freelance travel agent.  Shortly after the end of the civil war in May
2009, David contacted the appellant to seek his assistance with arranging
travel out of Sri Lanka for various members of the Tamil community from the
Northern Province.  Many people at that time wanted to leave the country,
claimed the appellant, and he saw no reason not to help to arrange that.
The appellant claims to have facilitated the travel of around ten to twelve
Tamil individuals from the country.  David paid him to do this.

The troubles with the appellant's wife's family took place in the period
after that, and led to the appellant obtaining entry clearance to this
country to study as a student.  He arrived here in 2014 and currently
enjoys discretionary leave to remain on account of his daughter's ill
health.

The basis of the asylum claim advanced by the appellant is that in 2017,
the Sri Lankan Army visited his parents' home with information suggesting
that his friend David was an LTTE operative.  David had been arrested, they
said, and had revealed information concerning the appellant's role in the
exfiltration of various LTTE operatives towards the end of 2009.  David had
also claimed that the appellant was active in intelligence regrouping.  His
father had been required to report to the police station in the appellant's
absence.  Finding out about these developments led to the appellant making
a claim for asylum.

The respondent rejected the claim on the basis of inconsistencies between
the appellant's case as it was advanced in an initial statement provided by
the appellant, on the one hand, and the information that he provided in his
substantive asylum, interview, on the other.  Those differences have
subsequently been explained by the appellant as being attributable to his
former solicitors, against whom he has made a complaint with the Legal
Ombudsman.  There are copies of the correspondence in the bundle.  The
inconsistencies between what the appellant said in his original asylum
statement and his interview did not form part of the judge's operative
reasons for dismissing the appellant's appeal; the judge primarily
considered that the account provided by the appellant to have been
implausible.

Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

It is necessary to set out the judge's findings in more depth.  At [46] the
judge said,

         "I find that based on the appellant's evidence before me that the
         sequence of events set out by the appellant appears implausible".

    At [47], the judge noted that the appellant last worked with David in
    2007 and last had direct contact with him in 2009.  It was, therefore,
    said the judge at [48], implausible that the authorities would only
    take action against him in 2017, rather than at an earlier stage.
    Various documents that the appellant had provided in support of his
    claim, one from a lawyer in Sri Lanka and another from a priest from
    his Roman Catholic church in Sri Lanka, were described by the judge as
    being "self-serving".  At [51], the judge said that the fact that the
    letters had not come to light after the initial asylum claim had been
    submitted meant that they were, "simply in my view designed to bolster
    an otherwise weak asylum claim".

Grounds of appeal

Mr Lewis advances essentially two grounds of appeal against the judge's
decision.  The first is that the judge had impermissible regard to what he
considered to be the inherent probability or implausibility of the
appellant's case.  Secondly, the judge's dismissal of the documentary
evidence provided by the appellant in support of his claim as "self-
serving" amounted to a refusal to engage with the contents of those
documents, and in any event adopted a logic pursuant to which no evidence
ever adduced in support of an appeal would be capable of attracting any
weight.

For the respondent, Mr Lindsay contends that the judge reached findings
which were open to him on the facts.  He contends that the judge's brevity
is to be commended.  Properly understood, the judge's reference to
"implausibility" meant simply that he was not persuaded that the appellant
had satisfied the burden of proof to which he was subject.  The judge gave
sufficient reasons for finding that the appellant's case was implausible,
by reference to the country guidance case of GJ and others (post-civil war:
returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  In that case, a number of
risk categories were found by this Tribunal to characterise those who
continue to be of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.  At [7] of the
headnote, those risk categories are:

         "(7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant role in relation to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)      Journalists (whether in print or other media) or
             human rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised
             the Sri Lankan government, in particular its human rights
             record, or who are associated with publications critical of
             the Sri Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons
             Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri
             Lankan security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan
             authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among those who may have
             witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly in the
             No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those who have already
             identified themselves by giving such evidence would be known
             to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at
             real risk of adverse attention or persecution on return as
             potential or actual war crimes witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against
             whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."

Mr Lindsay submitted that, at its highest, the appellant's case does not
fall into any of those categories, and the judge was correct, therefore, to
dismiss his appeal.  The judge set his plausibility-based findings against
that background, enabling him to reach legitimate conclusions that the
appellant's overall account was not credible, as he assessed the
appellant's narrative by reference to the scenarios which the country
guidance found reasonably likely to engage the attention of the
authorities.  Secondly, even if the appellant had been of some interest to
the Sri Lankan authorities in 2017, he would nevertheless not be at any
risk on account of his situation not falling within any of the pre-
identified risk categories.

Discussion

Mr Lewis's submissions have considerable force.  It is well established
that judges in this jurisdiction should be slow to bring their own
subjective assumptions about what is likely to be plausible or probable to
their analysis of asylum claims.  Claimants for asylum are often from very
different parts of the world, and cultures, to judges in this jurisdiction,
and assessing the claimed experiences of an appellant by reference to what
a judge here considers to be plausible is an unreliable way to assess a
case where, as here, there was little by way of accompanying analysis.

In Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 Lord
Justice Keene said, at [25]:

"A judge should be cautious before finding an account to be inherently
incredible, because there is considerable risk that he will be over-
influenced by his own views on what is or is not plausible, and those views
will inevitably have been influenced by his own background in this country
and by the customs and ways of our own society."

Lord Justice Keene continued to quote an extrajudicial writing of Sir
Thomas Bingham, as he then was, in the journal Current Legal Problems.  Sir
Thomas Bingham said:

"An English judge may have, or think that he has, a shrewd idea of how a
Lloyds broker or a Bristol wholesaler, or a Norfolk farmer, might react in
some situation which is canvassed in the course of a case but he may, and I
think should, feel very much more uncertain about the reactions of a
Nigerian merchant, or an Indian ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav banker... No
judge worth his salt could possibly assume that men of different
nationalities, educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments
would act as he might think he would have done or even - which may be quite
different - in accordance with his concept of what a reasonable man would
have done."

Similarly, in HK v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
Civ 1037 Lord Justice Neuberger, as he then was, endorsed Hathaway on the
Law of Refugee Status (1991) at page 81, where Professor Hathaway stated
the following:

         "In assessing the general human rights information, decision makers
         must constantly be on guard to avoid implicitly recharacterising
         the nature of the risk based on their own perceptions of
         reasonability."

I consider that the judge in the present matter fell into precisely the
trap that Lord Justice Keene, Sir Thomas Bingham and Lord Justice Neuberger
said that judges should avoid.

To the list of professions in very different cultures that Sir Thomas
Bingham said judges should be slow to assume they have some knowledge or
experience of, one could readily add the occupation of a Sri Lankan travel
agent, this appellant's profession at the relevant time.  The judge
purported to have insight and knowledge into the circumstances under which
a Sri Lankan travel agent, in the immediate aftermath of the civil war,
would have acceded to a request from a former colleague from the Northern
Province for assistance.

What is likely to have been inherently plausible or probable in the present
matter should have been assessed by reference to the background
information.  The judge did not assess David's LTTE background by reference
to the findings in GJ that all people from the Northern Province are likely
to have had some form of involvement in the civil war; had he done so, that
may have led some credence to the appellant's claim to have been asked by a
Tamil from the Northern Province to assist with something that, the
appellant now claims, was linked to LTTE activity.  See the headnote to GJ
at [8].

Rather than engaging in a conventional analysis of the internal consistency
of the appellant's case, the consistency of the number of different
accounts that the appellant had provided of it, and the consistency of the
appellant's evidence before the Tribunal with those accounts when tested
under cross examination, the judge rather brought his own assumptions as to
what is likely to have happened in Sri Lanka at the relevant time to his
analysis, and reached a conclusion which depended upon his own subjective
assumptions, rather than on the evidence that was before him.

Turning to the judge's analysis of the letter from the appellant's priest
and his Sri Lankan attorney, I accept Mr Lewis's submissions that the
judge's description of these documents as self-serving does very little to
demonstrate why weight should not be ascribed to them.  In the case of R
(on the application of SS) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
("self-serving" statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC) Upper Tribunal Judge
Peter Lane, as he then was, held the following at [1] of the headnote:

"The expression self-serving is, to a large extent, a protean one.  The
expression itself tells us little or nothing.  What is needed is a reason,
however brief, for that designation.  For example, a letter written by a
third party to an applicant for international protection may be 'self-
serving' because it bears the hallmarks of being written to order, in
circumstances where the applicant's case is that the letter was a
spontaneous warning."

In the present matter, the judge did not consider the circumstances in
which either letter was written, and instead simply disregarded the
prospect of a member of the Sri Lankan Bar as ever being able to write a
letter which could be regarded as reliable.  Similarly, there was no
engagement with the circumstances in which the priest's letter was written.
 Rather, the approach of the judge was simply to say that if an appellant
adduces evidence in his support, because it has been adduced by him, then,
by definition, it lacks reliability.

I find that that was an erroneous approach.  The proper approach should
have been to analyse the documents by reference to the overall credibility
of the appellant's case in the round, pursuant to Tanveer Ahmed (Documents
unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT 00439.  That is not to say
these documents should necessarily have attracted weight, but the approach
of the judge was to dismiss their probative value without engaging in any
analysis of their contents by reference to his overall assessment of the
credibility of the appellant's case (which, in any event, was flawed for
the plausibility-based reasons set out above).

I consider that the risk categories in GJ provide no support for the
judge's rejection of the plausibility of the remaining aspects of the
appellant's case.  The risk categories at [7] of the headnote concern those
who are presently at risk from the authorities in Sri Lanka.  It must be
read alongside [4], which held that,

         "If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services there
         remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring
         international protection."

    The origins of the above finding appear to lie in the concession by
    counsel for the respondent in GJ at [168]:

         "[Counsel for the Secretary of State] accepted that individuals in
         custody in Sri Lanka continue to be at risk of physical abuse,
         including sexual violence, and that such risk is persecutory.
         Evidence before the Tribunal confirmed that, pursuant to an
         amendment to the Prevention of Terrorism Act (as amended) (PTA),
         the authorities could lawfully detain individuals for 18 months
         without any judicial oversight or remedy.  The 11,000 LTTE cadres,
         who underwent the re-education process known as "rehabilitation",
         were detained for at least two years, and some for as long as four
         years.  Mr Hall accepted that there appeared to be no statutory
         underpinning for the rehabilitation process:  to the extent that
         "rehabilitation" was based on the detention powers in the PTA, even
         without any evidence of physical or sexual abuse, he accepted that
         detention without judicial supervision for such lengthy periods
         amounted to persecution."

Therefore, for these reasons, I find that the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and that that error of law
was material.  It is material because, if it is the case that the
authorities continue to have an interest in the appellant as recently as
2017, then there are grounds to conclude that it would be reasonably likely
that they would continue to have an interest in him upon his return.  I
make no finding as to whether or not the authorities do have such an
interest in him, other than a finding that the judge's analysis of this
issue was flawed.

The judge also purported to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds,
without conducting any Article 8 analysis.  In any event, it is not clear
why the judge did so, as the appellant currently enjoys discretionary leave
to remain, and the sole issue in the case was the appellant's claim for
asylum.

The only remedy appropriate in these circumstances is for the decision of
Judge Herbert to be set aside and for the matter to be remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing with no findings of Judge
Herbert preserved.  It is to be listed before a judge other than Judge
Herbert.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with  no  findings  of  fact
preserved, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Herbert.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 25 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

