
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01878/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 August 2017                     |On 6 October 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     MZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1977.  He came  to  the
    UK in 2012 as a student and in the same year made a claim  for  asylum.
    That claim was refused and initially certified  as  clearly  unfounded.
    After further submissions a fresh decision was made on 3 February 2017,
    again refusing the asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker ("the FtJ") at  a  hearing  on  23
    March 2017.  He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant has five children, born on [ ] 2000, [ ] 2002, [ ]  2007,
    [ ] 2010, and [ ] 2014.

 4. The appellant's asylum and human rights  claim  contains  a  number  of
    features.  First, it is asserted that his two younger  daughters  would
    be forced to undergo FGM if returned to Sri Lanka, his elder  daughters
    having been subjected to FGM because of family pressures.  Next, it  is
    asserted that he would be at risk of persecution on account of the fact
    that he is a Muslim.  It is also asserted that he is at  risk  of  harm
    from an individual (whom I shall identify as BA) as a result of a  debt
    that he owes.  Lastly, he claims that  he  is  at  risk  on  return  on
    account of his political opinions, that  risk  arising  in  part  as  a
    result of his activity on social media.

    The decision of the FtJ

 5. I summarise the FtJ's decision, although further  aspects  of  it  will
    become apparent in my summary of the grounds of appeal and  submissions
    before me, as well as from my conclusions.

 6. The FtJ came to a number of conclusions under the subheading  "Findings
    and Conclusions", although he expressed other views on the claim and on
    the evidence earlier in his decision.

 7. The FtJ accepted that the appellant's two elder daughters had undergone
    FGM, stating that the appellant's wife's statement confirmed  that  she
    had consented to  that.   He  also  referred  to  a  Child  and  Family
    Assessment and NHS documents in that respect.

 8. The FtJ said that it had not been proved that  the  appellant's  mother
    had such influence that she would be able to force  the  appellant  and
    his wife to have their two younger daughters undergo FGM, stating  that
    "Claims to the contrary are in fact quite absurd".

 9. In any event, he concluded that there  would  be  the  option  for  the
    appellant (and presumably his family) to relocate, as asserted  by  the
    respondent.  He rejected the contention that the appellant  would  have
    to live near his mother.

10. He likewise rejected the contention that the appellant would be at risk
    on account of his being a Muslim.  The appellant had confirmed that  he
    had not suffered persecution for that reason in the past, although  had
    been questioned at the airport and at a checkpoint.  The FtJ  concluded
    that whilst Muslims may face levels  of  discrimination,  the  evidence
    does not indicate that this amounts to persecution or serious harm.  He
    referred to the country guidance decision of GJ and Others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), stating that  the
    current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or  serious
    harm on return to Sri Lanka do not include Muslims.

11. He rejected the claim that the appellant would be at risk as  a  result
    of his fear of BA to whom he owes a debt.  Although there was  evidence
    that his  father-in-law  had  had  his  leg  amputated,  there  was  no
    evidence, other than from  the  appellant,  that  these  injuries  were
    caused by BA or his men.  Although there were two loan agreements which
    are in English, no satisfactory explanation had been given for the fact
    that they were in English.  On one of the  agreements  the  appellant's
    name is given as the lender, and the lender in the other  agreement  is
    not BA.

12. He referred to letters from a lawyer dated from September 2013 "but  no
    later  evidence  has  been  produced  which   cast   doubt   on   their
    authenticity" (sic).  Presumably here, the FtJ was saying that the lack
    of later evidence casts doubt on their authenticity, although  the  way
    the matter is expressed in the decision is  not  clear.   He  concluded
    that the police report does  not  "corroborate"  the  story.   He  also
    remarked on the fact that the appellant's father had not complained  to
    the police, which the FtJ said  was  very  surprising.   There  was  no
    objective evidence to show that BA is a notorious criminal or person of
    influence.

13. At [38],  he  reminded  himself  that  the  appellant's  case  must  be
    considered in the round.  He stated that the appellant had told "a very
    implausible  story"  regarding  FGM  and  religion,  and  he  has  been
    inconsistent and implausible,  stating  that  both  those  factors  are
    against him believing the story regarding BA.

14. Furthermore, the appellant had not tested whether the authorities could
    protect him and his family because he left before they had a chance  to
    do so.

15. He rejected the contention that the appellant was at risk  due  to  his
    political opinions.  He referred to the appellant's website under which
    he uses an alias.  With further reference to the documentary  evidence,
    he said that it was not clear how  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would
    identify the appellant, because he has not given his correct  name  and
    he is prepared to pay for his identity to be protected.  The  appellant
    had said that he would have to pay to remove his name so that he  could
    not be identified.

16. He concluded that the appellant's Facebook page  does  not  indicate  a
    significant political profile which would by itself bring  him  to  the
    attention of the authorities.  Furthermore, although his Facebook  page
    may be public, it could be adjusted to give him control over who  views
    the contents of the page.

17. Although the appellant had resubmitted a letter  from  an  attorney  to
    show that he is wanted by the authorities, and had  failed  to  present
    himself for inquiry and thus there is an arrest warrant, the  FtJ  said
    that "The police statement  does  not  state  the  charges  be  brought
    against him..." (sic) and he has not shown that his post-UK activity is
    a cause of the government's concern.  The evidence  provided  was  four
    years old and there was no new evidence showing that he was wanted.

18. The FtJ also referred to the appellant having gone back  to  Sri  Lanka
    from New Zealand in 2011, and having lived  in  New  Zealand  with  his
    family for five or six years.  He went back  to  Sri  Lanka  for  10-12
    months.  He concluded that the appellant would not have returned  to  a
    country in which there was a genuine risk of persecution.

19.  At  [46]  he  referred  to  aspects  of  matters  raised  by  previous
    representatives in relation to his claim, which were inconsistent  with
    the  present  claim.   This  relates  to  an  issue  raised  in  cross-
    examination about assertions made by his  previous  representatives  in
    respect of his claim.  The FtJ  said  that  it  had  been  put  to  the
    appellant that he was a highly educated man, and yet did not  read  and
    check previous statements that were advanced in respect of  the  claim.
    He concluded that the appellant was evasive and found  that  the  point
    made on behalf of the respondent in cross-examination was a valid one.

20. The implication is clearly that the FtJ found the  appellant's  account
    inconsistent and that no satisfactory explanation had  been  given  for
    that inconsistency.

    The grounds and submissions

21. The grounds take issue with the FtJ's conclusions in terms of the  risk
    of FGM for the appellant's younger daughters.  It is contended that the
    FtJ made a mistake of fact at [27] in concluding that  the  appellant's
    wife had consented to their  undergoing  FGM.   In  fact,  her  witness
    statement demonstrates  that  the  procedure  took  place  against  her
    wishes, and that it was only agreed to as a result of pressure from the
    family.

22. Furthermore, given that it was accepted that the appellant's elder  two
    daughters had been subjected to FGM (a conclusion also supported by the
    report from Social Services), the FtJ's finding that it  had  not  been
    established that the appellant's mother had such influence so as to  be
    able to force the appellant and his wife  to  have  their  two  younger
    daughters undergo FGM, was irrational.

23. Reference is made in the grounds to background evidence in terms of the
    reports of harassment, threats and physical violence  against  Muslims,
    and the  evidence  of  discrimination.   In  that  context,  the  FtJ's
    conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk of  persecution  was
    in error.  Furthermore, the FtJ erred in concluding  that  the  country
    guidance decision of GJ and Others held that the categories  of  person
    at risk did not include Muslims, given that the Tribunal was not  asked
    to determine that issue.

24. It is contended that the FtJ's conclusions in respect of the risk  from
    BA is infected by his earlier conclusions in relation to FGM,  the  FtJ
    having said that that adverse credibility finding was relevant  to  his
    conclusions in relation to the risk asserted from BA.

25. As to the appellant's Facebook, it was submitted that  the  appellant's
    identity  may  already  have  been  discovered  by   the   Sri   Lankan
    authorities.  Therefore, changing his settings so that he could not  be
    identified may not assist.  Again, the FtJ's earlier flawed credibility
    assessment  must  have  affected  his  conclusions  in  terms  of   the
    appellant's political activities.

26. Although the FtJ had said at [45] that the appellant's credibility  was
    damaged by the fact that he returned to Sri Lanka  in  2011  for  10-12
    months, the fact is that the issues which gave rise to the  appellant's
    claim on political grounds had not arisen at that point, but later.

27. The adverse credibility finding based on previous  statements  made  by
    his  earlier  representatives  failed  to   recognise   that   in   the
    respondent's decision it was accepted that those  were  errors  on  the
    part of his then representatives.

28. Given that  the  risk  of  persecution  arises  from  the  authorities,
    internal relocation was not an option for him.

29. Issue is taken with the FtJ's assessment of Article  8,  in  particular
    with reference to the best interests of the appellant's children.

30. Relying on the grounds, Mr Gilbert referred me to  various  aspects  of
    the documentary evidence, for example the Child and  Family  Assessment
    starting at page 51 of the appellant's bundle,  on  the  issue  of  the
    appellant and his wife's attitude of hostility to FGM.

31. As to what is said in  the  grounds  at  [12]  in  terms  of  the  loan
    agreements to which the FtJ referred, and their being  in  English,  Mr
    Gilbert submitted that his instructions were  that  the  appellant  had
    said at the hearing  that  those  documents  were  in  English  because
    English is widely spoken.  Indeed, that is consistent with what the FtJ
    recorded in his manuscript record of proceedings as to the  appellant's
    explanation for those documents being  in  English.   However,  it  was
    accepted by Mr Gilbert that that explanation was not supported  by  any
    evidence he could point to.

32. I was referred to the extracts from the appellant's Facebook  page  and
    his website.  It was submitted that the  appellant's  name  is  on  the
    website, as can be seen for example at page 181 of the bundle.  The FtJ
    appeared to accept at [40] that the appellant's  website  and  Facebook
    posts are critical of the government.  It was further submitted that it
    was apparent  from  existing  country  guidance  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities  maintain  sophisticated  intelligence.   Furthermore,  the
    decision in YB (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 360 was  relied  on  in  terms  of  the  monitoring  of
    individuals by intelligence or security services.

33. In  relation  to  the  FtJ's  adverse  credibility  finding  about  the
    appellant having gone back to Sri Lanka in 2011, in the main the  facts
    which indicated a risk to him, for example as shown in  the  attorney's
    letter at page 137, arose after 2011.  The attorney's letter  is  dated
    September 2013, and the arrest warrant (so called) is dated August 2013
    (page 109-111).

34. The appellant's witness statement dated  9  December  2016  at  [4]-[6]
    explained the errors made by the appellant's previous  representatives,
    and which the respondent accepted were errors.

35. Mrs Aboni relied on the 'rule 24' response to the effect that the FtJ's
    decision was free from error of law.  Although it was accepted that the
    FtJ's decision  may  be  slightly  confusing,  he  had  considered  all
    relevant factors and aspects of the claim.

36. In relation to FGM, the FtJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant
    would have the option of internal relocation.

37. Similarly, he was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  social
    media profile was not such as would put him at risk.

38. Likewise, in relation to what was earlier accepted by the respondent as
    an error in the representations made on  behalf  of  the  appellant  in
    terms of the detail of his account, the FtJ was entitled to have regard
    to the fact that the appellant appeared evasive when he gave  evidence.
    Any error of law in this respect was not material.

    Assessment

39. I announced at the hearing that I was satisfied that the FtJ had  erred
    in law in his assessment of the appellant's  credibility.   It  is  not
    necessary for me to express a view on every aspect of the  grounds  and
    submissions.  Suffice to say, the following reasons  are  a  sufficient
    basis from which to conclude that the  FtJ's  decision  should  be  set
    aside.

40. The FtJ's conclusion that the appellant's  wife  said  in  her  witness
    statement that she had consented to FGM for their elder two  daughters,
    fails to have regard to the fact that in her witness statement she said
    that it was family pressures that led to her  consenting  to  it.   She
    said in her witness statement that the appellant's mother  and  sisters
    and brother started to speak to her about FGM and  said  that  all  the
    girls in the family must have that procedure.  They referred to  it  as
    being part of their religion and culture and that  the  children  would
    not be accepted without it.  They also tried to convince  her  to  have
    FGM.  The witness statement continues that she did not want to risk the
    relationship her children had with their  family  or  the  relationship
    with her husband and she  therefore  agreed  to  FGM  for  her  younger
    daughter.  Her other daughter was subjected to the procedure  when  she
    was approximately 4 years old.

41. The FtJ having accepted that those  children  had  undergone  FGM,  the
    conclusion that it was "quite absurd"  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    mother had such influence that she would be able to force  FGM  on  the
    other two children, failed to take  into  account  the  detail  of  the
    witness statement and indeed the FtJ's own acceptance of the  procedure
    having previously carried out on two of the  children.   Likewise,  his
    conclusion at [38] that the appellant  had  told  "a  very  implausible
    story" regarding FGM.

42. The FtJ concluded that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  damaged  by
    reason of his having returned to Sri Lanka in 2011 for 10-12 months, on
    the basis that he would not have returned to a country which placed him
    and his family at risk.  However, this conclusion fails to have  regard
    to the detail of the appellant's claim and the  supporting  documentary
    evidence to the effect that his political activities were not a  matter
    that, for the most part at least, gave rise to a risk of persecution by
    the authorities at that point.  I have indicated the documents to which
    I was referred in this respect.

43. The FtJ made a further adverse credibility finding because of  what  he
    plainly regarded as an inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  claim  with
    reference  to  statements  made  on  his   behalf   by   his   previous
    representatives.  However, albeit  not  in  the  most  recent  decision
    letter of 3 February 2017, in the respondent's decision  dated  3  June
    2016 on page 7 it refers to a statement made on the appellant's  behalf
    by his previous solicitors. The respondent  there  states  that  it  is
    believed that the statement does not relate to  his  claim  and  is  an
    error on the part of his legal representative.  Similarly  in  relation
    to another aspect of his previous solicitor's letter it states that  it
    is not believed that this statement relates to his claim because he had
    never had his case heard before an Immigration  Judge  (as  suggested),
    and there was no evidence that he had ever been arrested or tortured by
    the Sri Lankan Army (again as suggested), which was never part  of  his
    claim.

44. The FtJ's reliance on those erroneous assertions on his behalf  by  his
    previous representatives further  undermines  the  adverse  credibility
    assessment.

45. The FtJ did undertake an  assessment  of  the  background  evidence  in
    relation to the risk to the appellant of persecution on the basis  that
    he is a Muslim.  However, the FtJ's finding at [33] in relation  to  GJ
    and Others that "The Tribunal held that" (written  in  bold  type)  the
    current categories of persons at risk did not include Muslims, suggests
    that this was a matter that was subject to inquiry by the  Tribunal  in
    that case, which it was not.

46. The FtJ's decision under the subheading "Evidence" gives a narrative of
    the oral  evidence,  in  particular  cross-examination.   He  made  the
    observation at [13] that the appellant was evasive (in relation to  the
    previous inconsistent statements to which I have referred).   The  same
    observation is repeated at [46] in relation  to  the  same  topic.   Of
    course, the FtJ saw and heard the appellant give evidence and he was in
    a position to make an assessment of the way that the appellant gave his
    evidence.  However, the assessment that the  appellant  was  vague  and
    evasive relates to a matter about which it was wrong to make an adverse
    credibility finding,  for  the  reasons  I  have  already  stated.  The
    respondent accepted that the  statements  about  which  he  was  cross-
    examined appeared as part of his case through  error  by  his  previous
    representatives.

47. During the course of the narrative of the appellant's evidence in cross-
    examination, on two occasions the FtJ said that the Presenting  Officer
    "extracted from him"  certain  evidence.   It  is  not  entirely  clear
    whether this expression was used deliberately by the  FtJ  to  indicate
    that the evidence given by the appellant was not  readily  forthcoming.
    In my judgement, this is a source for confusion in terms of  the  FtJ's
    assessment of the appellant's evidence.

48. I have considered whether what appears as the FtJ's own  assessment  of
    the appellant's evidence, for example at [38] to the effect that he had
    been inconsistent and implausible in relation to FGM and the risk  from
    BA, is in fact a reflection of the submissions made on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  In that paragraph and others, reading the  FtJ's  decision
    in a different way, it could be that the FtJ was  only  reflecting  the
    submissions  that  were  made  to  him.   However,  given  that   those
    assessments appear under the subheading "Findings and  Conclusions"  it
    seems to me that they do in fact represent the FtJ's own assessment  of
    the appellant's case, even though rather confusingly interspersed  with
    the observations of the Presenting Officer.

49. The cumulative effect of what I  regard  to  be  errors  in  the  FtJ's
    assessment of the appellant's credibility is such  as  to  lead  me  to
    conclude that his credibility assessment cannot stand.  The errors  are
    such as to require the decision to be set aside.

50. Mr Gilbert submitted that it would be appropriate for the appeal to  be
    retained in the Upper  Tribunal  for  a  re-assessment  of  credibility
    because of what he described as the  difficult  issue  of  FGM  in  Sri
    Lanka.

51. However, I do not consider that that is an appropriate course.  It  has
    been found that the appellant's two elder daughters have been subjected
    to FGM, and that is a finding that can be preserved.  There needs to be
    a re-assessment of the  extent  to  which  the  appellant's  other  two
    daughters are at risk in the same way on return to Sri Lanka.  There is
    no reason for that matter to be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    circumstances where the appellant has not had a proper appraisal of his
    claim in all its respects.

52. Whilst I do not consider that there is any harm  in  stating  that  the
    claimed risk to the appellant on the basis that he is a Muslim seems to
    me not to be the strongest aspect of his claim, I do not consider  that
    the FtJ's findings in that respect can be preserved given the wholesale
    rejection of the appellant's claim in all its respects.

53. In those circumstances, it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.  The only finding  of
    fact that can be preserved is that the appellant's two elder  daughters
    have been subject to FGM in Sri Lanka.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker,  with  the  only
    preserved finding being that referred to in the preceding paragraph.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Post script

By letter dated 26 September 2017, the appellant's solicitors wrote  to  the
Tribunal  to  state  that  "the  previous  representatives  appear  to  have
mistakenly failed to lodge appeals for each of the  Appellant's  dependants,
i.e. his wife and five children. As such  they  are  not  a  party  to  this
appeal although they should have been at the outset had it not been for  the
error of their representatives".

The dependent children are then named. It is stated that they were  included
as dependants on the appellant's asylum claim and  are  considered  as  such
for NASS purposes. It then states that "We therefore make these out of  time
appeals for each of the above and request that  the  appeals  be  linked  as
would normally be the case."

Although not part of my judgment in this appeal, this  is  as  convenient  a
way  as  any  of   responding   to   the   letter   from   the   appellant's
representatives. Simply put, the appellant's children  are  not  parties  to
this appeal. There is no mechanism by which simply writing a letter (to  the
Upper Tribunal in particular) can make them so. One would have thought  that
experienced representatives such as these would appreciate that fact.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     5/10/17



