
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/01819/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 March 2019                   |On 18 April 2019                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     DA
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This decision of the Upper Tribunal is a short one. That is because
of a conciliatory stance taken by Mrs Pettersen at the hearing before me,
which meant that, in terms of the outcome of this appeal and indeed the
preferred means of disposal, there was agreement between the parties. That
level of agreement means that it is unnecessary for me to set out the whole
of the evidence and the whole of the arguments in full. I need only explain
why I am setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the
tribunal) and why I am, in consequence of that, remitting for a rehearing
before a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

2.    The claimant, who was born on 29 March 1998, is of Kurdish ethnicity
and is a national of Iran. He entered the UK on 19 September 2017 and
sought international protection on the basis that he had been, albeit for a
short period, a political activist in Iran, that his activities had come to
the attention of the Iranian authorities, and that, therefore, he would be
at risk of persecution or serious harm if he were to be returned there.

3.    The claim was refused by the Secretary of State and the claimant
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal. The tribunal dismissed
his appeal following a hearing of 7 August 2018 and it sent its decision to
the parties on 31 August 2018. It is fair to say that the tribunal
disbelieved most of what the claimant had asserted to it. It explained why
it was disbelieving the bulk of the account in a passage running from
paragraph 47 to 68 of its written reasons. It was its rejection of the
claimant's credibility and consequently his account, which led to its
decision to dismiss the appeal. In seeking permission to appeal the
claimant, through Mr Greer, sought to attack almost all of the tribunal's
adverse credibility findings asserting that it had misunderstood aspects of
the claimant's evidence causing it to detect inconsistencies where there
were none; and that it had impermissibly speculated in ways which led to it
incorrectly rejecting aspects of the account.

4.        An unlimited grant of permission followed the lodging of the
grounds and the matter was then listed for a hearing before the Upper
Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be given as to whether or
not the tribunal had erred in law and, if it had, what should flow from
that. Representation was as stated above and as I have already indicated
that Ms Pettersen took a conciliatory stance. She noted that no rule 24 (a
reference to rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal's Rules of Procedure) response
to the appeal had been filed. But she indicated that she took the view it
was appropriate for this appeal to be redecided by a differently
constituted tribunal. The hearing was short because, after that, there was
really not much more which needed to be said.

5.    I have decided to set aside the tribunal's decision because I do
think that there are aspects of its credibility assessment which are unsafe
for reasons which I shall explain. I also think that a consequence of that
is that the credibility assessment as a whole, in the particular
circumstances of this case, is unsafe. But I would wish to make it clear
that it is apparent from the tribunal's written reasons that it has set
about its task with care and diligence and I would also wish to make it
clear that I do not accept all of the contentions which have been made on
behalf of the claimant in the written grounds. But I have accepted enough
of them to conclude that there has been legal error.

6.    The tribunal thought that the claimant had been inconsistent about
the date upon which he had left Iran. It said that, in his substantive
asylum interview, he had variously given the date as being 9 June 2017, 12
June 2017 and 3 September 2017. At paragraph 67 of its written reasons it
indicated its view that it considered that inconsistency and one other "to
be significant" and that both had "damaged the appellant's credibility".
So, it does appear that it gave quite significant prominence to its
conclusion as to inconsistency with respect to the date of departure in its
overall credibility assessment.

7.    It is apparent, as identified in the grounds of appeal to the Upper
Tribunal, that the claimant was, on a number of occasions during the course
of the substantive asylum interview, asked to provide dates when various
events had taken place. It appears that what was recorded in the typed
record of that interview, usually at least, was a date in the Iranian
calendar which would then be followed by an equivalent date in the
Gregorian calendar. There is an example of that happening with respect to
the answer to question 31. There is another such example with respect to
the answer to question 39. There is another with respect to the answer to
question 71. But the answers which concerned the tribunal related to
questions 127 and 130. As to question 127 and the answer to it, they read
as follows:

         "Q - what date did you leave Iran?

           A - 12/06/2017 (03/09/2017)".

8.    The way the answer to question 127 is set out mirrors the way the
answers, with respect to dates, have been recorded save for the fact that
both have the appearance of being dates from the Gregorian calendar. But
given the way in which the dates have been set out in the answers to
earlier questions, there is good reason to think that the intention was to
record an Iranian date first of all followed by a Gregorian date. So, it
might be that rather than giving two different dates of arrival in answer
to the same question which is how the tribunal had obviously interpreted
this (see paragraph 66 of the written reasons) and which would have
represented a clear inconsistency, the claimant had only given one date. In
those circumstances I do not think it was open to the tribunal (in looking
at the record of the interview as a whole) to safely conclude, at least
without probing the matter further, that the claimant had been inconsistent
with respect to dates or to accord such a consideration the prominence
which it apparently did accord it.

9.    One of the points taken by the tribunal against the claimant, with
respect to credibility, related to the content of leaflets which the
claimant had said he would distribute with his friend. His evidence was to
the effect that he is illiterate so could not read the content himself but
that his friend had told him something of the content. The tribunal noted
that the leaflets did "not call for any action" and the tribunal said that
such "would be expected on a leaflet". That does seem to me to amount to
impermissible speculation. Further, the tribunal's thinking to the effect
that such leaflets would call upon persons to take action against the
authorities (that is presumably what was meant) is not explained. It seems
to me it is perfectly possible that some political leaflets will express
concerns about the treatment of minorities and will then specify action
which it thinks should be taken or will urge people to take specific forms
of action. But one might equally conclude that some leaflets would simply
detail concerns with respect to perceived ill-treatment of minorities in
order to draw their attention to the wider public or to foster
disenchantment with the authorities. I have concluded that the tribunal's
conclusion that the leaflets would have called for specific action lacked
any proper evidential basis and so was not open to it.

10.   The tribunal indicated it thought the claimant's explanation as to
why he had joined a party as a political activist was unclear (paragraph 48
of the written reasons). But the tribunal, whilst it does quote from
answers the claimant had given to questions put to him in the substantive
asylum interview, does not really explain how it reached that view. It also
said that no explanation had been offered by the claimant, if his
motivation was a result of the killing of his father some years ago, as to
why he would not have joined an oppositionist organisation earlier.  The
claimant though had offered something of an explanation as to why he had
not acted earlier (and in any event, it appears that he was a child when
his father was killed) at paragraph 5 of his witness statement of 5 March
2018 as Mr Greer points out. Perhaps the view could be taken that what he
offered was not much of an explanation but that is not the point that the
tribunal was seeking to make. Further, as to the claimed lack of clarity
regarding his motivation, it seems to me that the thrust of what the
claimant had to say was that his father had been killed when he was young
but it was only as a result of his friend subsequently urging him to join
and suggesting that the authorities had been responsible for the death of
his father, that he did so. There might be an argument to say that a person
would be unlikely to join a political party, become active and risk
persecution or death, simply due to the urging of a friend but again, that
was not the tribunal's point. Perhaps what it really thought was that the
claimant's explanation as to why he had become a political activist was
simply unconvincing. It might have been open to it to so decide but it does
not seem to me that it was open to it to decide that his motive was
"unclear". He had stated what it was with some clarity.

11.   I fully appreciate that there are other credibility concerns set out
in the tribunal's written reasons. As indicated, Mr Greer attacks most of
those, but I am not persuaded that what is said as to those remaining
matters goes beyond re-argument or simply the identification of a different
way of looking at the same evidence. That latter sort of point does not
help unless the way the tribunal looked at it was not open to it. I fully
appreciate that it will not by any means always be sufficient in seeking to
establish legal error, to undermine certain of the credibility conclusions
where others remain unchallenged or not successfully challenged. But I am
persuaded, in this case, that the credibility assessment is not legally
sustainable and I do note that Mrs Pettersen effectively expressed that
view herself on behalf of the Secretary of State. That is not something
which I should disregard.

12.   In the circumstances then, I have concluded that the tribunal's
decision ought to be set aside. Since I have decided to do that on the
basis of the credibility assessment, I am not able to preserve any of the
tribunal's findings. In those circumstances it seems to me, as was agreed
by the two representatives, that the most appropriate course of action
would be a remittal to the tribunal and that is what I have decided to do.
There will, therefore, be a rehearing of the appeal before a differently
constituted tribunal (a different judge). That rehearing will not be
limited to the issues I have identified above and which have caused me to
set aside the tribunal's decision. The tribunal will consider all aspects
of the appeal, both fact and law, entirely afresh. The claimant should not
assume, merely because I have set aside the tribunal's decision, that he
will ultimately succeed. He might but, again, he might not. All of that
will now be a matter for the good judgment of the new tribunal.

13.   The Upper Tribunal, in circumstances where it sets aside a tribunal
decision, is required to give directions for the rehearing. However, it
does not seem to me that it would be appropriate to give detailed
directions. That function may be carried out more appropriately by members
of the judiciary within the First-tier Tribunal. I would simply direct,
then, that there be a full rehearing of the appeal by way of oral hearing,
on a date to be fixed.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside. The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
rehearing by a differently constituted tribunal (a different judge).

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. I continue that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008. Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the
claimant or any member of his family. This direction applies to all parties
to the proceedings. Failure to comply might lead to contempt of court
proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

