
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01754/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft Teams     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th June 2021                            |On 11th August 2021           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Ms K S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ali, instructed by Zakk Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Wood, dismissing her appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated
17th February 2020 to refuse the appellant's application for international
protection and protection on human rights grounds.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the history in some detail such that
the appellant was a national of Pakistan born on 30th June 1982 and she was
married in August 2007 to Mr S D and shortly afterwards he left for the UK,
leaving her in Pakistan.  In October 2009 she applied for entry clearance
as a spouse, and she entered the UK in April 2010.  Her leave expired on
9th June 2011.  She subsequently failed to keep in touch with the
immigration authorities between 2010 and 2017. In 2011 she returned to
Pakistan to care for her sick mother and remained there for seven months.

It appears she subsequently separated from her husband in the UK and on
13th July 2017 made an application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds
which was refused and certified as having no prospect of success.  She
submitted a further Article 8 application for leave to remain on a similar
basis, that is, she had no-one to return to in Pakistan and would
experience societal disapproval, and that application was again refused and
certified.  Following judicial review proceedings on 2nd October 2019 the
Upper Tribunal refused permission for such a challenge, directing that no
First-tier Tribunal, properly directed, could allow an appeal against a
refusal of the claim.

On 21st January the appellant was detained by the Home Office and she
claimed asylum whilst in detention.  In summary, she asserted she was
afraid to return to Pakistan for fear of repercussions from someone named
Mr Z, who had wished to marry her but was rejected in favour of her
husband.  It was suggested that as a single woman she would not have access
to state protection.  Further, she had developed both a family and private
life in the UK in relation to the family of her estranged husband.

The grounds for permission to appeal set out as follows.

Ground 1

The judge did not adequately assess the appellant's mental health,
vulnerability and its impact on return.  The grounds stated that the judge
accepted the appellant had a major depressive disorder and a post-traumatic
stress disorder and she was vulnerable but that he failed to place
sufficient weight on the appellant's mental health conditions and
vulnerability which had a bearing on her risk on return.  At paragraph 12
the grounds added that the judge did make reference to part of the claim
regarding single women like the appellant not having access to state
protection and at paragraph 59 the judge accepted there were "certain
limitations to the effectiveness of police protection for women involved in
honour-related violence.  However, I note that the appellant is from
Rawalpindi, which is an urban area not necessarily prone to these types of
problems".

The grounds submitted that the appellant's circumstances would make her
prone especially in the light of the fact that she had no father figure and
her brother was a drug addict and her estranged mother was suffering from
mental problems and the appellant was from a patriarchal tribe.  Reference
was made in the grounds to the report of Dr Mariam Kashmiri, a psychiatric
report dated 2nd July 2020, and to the fact that the threat the appellant
faced was from a member of the Pathan community and the judge appeared to
have overlooked the comments made by the doctor, in particular at
paragraphs 15.8, 15.9, 16.6 and 16.9, which referred to her bringing up
memories of her loss, that Pakistan would be difficult in her current
state, considering it would be an environment in which she had suffered
trauma, that "further stress concerning her immigration issue was likely to
exacerbate her distress and feelings of helplessness" and finally that
further exposure to a stressful situation which she was likely to face on
her return to Pakistan where she had no family or social support would
aggravate her symptoms significantly.

It was also submitted that the appellant's mental health issues were
identified prior to her asylum interview and the judge indeed made
reference to her visit to the GP in 2017 regarding her mental health.

When the appellant was in Pakistan previously she was with her in-laws and
the community knew she was married and had their support and she would be
returning as a separated woman with no meaningful support and after a
decade and her in-laws could not visit her owing to the COVID Rules and
their respective medical conditions.

It was submitted that the judge failed to attach appropriate weight to her
personal circumstances or take a holistic approach when considering her
return to Pakistan.  The COI Report dated February 2020 was referred to at
paragraph 19 of the skeleton argument and highlighted the issues facing
women in the same circumstances as the appellant and there had been no
proper application of the appellant's situation or her personal
circumstances.

    Ground 2

The second ground referred to the judge's lack of anxious scrutiny.  At
paragraph 59 the judge acknowledged the limitation of the effectiveness of
the police but claims that the appellant would not be prone to these types
of problems but the judge failed to take into account the perpetrators of
the appellant's father, who was murdered in 1989, were never brought to
justice.  The appellant would be returning as a lone female of a failed
marriage and would not have the support of her in-laws  This was the only
family she had known for a decade.  The judge failed to take into account
the lack of adequate male protection and the importance of male protectors
and failed to consider how this would impact on her when finding employment
or accommodation and the judge could not put her into the category of
independent "socio-economic" female as she had never led an independent
life.  The psychiatric report had clearly stated the difficulties the
appellant would face and it was submitted it was highly unlikely the
appellant would be able to lead an independent life, based on her health
and previous dependency.

At the hearing before me, despite the technical difficulties, both
representatives confirmed that they could see and hear me.  Ms Ali relied
substantially on the extensive written grounds that submitted that the
judge had failed to take into account fully the medical report,
particularly at paragraphs 15.8 and 15.9 that the appellant's symptoms
would worsen on return and that she had no family support and was at risk
of suicide.  The determination clearly accepted the limits to the police
protection if she returned, she had no father figure and it was noted that
she came from the Pathan community, which was very patriarchal.  When she
went back for seven months she had been supported by her parents-in-law.

In relation to ground 2, again there had been insufficient scrutiny of the
facts and that the appellant would be returning as a separated lone female.
 Her in-laws were now too ill to travel to Pakistan and too vulnerable.
This appellant had never lived an independent life and the determination
should be set aside.

It was confirmed that there was no challenge to the adverse credibility
findings made with regard to the appellant.

Mr Melvin confirmed that there indeed were no credibility challenges in
relation to the decision and the appellant's account was based on a
fictitious character.  She had family to support her in Pakistan and the
psychiatric report was based fully on what she had been told.

    Analysis

The judge's treatment and approach of the evidence in relation to
credibility was not challenged in the grounds but focussed on the
appropriate weight given to her personal circumstances or take a holistic
approach when considering her return to Pakistan.

In the application for permission to appeal, the first challenge related to
the judge not adequately assessing the appellant's mental health and
vulnerability in relation to her return and noted that the judge accepted
that she had a major depressive disorder.

At paragraph 22 First-tier Tribunal Judge Wood made clear that he had
considered all of the documentation before him and during the course of the
determination and noted that the appellant's solicitors had commissioned a
psychiatric report dated 2nd July 2020 subsequent to her asylum interviews
on 28th January 2020 and 5th February 2020.  His references to the evidence
underlined the point that anxious scrutiny of the case had been made.  The
judge referenced, and applied, the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of
2010 and the judgment AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 and confirmed that he had regard to her
mental health condition when assessing the credibility of the appellant's
evidence.  That is evident on a careful reading of the decision.

The judge detailed the mental health evidence including the visit to the GP
(where she did not mention Mr Z).  As can be seen from the determination,
the judge was well aware that the appellant asserted mental health
difficulties prior to the psychiatric report and her asylum interview.
The judge at paragraph 64 specifically identified that the appellant began
'to experience symptoms shortly after her encounter with Mr Zada ...she did
not see her GP until 2017'.   The grounds disclose in effect a challenge to
the weight to be accorded to the evidence by the judge.  Having factored in
the mental health condition the judge made a series of adverse credibility
findings for cogent reasons.

At paragraph 67 the judge stated:

"However, looking at the evidence in the round, it is my view that the
appellant is not a credible witness.  The inconsistencies which I have set
out are, in my judgment, impossible to reconcile, even having regard to the
fact that she is obviously a lady who has mental health issues.  It is my
view that the appellant has repeatedly altered her evidence to fit the
evolving nature of her immigration situation.  It was only when detained
that she claimed asylum on the basis of threats from Mr Z.  It is my
judgment that this is inexplicable in the context of the case as a whole.
I would add that I also found her presentation as a witness at the hearing
to be unsatisfactory.  On a number of occasions, Mr Beer was required to
repeat or rephrase simple but important questions which I felt the
appellant sought to avoid answering in a straightforward manner.  In my
judgment, this was plainly not the result of any vulnerability, but a
reluctance on her part of address problematic parts of her claim",

and at paragraph 68 the judge stated:

"...  However, it is the irreconcilable nature of the evidence which came
before which fundamentally damages this lady's credibility.

    And at paragraph 69

"Accordingly, I cannot find, even to the low standard of proof, that there
is a real risk that the appellant has a genuine and well-founded fear of
return to Pakistan  I do not accept that Mr Z exists, or that there is an
ongoing risk posed by him.  If the appellant really did refuse Mr Z's
marriage proposal (which I do not accept) and did make threats as alleged
(which I also do not accept), then I find that he does not pose a
continuing threat to the appellant or her family in 2020.  I therefore
refuse the asylum claim on this basis."

The reference to suicide was fleeting only and in the light of the
credibility findings the approach of the judge was open to him when finding
there would be treatment in Pakistan and her family would be there to
support her.  The judge had overall given the appeal full and anxious
scrutiny in the light of the previous Article 8 claims.

Ms Ali submitted that the psychiatrist had not simply followed what the
appellant had stated but put in her own observations and comments such that
the appellant had mental health symptoms.  The judge, however, did not find
that the appellant had no mental health difficulty.  It is clear that on
reading the determination as a whole the judge factored in the psychiatric
report and the assertion that the judge failed to place sufficient weight
on the appellant's mental health condition and vulnerability is not borne
out by a careful reading of the determination.  The judge carefully
assessed the mental health of the appellant and accepted at paragraph 65
that the appellant presented with a major depressive disorder and post-
traumatic stress disorder.  In that paragraph the judge acknowledged that
this was a result of stressful and traumatic events "in her life".  He was
clearly aware that there were events which caused her mental health issues
prior to the claim for asylum and indeed made reference to the murder of
her father at a young age and separation from her family in Pakistan.  The
judge states in terms that he had "placed some weight on the medical
findings whilst being conscious of the extent of the reliance on the
account provided by the appellant's post-asylum claim".   The medical
conditions were reported prior to the asylum claim but the judge does not
state that her mental health condition was limited to the post-asylum claim
but it was the extent of that reliance on the account provided by the
appellant that was relevant.  There is a nuanced difference.

The judge had already recorded in the decision that the appellant had
previously made two human rights claims both of which had been refused and
on a different basis from that on which she later claimed asylum.  At
paragraph 56 the judge stated:

         "It is only with the claim for asylum that any difficulties with Mr
         Z are mentioned or any dispute with her mother arising out of her
         marriage to her estranged husband.  Reference is made to it only
         when she is detained."

The judge carefully analysed the reasons for delay in the claiming of the
asylum but found that

"in making three different immigration applications, in which she was
required to think about and discuss potential difficulties associated with
going back to Pakistan, it was inevitable that she would have to recall
events connected to Mr Z, if they occurred"

He concluded that by the time she had come to her second human rights
application and her status was precarious, to say the least, she must have
appreciated the need to explain her claim in full.  In effect she did not.

The judge found the appellant to be a vulnerable witness but looking at the
evidence in the round found her not to be credible, not least because of
omissions in the documentation in the form of the mother's declaration of
disowning, and the witness statements which omitted any reference to Mr Z.
He took into account that she had "repeatedly altered her evidence to fit
the evolving nature of her immigration situation".  The judge also found
that the appellant evaded cross-examination and "in my judgment this was
plainly not the result of any vulnerability but a reluctance on her part of
(sic) address problematic parts of her claim".  He was unarguably entitled
to draw that conclusion.

Crucially, there was no challenge to the judge's treatment of the evidence
on the adverse credibility findings.  The judge considered the medical
report when assessing the credibility of the appellant.  The weight to be
given to various reports is a matter for the judge. Mere disagreement about
the weight to be accorded to the evidence, which is a matter for the judge,
should not be characterised as an error of law, Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA
Civ 412. The judge rejected the "disown declaration" from the mother and
that rejection was not challenged and the judge also considered the witness
statements from the other family members and noted that they did not give
evidence and thus could not be cross-examined despite the fact that two of
the potential witnesses were present in the Tribunal and chose not to give
evidence.

The judge considered that the medical report was based on the personal
history and background evidence given by the appellant herself but as
referenced above gave some weight to the report.  The point was made by Ms
Ali that the doctor gave independent observations of the appellant's
health, but the judge was aware and found that this could also be the
result of the death of her father at a young age, separation from her
family and/or 'being involved in a protracted immigration process which
culminated in long term detention'.

I note the report itself details the history of presenting complaints, a
description from the appellant of the complaints and a record that the
appellant broke down in tears during the interview and that objectively the
appellant  appeared "low" but absent further detailed observations the
judge was entitled to take the approach that he did to the medical report
and put the weight on it which he did.

Crucially, at paragraph 73 the judge found that the appellant had
conditions which were primarily treated by commonly available medication
and those treatments would be available in Pakistan, albeit not without
problems but the judge stated:

"I accept that if she is returned to Pakistan without treatment that her
conditions will deteriorate.  But she would not be in danger of imminent
death.  I find that she will have access to appropriate treatment and to
social support from her family.  I do not accept that she is estranged from
some or all of her family."

In effect, the judge considered that she would not be returning as a lone
independent woman.  He rejected the fact that her mother had disowned her
as drafted by the "disown declaration" dated 20th November 2018.  The
information in relation to the appellant's brother being a drug addict
stemmed from the appellant herself and the judge specifically found her not
to be credible.

The grounds make reference to the judge accepting that there were "certain
limitations to the effectiveness of police protection for women involved in
honour-related violence" but, for sound reasons, the judge did not accept
the credibility of the appellant, did not accept Mr Z existed and did not
accept that her mother was estranged.  The judge clearly found that the
appellant had access to her family in Pakistan and noted that she had
returned and lived in Pakistan in 2011 and remained there for seven months,
living "with or in close proximity to her family home", at paragraph 58.
Indeed, it was for this reason that the judge did not accept her asylum
claim.  The judge was also cognisant of the fact that Mr Z did not actually
harm her at that point and had previously in the determination recorded
that the appellant had remained in Pakistan for 'the best part of three
years' after she was married and then returned to Pakistan.

In terms of returning as a lone woman, it was the appellant's own claim
that her brother was a drug addict and I repeat that the judge disbelieved
the appellant's evidence.  The medical report, at paragraph 16.9 stated
that the appellant would have her symptoms aggravated significantly "on her
return to Pakistan where she had no family or social support" but the judge
rejected that account.

The grounds maintain that the appellant's in-laws would not be available to
her should she return to Pakistan but once again, the judge had found that
her own family were available to assist her with her mental health
condition and to support her generally.

In relation to ground 2, I do not accept that there was a lack of anxious
scrutiny.  The findings of the judge clearly took the case at its highest
and this was a college-educated woman, albeit with no employment history,
with a background of two previous failed Article 8 claims based a
protection claim on entirely new grounds.  The appellant would not have
need of police protection because not least the judge did not accept that
she was at risk from her former husband or family or tribe on her return
and would not be a lone female.

As she had access to her family, as found by the judge, that would not
place her in the category of an independent socio-economic female
regardless of whether she had led an independent life or not and indeed, it
was noted that she was college-educated.  The psychiatrist also approached
the report on the basis of not only her evidence but on the basis that she
legitimately feared "further persecution" and she has "no family or social
support".  Neither of those were accepted by the judge.  For sound reasons
the judge found the circumstances of the appellant were not as presented
and as such the Country of Origin Information Report dated February 2020 on
Pakistan does not assist.  The appellant had lived in Pakistan for a number
of years following the death of her father.

 1. The Upper Tribunal is cautioned to exercise restraint when  considering
    appeals  against  First-tier  Tribunal  decisions,  UT  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    Secretary of State [2019] EWCA Civ 1095.   McCombe LJ in  Lowe  v  SSHD
    [2021] EWCA Civ 62 at paragraph 29 cited paragraphs 114 and 115 of Fage
    UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5  as follows:

         'At [114] - [115], Lewison LJ explained the caution to be exercised
         by appellate courts in interfering  with  evaluative  decisions  of
         first instance judges'

    Lewison LJ in particular reasoned

         'In making his decisions the trial judge will have  regard  to  the
         whole of the sea of evidence presented to him, whereas an appellate
         court will only be island hopping'.

    And
         'The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any event, be recreated
         by reference to documents (including transcripts of evidence)'.




The judge had the benefit of taking oral evidence from the appellant in
question, considered the medical evidence as a whole and arrived at
findings which were undoubtedly open to him.

The grounds of challenge are not made out and I find no error of law and
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.



Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed, and the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 2nd August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

