
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01065/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                   Mr T S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,
                    instructed by the GLD


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Courtney sent on 25 October 2019.  Permission to appeal was granted by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey on 30 December 2019.



Anonymity

This direction is made below because this is a protection matter and the
appellant has been diagnosed with PTSD.

Background

The appellant who is a national of Afghanistan, arrived in the UK illegally
in 2010 aged 20. He applied for asylum on 4 February 2010. His asylum claim
was refused on 6 March 2010 and he did not appeal. He made further
submissions on 24 October 2018.

The basis of his claim is that his father was a member of the Taliban and
was killed by the authorities.  The appellant fears being recruited by the
Taliban.  Alternatively, he fears serious harm from the authorities as a
result his family association with the Taliban. Further, he is also
eligible for Humanitarian Protection.  There is a real risk to him of
serious harm on return in accordance with Article 15(c) Directive
2004/83/EC.  The appellant also is at risk of treatment contrary to Article
3 ECHR because it is not feasible for him to return to his home district of
Kapisa, which is under the control of the Taliban and it is not possible to
relocate in Kabul because he has serious mental health conditions and would
not have access to medical treatment. This would result in a deterioration
of his mental health which would reach the threshold of severity to engage
Article 3 ECHR.

By way of a letter dated 28 December 2018 the Secretary of State refused
the asylum claim. The respondent accepted the appellant's claimed
nationality and that he is from Tagab in Kapisa in Afghanistan. It was also
accepted that the appellant has PTSD and depression. The respondent did not
accept that the appellant's father had been killed or his claim that he
would be at risk from either the Taliban or the Afghan government. His
credibility was said to have been undermined by his failure to claim asylum
in the other European countries that he travelled to en route to the UK.
The respondent rejected the documentary evidence adduced by the appellant
in support of his claim. It was not accepted that the appellant would be at
risk from the authorities because it is not accepted that his father was
connected with the Taliban. The Secretary of State asserts that the
appellant can return safely to his home area because there is a safe route
of return.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant was identified as a vulnerable witness and did not give oral
evidence. The Judge acknowledged that the appellant had been diagnosed with
PTSD and depression but found him to be lacking in credibility due to
discrepancies in his account of the timings of various events and due to
the lack of reliability of the supporting evidence. The Judge concluded
that the appellant had family in Afghanistan, that medical treatment would
be available to him and that he does not have a well-founded fear of
persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return to his home area of Tagab
in Kapisa province. Having found that the appellant could return safely to
Tagab the Judge did not give consideration to internal relocation to Kabul.
Nor did the Judge consider Article 15 (c) of the Qualification Directive
because it was recorded that Mr Khan for the appellant did not pursue this
claim.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Grounds of Challenge

The appellant submits that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
flawed in the following material respects:

Ground 1: failure to have regard to relevant evidence.

It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant had been diagnosed
with major depression and PTSD.  Evidence of the appellant's poor mental
health including difficulties with memory and cognition were adduced in
support of the appeal.  The appellant's mental ill health was addressed by
both parties in their written and oral submissions and was a live issue.
It is said that the Judge failed to give weight to the diagnosis of the
appellant's mental health when considering the issue of the appellant's
credibility in the round prior to a decision being made.  Further, FtT
Judge Courtney, although listing the medical evidence, failed to reach any
conclusions on the evidence and gave no reasons for rejecting this
potential corroboration in support of the appellant's account.  By failing
to give reasons for discounting the relevant evidence Judge Courtney's
approach was erroneous when considering the appellant's credibility.

Ground 2: availability of medical treatment.

It was accepted by both parties that the appellant has been diagnosed with
PTSD and a Major Depressive Disorder.  Dr Shams gave a clear opinion that
the appellant's mental health condition would deteriorate if he were
returned to Afghanistan and that there was a high risk of suicidal
ideation.  It is submitted that the Judge's finding that the appellant
could access medical treatment was irrational in light of the evidence
before the Tribunal in the form of the EASO Report, which confirmed that
facilities for assisting those with PTSD was extremely limited.  In AS
(Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 118, the Tribunal were at
pains to point out that their guidance on the safety of return was directed
to a single adult males in good health.  It is asserted that in the absence
of any proper consideration of the medical evidence presented, the decision
that medical treatment would be available to the appellant on return is
flawed.

Ground 3: failure to consider the Humanitarian Protection claim.

The appellant had made a separate and stand alone ground of appeal against
the refusal to grant him Humanitarian Protection.  It was submitted in the
skeleton argument that, given the very high levels of violence in
Afghanistan both in Kabul and generally in Afghanistan, the appellant faced
a real risk of serious harm on return as defined by Article 15(c) Directive
2004/83/EC.  The Judge makes a note that this claim was not pursued but
then proceeds to make a decision that this claim is not made out.

The Rule 24 Response

No rule 24 response was provided.

Discussion and Decision

In respect of Ground 1, Ms Akinbolu submitted that at [41] the Judge
accepts that the appellant is a vulnerable adult:

"41. The Secretary of State accepted Dr Shams' assessment in her recent
report of 27 April 2018 that the Appellant was suffering from PTSD with
secondary symptoms of a Major Depressive Disorder. A fundamental aspect of
the expert's expertise is the evaluation of patient's accounts of their
symptoms. As emphasised by Sedley LJ in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009]
EWCA Civ 362 'it is only of the tribunal has good and objective reasons for
discounting that evaluation that it can be modified or -even more radically
-disregarded' [12]. No such reasons arise in this case and I find
accordingly that the Appellant has the significant mental health problems
indicated.  He is a 'vulnerable adult' in terms of the Joint Presidential
Guidance Note No 2 of 2010."

At [42] the Judge states:

"42. I accept that something traumatic occurred to trigger Mr S's
condition."

At [43] the Judge cites HE (DRC, credibility and psychiatric reports)
[2004] UKIAT 00321.  The Judge noted that the major problem with the
contention that a psychiatric report can be used to support an applicant's
claim to have told the truth about the history is that there are usually
other obvious potential causes for signs of anxiety, stress and depression.


The Judge states:

             "Where the psychiatric report merely recounts a history which
             the judge is minded to reject and contains nothing which does
             not depend upon the applicant's truthfulness the part which a
             psychiatric report can play is negligible."

Ms Akinbolu's submission was that this sentence is problematic in light of
what is said in JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145
(IAC) and SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.

She reminded me that no oral evidence had been called. She asserted that
the Judge appears to have cited the medical evidence rather than analysing
it or giving reasons for rejecting it.  Her submission is that the Judge's
reasoning is inadequate.

Ms Akinbolu submitted that Dr Shams prognosis from her observations and
examination of the appellant was that the appellant was suffering from
significant psychological distress as an impact of traumatic events. This
was not the only medical evidence. Additionally, the appellant produced a
letter from a psychotherapist Ms Ana Sokoli who confirmed that the
appellant had had ongoing counselling with her over a period of sixteen
weeks from 26 September 2018. Attached was a summary of the appellant's
treatment with potentially corroborative evidence of the cause of the
appellant's PTSD, which was as a result of trauma in Afghanistan.  At [45]
the Judge appears to summarise the evidence rather than reach any
conclusions on it.  The approach of the Judge is inadequate.  Ms Akinbolu
asserted that there were no real additional reasons for not believing the
appellant's story.

Ms Everett submitted that the issue of the appellant's analysis is
embroiled within the narrative.  The Judge accepted this diagnosis but did
not accept the narrative as expounded by the appellant.  Her submission was
that the Judge has provided cogent reasons for finding that the appellant
was lacking in credibility and had looked at all of the evidence in the
round including the medical evidence when making his assessment.  The Judge
assessed other evidence and it would be strange if the Judge accepted that
there was a large degree of inconsistency in the appellant's account and
then went on to find that those inconsistencies were undermined by the
medical evidence.

I have considered the Judge's approach to the medical evidence in line with
JL, where it is said:

"For their part, judges should be aware that, whilst the overall assessment
of credibility is for them, medical reports may well involve assessments of
the compatibility of the appellant's account with physical marks or
symptoms, or mental condition: (SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302).  If the
position were otherwise the central tenets of the Istanbul Protocol would
be misconceived whenever there was a dispute about claimed causation of
scars and judges could not apply its guidance, contrary to what they are
enjoined to do by SA (Somalia).  Even where medical experts heavily rely on
the account given by the person concerned, that does not mean their reports
lack or lose their status as independent evidence, although it may reduce
very considerably the weight that can be attached to them."

In light of this headnote at (4), I agree with Ms Akinbolu that the Judge's
statement at [43] where he states that 'where a psychiatric report merely
recounts a history which the Judge is minded to reject and contains nothing
which does not depend upon the applicant's truthfulness, the part which a
psychiatric report can play is negligible' is in direct contradiction to
the guidance in JL.  It is for the Judge to assess, having considered all
of the evidence in the round, why he gave little weight to the fact that
the appellant's depression and PTSD did not constitute corroborative
evidence of the claimed events.

This is particularly so in the light of the Judge's approach to the
remaining medical evidence before him in the form of the Summary completed
by Ana Sokoli, a psychotherapist at Talking Therapies Southwark, which was
dated 25 March 2019.

At [45] it is said:

"In a letter dated 25 March 2019 Ana Sokoli, a psychotherapist at Talking
Therapies Southwark, stated that [the appellant] started counselling on 26
September 2018 and had attended sixteen sessions of therapy.  In her
assessment form Ms Sokoli said that the appellant told her that the army
had entered his house and shot his father in the forehead.  He himself was
'hit on the head, stomach and lower abdomen with hard objects and was left
unconscious'."

Ms Sokoli states the appellant reports constant headaches, scary dreams and
vivid nightmares and that he was clearly distressed when he recounted the
trauma he had experienced. I am in agreement with Ms Akinbolu that there is
no analysis of this medical evidence. The Judge has not indicated whether
he attaches any weight to it particularly when it is consistent with the
appellant's account from the outset that his father was murdered by the
authorities in his family home and supports the same account which was
given to Dr Shams.   I take into account that Ms Sokoli is a qualified
psychotherapist and saw the appellant over a period of sixteen sessions
from which I infer that she knew the appellant well and was in a position
to give an opinion on the appellant's state of mind.

The appellant has consistently stated that his father was murdered in front
of him when he was a minor.  At the outset of his claim in 2010 when he
attended his screening interview, he stated that his father was deceased.
In his initial statement he said that his father was killed in a night raid
in his house.  The assessment document at page 2 of his documentary bundle
stated:

"Patient reported ongoing problems as constant headache, 'got scary dreams,
it feels so frighten', told me when he was living in Afghanistan police,
army entered his house in a middle of the night shoot his father in
forehead, after that the whole family was bitten up [sic], he said was hit
on his head, stomach and lower abdomen with hard objects and was left
unconscious."

I am satisfied that the Judge failed to give any adequate reasons for
either accepting or rejecting this evidence and analysing how it fitted
into the overall picture of the medical evidence particularly when there
was further medical evidence from Dr Das which was potentially
corroborative. This evidence was set out at [44];

 "The appellant had an appointment at the Department of Neurology, King's
College Hospital, on 1 February 2018.  In a letter dated 8 February 2018 Dr
Ranjan Das FRCP stated that [the appellant] had had a history of headaches
for the previous ten years which 'started after he had a head trauma in
Afghanistan where he was hit with the butt of a gun.  He was unconscious
but he was not taken to hospital'.  Dr Das noted an old scar on the top of
his head and concluded that [the appellant] had posttraumatic headache
which has some migrainous features [AB page 21].  No expert opinion has
been obtained as to the likely cause of [the appellant's] scar.  Dr Das
stated that CT scans had shown a normal intracranial appearance.  He
prescribed amitriptyline and said that the main treatment for [the
appellant] should be psychotherapy."

I am satisfied that the Judge has made inadequate findings in relation to
whether he accepts the evidence of Ms Sokoli and Mr Das and there is a lack
of explanation as to  why these three medical reports which were completed
by three different medical professionals and all of which seemingly
corroborate the appellant's consistent account of his father being killed
and himself being attacked do not support his credibility.

Ms Everett is correct in stating that the Judge has given alternative
reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility including the fact that
he was unable to state exactly when his father had been killed and there
were discrepancies in relation to the timing of his journey to the United
Kingdom.  The Judge also considered it implausible that the appellant had
approached British policemen on a number of occasions, but they had told
him to go and see immigration officials.  There were also discrepancies
between the appellant's account of how involved his father was in the
Taliban.  These were factors that it was properly open to the Judge to take
into account.

Nevertheless, at [30[ the Judge states:

"I have taken account of the guidance given by the court in AM
(Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 at paragraph 21.  I have asked
myself whether any of the inconsistencies in the appellant's account (as
given in his screening and asylum interviews) that were identified by the
respondent could be explained by him being a vulnerable person."

I find that despite making this statement there is no analysis of whether
the appellant's accepted PTSD and major depression could have contributed
to any of the discrepancies on which the Judge relied to reject the
appellant's credibility.

Having viewed the Judge's reasoning as a whole, I am satisfied that the
Judge has failed to give adequate consideration to the medical evidence,
particularly the evidence of Ana Sokoli, the psychotherapist, and has
failed to give any or adequate reasons for not giving weight to that
evidence and the consistency of it with the appellant's account of having
witnessed his father being murdered and further that the Judge has failed
to ask himself whether any of the inconsistencies in the appellant's
account (many of which relate to the timing of events) could be explained
by the appellant being a vulnerable person or due to his age when the
events took place.

I find that this approach renders unsafe the Judge's assessment of
credibility. The approach of the Judge in this appeal was to put forward
the inconsistencies in the evidence to find that the appellant's account
was not credible and then form the view that because his account was not
credible the medical evidence could be rejected because it was based on a
fabricated account.  I accept that the Judge did not give any weight to the
documentary evidence put forward in respect of the claim and that the
Judge's reasoning cannot be undermined in this respect of this evidence,
but nevertheless I find that the approach to the medical evidence was
flawed.

Grounds 2 and 3

Having found that the approach to the appellant's credibility was flawed it
is unnecessary to consider the remainder of the grounds.

    Materiality

I find that the error above was material because had the judge analysed the
medical evidence properly and considered whether it constituted evidence of
trauma in the way described by the appellant along with the different
statements given to the various medical professionals in the round with the
remainder of the evidence, asking himself the question of whether any of
the inconsistencies in the account could have been explained by the
appellant being vulnerable and suffering from mental health issues, the
Judge may well have come to a different conclusion about the events which
took place in Afghanistan.

Without a proper assessment of the facts it was not possible for the Judge
to have made sustainable findings about whether the appellant is at risk in
his home area either at the hands of the Taliban or by the authorities as
somebody who is perceived to be linked to the Taliban. There was evidence
before the Tribunal from Dr Giustozzi that in the current political climate
in Afghanistan the appellant would be at risk from the authorities if he
were perceived to be a family member of a known Taliban supporter.

I also note that Judge Courtney, having found that the appellant was not
credible, found that he could return safely to his home area. Both parties
at the appeal including Ms Everett accepted that Kapisa province is
currently under Taleban control, that it is accepted to be somewhere where
there is an indiscriminate level of harm and that the appellant would not
be expected to return there. There was no consideration in the decision
about the reasonableness or otherwise of the appellant relocating to Kabul.


I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney in its
entirety on this basis that there has been a material error of law.

Disposal

Both parties agreed that it would be appropriate to remit this appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo. While mindful of statement 7
of the Senior President's Practice Statements of 10 February 2010, it is
the case that the appellant has yet to have an adequate consideration of
his asylum appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair to
deprive him of such consideration. In addition, Ms Akinbolu submitted that
there was a need for updated medical information as to the appellant's
mental state.  There is also the matter of the outstanding country guidance
decision in AS which is likely to delay the remaking of this case in the
Upper Tribunal.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any Judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Courtney.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            R J Owens                      Date 25 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

