
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01229/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th September 2020               |On 3rd November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     T B
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant claims to be an Eritrean national born in October 2001.
He arrived in the UK on 23 August 2018 and claimed asylum. He appeals
against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G D Davison, promulgated
on 17 March 2020, dismissing his protection claim on asylum, humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the Appellant was
an Eritrean national. The judge made the following relevant findings:

             "7.  It was accepted by both parties that the sole issue for
             determination was the Appellant's nationality. The refusal
             letter accepted if he were Eritrean, he would have a problem
             on return as a result of military service. The Appellant had
             also claimed his Pentecostal faith would place him at risk but
             in either event the primary issue is whether, to the lower
             standard, he is Eritrean as claimed."


             "21. As noted above the sole issue for determination is
             whether the Appellant is Eritrean. The Appellant does not
             dispute that he has very limited knowledge of his home area of
             Assab. He knew there was a mosque and a big pitch he used to
             play on.  He thought there were nine regions in Eritrea not
             six."


    At [22] to [28] the judge gave reasons for finding that the Appellant's
    claim to be Eritrean was not credible and for rejecting the evidence of
    his witnesses.

"29. There is a low burden in asylum, I remind myself of the age of the
Appellant when he is said to have left Eritrea, the lack of education he
claims and the issues he and his aunt are said to have faced in Sudan. But
even making due allowances for all of these issues, I conclude to the lower
standard that the Appellant has not discharged the burden to establish that
he is a national of Eritrea as claimed."


"30. The parties agreed that if this were my finding the appeal would stand
to be dismissed on all grounds."


3.   Permission to appeal was sought on the following four grounds:

             (i)  The judge failed to apply the standards and guidance
             applicable to the evidence of minors given the Appellant
             entered the UK as a minor and had turned 18 years old some
             three months prior to the hearing;


             (ii) the judge failed to take account of a relevant
             consideration, namely the inherent limitations on the memory
             of a child under the age of six;


             (iii)    the judge's limitation of his consideration of
             credibility to evidence specific to the Appellant's
             nationality failed to take  into account relevant matters;
             and/or


             (iv) the judge failed to make findings on material matters,
             namely the risk to the Appellant as a Pentecostal Christian on
             return to Eritrea and very significant obstacles to
             reintegration.


4.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on 20 April
2020 on the following grounds:

"The judge directs himself at paragraph 4 as to the correct burden and
standard of proof and referred at paragraph 29 to the Appellant's age when
he claimed to have left Eritrea and to his lack of education. It is however
arguable that the judge failed to take certain evidence, identified in the
grounds, into account when assessing credibility.  In these circumstances,
all grounds may be argued."




Submissions

5.   Ms Moffatt submitted that grounds (i) to (iii) concerned the
Appellant's nationality but ground (iv) related to the judge's failure to
make findings on a completely different issue, namely whether the Appellant
would be at risk on return to Eritrea as a result of his Pentecostal faith.


6.   Ms Moffatt stated she would address ground (iv) at the outset and then
deal with the other three grounds. It was apparent from the refusal
decision that the Appellant would be removed to Eritrea notwithstanding the
Respondent did not accept that he had established Eritrean nationality.

7.   Ms Moffatt submitted that Pentecostal Christianity is illegal in
Eritrea and therefore, even if the Appellant is not an Eritrean national,
he would still be at risk on return to Eritrea on account of being a
Pentecostal Christian. The judge failed to make findings on whether the
Appellant was a Pentecostal Christian and there was evidence in the CPIN of
February 2018 (paragraphs 2.2.7, 2.2.8, 6.1 and 6.3) which showed that the
Appellant would be at risk on return. Members of the Pentecostal faith were
considered to be an unregistered religious group and would be subject to
persecution.  The Appellant would be subject to this risk irrespective of
his nationality. The judge had erred at [7] of the decision in limiting his
findings to nationality and failing to deal with risk on return. There were
no findings in the decision in relation to the Appellant's faith and, had
the judge accepted his credibility on that point, the Appellant would not
act discreetly on return and therefore he would be at risk of ill-
treatment.

8.   In relation to grounds (i) to (iii) Ms Moffatt submitted the judge had
failed to take into account material matters in his assessment of
credibility. The basis of the adverse credibility finding was that the
Appellant's knowledge of Eritrea was vague in the extreme, the expert
evidence was inconclusive and the witness evidence was irrelevant. The
judge found that the inconsistencies referred to at [24] and [25] were not
particularly weighty.

9.   The judge's assessment of credibility was flawed because the judge
failed to consider the relevance of the Appellant's age. At [11], the judge
mistakenly recorded the Appellant was 18 years old when he arrived in the
UK when, in fact, he was 16 years old. This was a material mistake of fact
which was apparent from counsel's verbatim note of the Record of
Proceedings attached to grounds.

10.  I noted the judge's Record of Proceedings was consistent with
counsel's record. Ms Moffatt submitted, as a result of this material
mistake, the judge failed to take into account that the Appellant was a
minor when he entered the UK. The judge may well have taken into account
the Appellant's age on leaving Eritrea but this was not sufficient to show
that he applied the correct guidance in assessing the evidence of an
unaccompanied minor. Further, the judge had asked the Appellant at the
hearing how close the city of Assab was to the sea.  Given that the
Appellant had left Eritrea at the age of six and had only recently turned
18 years old, the judge's question was confusing when read in the context
of the cross-examination.

11.  In relation to ground (iii), Ms Moffatt submitted the judge failed to
take into account evidence in the Respondent's bundle, in particular the
Social Services Pathway, which was directly relevant to the Appellant's
nationality and to the consistency of his claim. There was also evidence of
his claim to be a Pentecostal Christian. The judge's failure to refer to
this evidence was material and capable of affecting the outcome of the
appeal.

12.  There was evidence in the Appellant's bundle which showed that his
evidence was consistent and the judge failed to take this into account.
There were witness statements from people who had known the Appellant for
two years and it was relevant to the context of the Appellant's claim. When
read as a whole this evidence supported the consistency of the Appellant's
claim and should be weighed in the balance. The judge had failed to do so.

13.  There was also a factual error in the judge's assessment of the second
witness at [28].  It was clear from the skeleton argument before the First-
tier Tribunal that the Ethiopian Christian Fellowship Church in the UK was
made up of Ethiopians and Eritreans.

14.  Mr Whitwell addressed ground (iv) and submitted that the sole issue
for determination in the appeal was the Appellant's nationality and this
was apparent at [7]. He accepted that there were no findings on the
Appellant's religion but it was clear from [19], where the judge summarised
the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant, that this point was not
argued before the First-tier Tribunal. It was not apparent from the
skeleton argument that the Appellant's religion was relevant to assessing
the Appellant's Article 8 claim and whether there were significant
obstacles to reintegration.  There was nothing on the face of the decision
to show the point, that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Eritrea
because he was a Pentecostal Christian, was argued before the judge.

15.  In relation to the remaining grounds, Mr Whitwell submitted that there
was nothing in the decision to show that the judge erroneously took into
account the Appellant's age and applied it to his findings. The Appellant's
age was not into dispute. The judge was quite clear of the Appellant's age
having given his date of birth in [1]. The judge took into account the
Appellant's age at [22] stating: "This is not, in my finding, explained
away due to age and lack of education."

16.  Mr Whitwell submitted the discrepancies in the Appellant's account
could not be explained away due to age or lack of education. The
Appellant's age on arrival in the UK was irrelevant to the judge's
credibility findings made at [22] to [27]. The judge's question about how
far Assab was from the sea was not an unreasonable one. Even a six year old
child would know if the town in which he lived was near the sea, in
particular, since he was able to state that he lived near a mosque and a
playground.

17.  The Social Services evidence did not detract from the judge's
credibility findings and the witnesses' evidence was not indicative of
someone who was Eritrean. The judge's inference in relation to the
Ethiopian Church was a reasonable one and the judge's decision to dismiss
the Appellant's protection claim was sustainable.

18.  In response, Ms Moffatt submitted that the Appellant did say the town
of Assab was near the Red Sea. He was unable to say how near, which would
depend on where the Appellant lived in the town. The points relied on by
the judge should not form the basis of an adverse credibility finding,
which was all about the Appellant's vague recollection of Eritrea. The way
the judge approached his finding was flawed and he had failed to apply the
principles relevant to the evidence of minors.

19.  There was some discussion as to the disposal of this appeal.  Mr
Whitwell was of the view that the matters relied on in this appeal were not
raised before the First-tier Tribunal. Ms Moffatt was in a difficult
position because she represented the Appellant before the First-tier
Tribunal. Consideration was given to whether it was necessary to adjourn
the hearing to enable Ms Moffatt to make a witness statement and for
alternative counsel to be instructed. However, it was apparent from the
judge's Record of Proceedings and [19] of the decision, that Ms Moffatt
relied on her skeleton argument in which she dealt with risk on return as a
Pentecostal Christian and Article 8. The judge did not make findings on
these two issues.

20.  I found that the judge erred in law in failing to make findings on
Article 8. The Appellant's religion would be relevant to whether there were
very significant obstacles to reintegration. Notwithstanding the judge's
conclusion at [30], it did not follow that the Appellant's failure to prove
nationality would necessarily lead to a finding that there were no very
significant obstacles to reintegration. Even if the point was not properly
argued before the judge, it was apparent from the grounds of appeal and the
skeleton argument that risk on return as a Pentecostal Christian and
Article 8 were relied on. It was clear from the refusal letter that removal
to Eritrea was a point that needed to be considered. Accordingly, I
concluded that there was a material error of law and a further hearing
would be necessary to decide those issues.

21.  There then remained the issue of whether the protection claim should
be relitigated on the basis that the judge's credibility findings were
flawed. If that were the case, then it was agreed by the parties that the
appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete
rehearing on all issues.  If I found the judge had not erred in law in his
assessment of credibility at [21] to [28], the matter could remain with the
Upper Tribunal.

22.  It was agreed that, if the appeal remained in the Upper Tribunal, the
issues to be decided would be whether the Appellant would be at risk of
Article 3 treatment because he was a Pentecostal Christian and whether
there were very significant obstacles to reintegration. A finding that the
Appellant would be at risk of Article 3 treatment would mean that the
Appellant's appeal would also succeed on Article 8 grounds because there
would be very significant obstacles to reintegration. However, it did not
follow that very significant obstacles to integration would breach the
Article 3 threshold.

23.  Ms Moffatt relied on Schedule 2 paragraph 8 Immigration Act 1971 Act
to demonstrate that the country of proposed removal was relevant because
the Appellant could be returned to Eritrea notwithstanding the Respondent
did not accept that he was a national of Eritrea.

Conclusion and Reasons

24.  I find that the judge failed to address the risk on return to Eritrea
as a Pentecostal Christian. It was clear from the refusal letter that the
Respondent would return the Appellant to Eritrea notwithstanding it was not
accepted he was a national of Eritrea. Therefore, it was incumbent on the
judge to make findings on the risk on return to Eritrea as a Pentecostal
Christian, even if he did not accept the Appellant was an Eritrean
national. I am satisfied that the matter was raised in the Appellant's
skeleton argument and that Ms Moffatt relied on the skeleton argument in
her submissions. The fact that she did not make any oral submissions before
the First-tier Tribunal did not mean the judge did not have to address this
issue in his decision because the point was made adequately in writing in
the skeleton argument.

25.  I am also satisfied that the judge erred in law in failing to make any
findings on Article 8. It was apparent from the grounds of appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal that Article 8 was an issue and the judge's failure to
address the Article 8 claim, which was clearly apparent on the face of the
papers, was an error of law.

26.  In relation to credibility, grounds (i) to (iii), I find on reading
the decision as a whole, the judge failed to take into account the
Appellant's age in assessing his claim and failed to apply relevant
guidelines. The Appellant was six years old when he left Eritrea. The
judge's finding at [22] when put into context is not sustainable. The judge
criticised the Appellant for giving incorrect evidence rather than claiming
that he did not know. I am persuaded that the points made by Ms Moffatt in
her submissions demonstrate an error of law in the judge's assessment of
credibility.

27.  Accordingly, I find the judge has made material errors of law and I
set aside the decision promulgated on 17 March 2020 in its entirety. None
of the judge's findings are preserved. The matter is remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo.



Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 19 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award. The appeal remains outstanding.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 19 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
