
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01453/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st May 2021                     |On 9th July 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                            Farhad Abdullah Salih
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 January 1994. He appeals
against the refusal of his protection claim on asylum, humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.  The Appellant's appeal was allowed by
First-tier Tribunal Judge James in a decision promulgated on 9 May 2019.
This decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson for the reasons
given in his decision promulgated on 30 July 2019. The matter came before
me for rehearing. None of the First-tier Judge's findings of fact were
preserved save for the Appellant's nationality and immigration history.

2.   In about June 2017, the Appellant left Iraq and went to Turkey by car
where he remained for a month. He then travelled to Greece by boat where he
was detained and fingerprinted on 27 July 2017. He remained in Greece for
ten to eleven months before travelling to Italy by boat. He remained in
Italy for three to four days, and was fingerprinted on 6 April 2018, before
travelling by car to France. He stayed in France for four months before
travelling to the UK where he claimed asylum on 9 August 2018. It is the
Appellant's claim that he would be persecuted on return to Iraq because his
father worked for Saddam Hussein's regime and there was a family feud
between his family and the Hussain family.

3.   In his witness statement dated 25 January 2019, the Appellant recounts
the harassment he experienced after the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime
until ISIS invaded. The Iraqi forces and the Kurdish Peshmergas fought to
defeat ISIS and made them leave the area. The Appellant stated, "However,
as a result it caused problems between the Iraqi government and the Kurdish
fighters. The Arab forces, especially the Shias were trying their best to
prevent us from carrying on with day-to-day things such as go (sic) to
mosque as we were Sunnis." The Appellant's movements were restricted and he
was unable to continue his studies.

4.   On 28 July 2016, the Appellant's father was attacked and killed
returning from the mosque after morning prayer. He and two other men were
shot by armed men and four others were injured. A month later the Appellant
and his family were evicted from Tuz and went to stay with a friend in
another village. When they returned home, the verbal and physical abuse
continued. The Appellant's brother was beaten and their family home was
raided. In December 2016, his brother was kidnapped and the Appellant went
with his mother to his uncle's who helped him leave the country with the
assistance of an agent.

5.   In his statement dated 5 March 2019, the Appellant made comments on
the Secretary of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter. In summary, he stated
the Hussain family were members of the Hezbollah Party who had connections
with the PMF and they were taking revenge on his family. This was not based
on one thing, but on an accumulation of many issues. These issues included
his ethnicity, his religion (Kurdish Sunni Muslim) and the fact that his
father was associated with Saddam Hussein. It was not just his family they
targeted, but all Kurdish Sunni families in the area were harassed by the
Shia community. The Appellant's father was killed and his brother was
kidnapped. The Appellant was beaten up on many occasions and his house was
burnt down. The family were forced to temporarily leave their home and home
area. The Appellant believed his family were specifically targeted and
terrorised as a result of all of these issues.

6.   The Appellant gave oral evidence, relying on his witness statements as
evidence in chief. In cross-examination, the Appellant stated that there
was a feud between his family and the Hussain family. It related to his
father. It was because they were Sunni Muslims and the Hussain family were
Shia and because the Appellant's father worked with the Saddam Hussein
regime. It had been said that his father reported some member of the
Hussain family to the regime and due to that one of them had disappeared.
Mr Tufan asked the Appellant why he had not mentioned this earlier.  The
Appellant did not understand the question and it was put again. He then
said that he had mentioned this. Mr Tufan noted there was nothing in the
interview at question 27 in relation to this.

7.   Mr Tufan asked what the Appellant's father did. The Appellant said he
did not know at the time because he was young. He stated he did ask his
father when he grew up but his father did not answer. He asked his mother.
She did not go into detail but she said this problem had gone on for ages
since Saddam Hussein was in power. The Appellant did not know where his
brother was. He accepted that his maternal uncle had provided funds for him
to travel to the UK but stated he was not in contact with him now. Mr Tufan
asked the Appellant why his uncle had not contacted him. The Appellant
replied, "Since 16 October I have not contacted him." He was asked if he
was in the UK the last time he contacted his uncle. He said he was in
Greece and he had not contacted his uncle because at that time he was in a
closed camp and the Shia militia attacked Tuz. He stayed in the closed camp
in Greece for eight months. He said he did not have a passport.

8.   Mr Tufan confirmed that there was no evidence that a passport had been
taken by the Greek authorities. It was pointed out that the Appellant's
evidence in his asylum interview was that he did not have a passport.  The
reference in the screening interview was to his CSID, not a passport. The
Appellant was asked about his CSID. He said, "It fell into the sea when I
was on my way. The boat I was on was about to overturn. It was unsettled
and all the belongings in my bag and my personal bag went into the sea."
The Appellant did not go to the Iraqi Embassy to get a replacement because
he did not have any documents with him to confirm his identity.

9.   Mr Tufan as asked if the Appellant had ever tried to contact his
family through the Red Cross and he replied, "I went down to their office
and provided all details. After that there was the pandemic and I contacted
them and they contacted me and finally they said they were not able to
assist me." He was asked if he had any evidence to confirm this. He said:
"If I knew that you would ask this question I would prepare myself and
bring some proof that I contacted them. Whilst in a different town I
provided my address and I had their address with me and the telephone
number."

10.  The Appellant said that his family and uncle's family are both in Tuz,
but he did not have any other family elsewhere in Iraq. He was asked if he
studied until he was 15 years old. He said: "I was in education for six
years so I don't know what was the outcome." He confirmed that he was
educated in both Kurdish and Arabic. He was asked if there was any reason
why he could not live in Baghdad and he said: "Yes, I am a Sunni Kurd and
the family we had a dispute with are Shia. My dad used to work with the
Ba'ath Party." He was asked why he cannot live in the IKR.  He replied: "My
father was on a list of wanted people in the Kurdish region because he was
a member of the Ba'ath Party and we live in a disputed area. We try to keep
separate and as we are."
11.  In response to questions from me, the Appellant said that ISIS had
weak control in his home area and it has been overtaken by Shia Muslims.
The village he lived in was attacked on 15 or 16 October 2017. As far as he
was aware his mother and uncle were living there. He did not know what had
happened to them because he was in the closed camp in Greece. He did not
have contact with them after that date. He knew that the village had been
attacked because some 'detainees' had mobile phones and they could access
the internet. He knew through the news. I asked if he had a CSID to travel
out of Iraq. He said, "Actually, through all my journey it was through
smuggling illegally." He did not use his CSID. I asked why he brought it
with him. He said, "because it was already in my pocket when I fled and my
mobile phone was not with me."

12.  In re-examination, Ms Reid asked why he had failed to mention that a
member of the Hussain family had disappeared in his asylum interview.
Question 115 and the answer was read out him and he was asked, "how have
you come to know the reason now when you did not know it in the asylum
interview?" The Appellant replied, "Even in the asylum interview I knew the
reason and I did not reveal the truth at that time because I was
embarrassed about what my father did. I thought if I revealed that
information I would get into trouble in this country and I would be accused
as part of that action. After that I realised that this is a different
country and there are human rights here."

13.  The Appellant was then asked about whether he had made attempts to
contact his family other than approaching the Red Cross.  He said he had
contacted his old boss, but he did not help him. The Appellant stated his
old boss was unable to help and blocked his number. This was about a year
ago. He was asked if there was any reason why he waited so long to contact
his former employer, given he had had no contact with his family since
2017.  He said: "At that time I was in prison and in control of the
smuggler and there was nothing like the Red Cross to trace my family in
Greece." He was asked why he did not contact his former employer soon after
he entered the UK on 9 August 2018.  He said, "Because at that time he
blocked my number, no, it was before that, because of my journey to this
country, it was quite tough, my mental condition was not stable and as a
result I was depressed and anxious and during sometime I lost my memory as
well.  At time I arrive at this country not know this country was
systematic and everything is managed and run by law. After that people
advise me about such organisations as the Red Cross." He was asked if he
used the Red Cross to contact his former employer and he replied:
"Actually, I provide my maternal uncle details to the Red Cross and family
details but not to my former employer. Even myself I did not trust my boss
that much. I was worried he might pass my details to that family."

14.  Mr Tufan requested permission to cross-examine the Appellant on the
evidence which had been revealed during re-examination. Ms Reid did not
oppose his application, given that the matters raised had not been
mentioned in the documentation and were not something that Mr Tufan could
have been aware of. Mr Tufan asked the Appellant if he had contacted his
former employer by phone and whether he could remember the phone number. He
said no, he had obtained the phone number through Facebook.  He contacted
his former employer by voice message, effectively the same as a telephone,
he talked to him verbally over the phone and not in writing because he was
concerned that if his views were in writing his former employer would pass
that to the same family. After contacting his former boss he deleted his
Facebook account immediately as he was concerned his boss might pass on
details or the Hussain family might pay his boss for information or they
might be able to find his whereabouts. He was asked why he had not
contacted his uncle by telephone or Facebook and he replied he did not know
his whereabouts and when he was living in Iraq with his uncle he did not
have a smartphone. There was no further re-examination.


Respondent's Submissions

15.  Mr Tufan submitted there were three issues; credibility, the CSID and
the situation in Iraq. In relation to credibility he submitted the
Appellant's account was not credible. The Appellant had embellished his
account today and disclosed matters not previously disclosed in interview
or in his statements. The Appellant stated that it was suspected his father
reported one of the Hussain family members who then disappeared and his
father was deemed accountable. Mr Tufan submitted that it was incredible
that this important issue was not mentioned before and I should attach no
weight to the Appellant's explanation that he was too embarrassed to
mention it in interview.

16.  Mr Tufan submitted that another perplexing feature of the Appellant's
account was that he did not know what his father did when he was working
for the government.  His answers were unsatisfactory and the only plausible
explanation was that his father did not work for the government. The
Appellant also raised another new issue in oral evidence, stating that his
father was on a wanted list. This was inconsistent with what he said in
interview, at question 22, when he stated his father helped the Peshmerga
forces, who were Kurdish forces loyal to the PKK. It was perplexing he
would be on a wanted list if this was the case. The Appellant was not
telling the truth and was not credible.

17.  In relation to documentation, the Appellant did have an identity
document, a CSID, and his explanation for losing it on a boat was not
plausible.  Since the Appellant was not credible on any other issues it was
not credible that he was unable to remember the details of his CSID. In any
event, he could get details from family members although he stated he had
no contact with them. Little weight should be attached to this evidence,
given that assessing his credibility in the round, the Appellant was not
credible.

18.  Mr Tufan submitted the Appellant initially stated he had contacted his
former employer by Facebook, but then changed his account to say he had
contacted him by telephone. The Appellant's account progressively changed
and was not credible. The Appellant would be able to contact his family and
get their details to obtain a CSID.  He was now saying he had contacted the
Red Cross and they did not help. There was no evidence apart from his word,
but he was totally lacking in credibility.

19.  The Appellant had not tried to obtain a new CSID from the Iraqi
Embassy and there was nothing to suggest that he had provided his details
and they would not help him.  The Appellant can obtain a CSID and can
return safely to his own home area. Mr Tufan confirmed that forced returns
were to Baghdad, but voluntary returns did occur to the IKR.  The Appellant
would be safe in his home area as there were only isolated areas where
Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive was engaged. The Appellant was
educated in Arabic and having obtained a CSID he could relocate to Baghdad.
His voluntary return package would be enough for him to start up. Looking
at the headnote of SMO (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019]
UKUT 400 (IAC), at paragraph 21 onwards, the Appellant could relocate
within the IKR. He would not be refused entry and, in any event, the
conditions in which he would have to live were not sufficient to reach the
Article 3 threshold.


Appellant's Submissions

20.  Ms Reid relied on her skeleton argument, dated 21 May 2021, and the
Appellant's witness statement dated 5 March 2019. It was perfectly
plausible the Appellant had lost his CSID at sea and it was perfectly
plausible that his father chose not to tell him about his job with the
government. It was clear that his father was someone who would attract
interest and the Appellant's answer to question 22 of the asylum interview
did not undermine his contention that his father was a person of interest.
The Appellant had given a reasonable explanation for failing to mention
that his father had informed on a member of the Hussain family. The
Appellant's account was consistent. He had just given more detail. His
account was credible throughout. The Appellant's failure to contact his
former employer until last year did not undermine his credibility on the
basis of the timing of that contact.

21.  In relation to documentation, Ms Reid submitted that if the
Appellant's credibility was accepted, then he had no contact with his
family. The Appellant would need his family to find the page number and
book number in order to be able to obtain a CSID. The difficulty was that
the patrilineal line ended with his father. The move to an ID card and the
use of a proxy would make it more difficult. Even if the Appellant was able
to contact his family, there would still be difficulties. Ms Reid relied on
the COIR June 2020 at paragraph 8.1, in which the position was that the
Appellant would have to obtain security clearance, sponsorship from a local
resident and numerous other documents including a letter from the Mukhtar
from where he previously resided in order to be able to live in Baghdad.
Given the volume of documents he had to obtain, Baghdad was not an option.
The Appellant would not be able to relocate to the IKR from Baghdad because
he could not travel there safely.


22.  Ms Reid accepted that, although the Appellant's home region was a
disputed region, he would not be at risk of Article 15(c)/indiscriminate
violence. She accepted the Appellant's claim was dependant on his
credibility. If I found he was not credible, his claim was likely to fail
unless I concluded that he had lost contact with his family. She had
nothing further to say in relation to the Respondent's submissions dated
February 2019. Ms Reid was given the opportunity to consult with the
Appellant at the end of the hearing and she had nothing further to add.


Conclusions and Reasons

23.  The burden is on the Appellant to show that there is a reasonable
    degree of likelihood that he has a well-founded fear of persecution or
    real risk of serious harm on return to Iraq. It is accepted that if the
    Appellant is found not credible his protection and human rights claims
    will fail.

24.  I do not find the Appellant to be a credible witness because he has
    given inconsistent accounts in his interview, in his witness statements
    and in his oral evidence. He has embellished his evidence and his
    failure to mention important details in his witness statements further
    undermines the credibility of his claim.

25.  I find the following inconsistencies are significant and they
    undermine the Appellant's credibility. In his asylum interview on 28
    January 2018, the Appellant stated his father was killed on 8 August
    2016. In his witness statement dated 25 January 2019, he stated his
    father was killed on 28 July 2016. In his asylum interview, the
    Appellant was asked what happened on the day that made him leave Iraq.
    He stated the Hussain family threatened to detain and kill him and he
    called his uncle. The Appellant made no mention of this threat in
    either of his witness statements. In his witness statement, the
    Appellant stated he was extremely scared after his brother was
    kidnapped in about December 2016. He took his mother and went to live
    with his uncle because 'they' do not harass older men and his mother
    would be safe there.

26.  The Appellant disclosed in cross-examination that his father informed
    on a member of the Hussain family who then disappeared. In his asylum
    interview, he stated his father did not tell him what caused the feud
    (question 121). The Appellant denied he had not mentioned this before.
    It is incredible that this information was not recorded in either of
    his witness statements if he had disclosed it either in interview or to
    his solicitors. In re-examination, he stated that he was afraid to
    mention this information in interview because he was embarrassed. There
    was no plausible explanation for why he failed to mention this
    important fact in his witness statements.

27.  The Appellant disclosed in cross-examination that his father was on a
    wanted list. This was inconsistent with his claim in interview that his
    father assisted the Peshmerga forces. There was no plausible
    explanation for his failure to mention this in his witness statements.

28.  The Appellant disclosed in re-examination that he had contacted his
    former employer to help him trace his family. There was no plausible
    explanation for his failure to mention this before the hearing. The
    Appellant's evidence on this issue was confusing. He stated that his
    employer blocked his calls and was unable to help him. He then stated
    that he was reluctant to give details to his former employer.

29.  The Appellant's evidence of his attempts to contact his family was
    vague and unsupported by evidence which he ought to have been able to
    produce if his account was true. There was no evidence from the Red
    Cross. His claim to have lost contact with his mother and uncle in
    October 2017 was vague and unsubstantiated. He claimed to have heard
    about the attack on his village in the news on the internet. There was
    insufficient evidence to show that Appellant had made reasonable
    efforts to contact his family and was unable to do so.

30.  The Appellant's credibility is further undermined by his failure claim
    asylum in Greece or Italy. The Appellant came into contact with the
    authorities and was fingerprinted. There was no plausible explanation
    for his failure to make a claim before his arrived in the UK. His claim
    to have been under the control of people smugglers is undermined by his
    claim that he left Iraq with his CSID in his pocket.

31.  The Appellant's account in interview and in his statements was
    insufficient to show a reasonable degree of likelihood that the
    Appellant was at risk of persecution on return to Iraq applying
    relevant country guidance. He has embellished his account in oral
    evidence in order to bolster his weak asylum claim. The Appellant may
    well have suffered harassment from ISIS and the Arab forces prior to
    2016. His evidence in interview was that he was still able to work at
    this time. I find the Appellant was not at risk of persecution prior to
    leaving Iraq.

32.  For the reasons given above, I do not find the Appellant's claim to be
    credible and I reject it in its entirety. I do not accept he has lost
    his CSID or that he has lost contact with his family in Iraq. It is
    accepted the Appellant will not be at risk of indiscriminate violence
    pursuant to Article 15 (c) on return to his home area. I reject the
    Appellant's claim to be at risk of harm from the Hussain family because
    I do not find his account credible. Applying SMO, the Appellant would
    not be at risk on return to Baghdad or the IKR.

33.  Accordingly, I find that the Appellant is not at risk of persecution,
    serious harm or treatment in breach of Article 3 on return to Iraq. I
    dismiss his appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 4 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 4 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


