
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/01282/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2019                           |On 26th April 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [R K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose date of birth is recorded as [~]
1977.  On 21st May 2016, he arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed
international protection as a refugee.  On 24th December 2017, a decision
was made to refuse the application and the Appellant appealed.  On 18th
December 2018, his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Henderson, sitting at Taylor House.

The background to the Appellant's case was that he had worked for an
American company, KBR, from the end of 2003 to 2006.  That company provided
services to the United States Army at its military bases in Iraq.  The
Appellant worked at one of those bases for one year and then at another.
He worked as a guard within the security team.  There came a time when he
received threatening letters from the Mahdi Army.  These letters referred
to him as a traitor and an American spy/agent.  Threats were made on his
life.

It was the Appellant's case that the base shut down in 2006 and he changed
his work.  He became concerned with a small restaurant in Hillah.  That was
his family home, and it was his case that within a month of that restaurant
opening the person who was running the restaurant for him told him, the
Appellant, that people were making enquiries about him.  The Appellant was,
on his case, still receiving threatening letters and he decided to sell the
restaurant, and it was further his case that he then moved from place to
place, staying with friends. In 2014, the Appellant's next-door neighbour's
home was attacked with a hand grenade which, the Appellant believed, had
been meant for him.  So much by way of background, which I have taken from
the Decision and Reasons of Judge Henderson.

Judge Henderson made mixed findings.  She accepted part of the Appellant's
case but found, in her words, that certain parts were not "plausible".
What she did accept was that the Appellant had been working, as he
contended, for this company with its American associations.  She also
accepted that there had been some threatening letters which the Appellant
had received.  However, so far as the evidence concerning the restaurant
was concerned, that was not accepted, and more importantly, Judge Henderson
did not accept that the Appellant was of any continuing risk and so she
came to the view that the Appellant was not entitled to international
protection and dismissed the appeal.

Not content with that Decision, by Notice dated 23rd January 2019, the
Appellant made application for permission to appeal to this Tribunal and on
6th February 2019, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Povey granted
permission.  Thus, the matter comes before me.

The Grounds of Appeal run to thirteen paragraphs but in fact, there are two
substantive grounds.  The first attacks the reasoning of Judge Henderson
and the second is a contended failure to take into account the expert
evidence of Sheri Laizer, whose report appeared within the Appellant's
bundle at page 7.

I heard quite a lot of argument both from Mr Sellwood and Mr Lindsay on the
report.  Each took me to various passages and Mr Sellwood pointed to those
parts which supported his case. The expert reported that the Sadrist
movement was still active, that the current incarnation of its armed wing,
the al-Mahdi Army, had been renamed and that the group has widespread
control of many parts of Baghdad and the main roads northwest as far as the
Fallujah checkpoint in the south, including the Appellant's hometown of
Hillah.  The expert had recently visited the area (October 2018).  She had
travelled on the road towards Mosul and noted the ongoing presence of ISIS
militias there.  She noted that some checkpoints and barriers there within
Baghdad were under the sole control of Shia militia and, at page 12 of the
report at (v), "Central Baghdad and former mainly Sunni districts that have
been taken over by the Shia also testify to the strong presence of Saraya
al-Salam and the Sadrist movement".

Further in the report, in answer to certain questions posed by the
Appellant's solicitors, Ms Sheri Laizer said that those working for the
Americans were likely to be identified and their names put on a list.  She
makes further observations, but the conclusions were clear, and that was,
as set out at page 32 of the report, that the Appellant would remain at
risk on return to Iraq on account of his employment history.  It is
certainly common ground and it is trite law that a person is not required
to lie so that were the Appellant asked questions at a checkpoint then he
would reasonably be expected to answer that he had worked for the American-
based company.

Mr Lindsay for the Secretary of State submitted that the conclusions were
not supported by the substance of the report and that much of the
background material relied upon by Ms Laizer was out dated.  He made the
point that there was reference to a checklist but no sufficient evidence
within the report to substantiate the notion that the Appellant would be on
one, and in any event it was open to the judge to find, as she did, that
the Appellant was no longer at continuing risk.

Certain it is that the judge was cognisant of the expert report.  She deals
with it at paragraphs 46 to 49.  The report runs to many pages, but the
judge was able to dispense with it in four paragraphs and I make particular
reference to paragraph 49, in which she says as follows:

"The expert report confirmed the plausibility of the Appellant's account
with regard to receiving threats from the Mahdi Army: however, the report
itself is not evidence of the credibility of the Appellant's account with
regard to his own fear of persecution in his individual circumstances".

What is not in issue is what appears at paragraph 46 of the decision, which
states as follows: "The Respondent did not challenge the credentials or
expertise of Ms Laizer, nor was there any challenge to the content of her
expert report".

Mr Lindsay submitted that it was obvious that the conclusions were in issue
because otherwise there would not have been a hearing.  I am afraid, I
cannot accept that submission.  The decision to refuse the application is
made by a caseworker.  This is an adversarial jurisdiction.  A party may
submit any relevant evidence.  The expert report was clearly relevant.  The
report made certain assertions.  It made assertions of fact, one of which
was that the Appellant was at continuing risk within the Refugee
Convention.  That was not challenged (see NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ
856). It may be that the Presenting Officer ought to have made himself
clearer, but it is also clear that no point was taken before me concerning
what is recorded.  I was only invited to interpret what was recorded in a
different way.

What the judge failed to do, and I shall come back to the fact that the
expert report was not challenged, was to consider what the effect was of
her positive finding objectively upon the Appellant.  Having found that the
Appellant had an association with the United States forces indirectly
through his employment, even though she found his claim lacking in
credibility in other respects, the judge was required to go on to consider
whether objectively the Appellant was at risk of serious harm by virtue
only of that finding, which she did not do.

There was, in my judgment, both because she did not give sufficient reasons
and for going behind what is essentially a concession, a material error of
law in the decision-making.  Neither party suggested that this was a case
which should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, turning as it does on
the effect of the evidence of the expert when taken properly into account.


In my judgment, given that there was no challenge to the content of the
expert report, then there is no challenge to the facts asserted by the
expert, and one of those is that the Appellant will remain at risk on
return to Iraq on account of his employment.  There are checkpoints, so
that he cannot freely move around, including in his own area, but in any
event, he would have to access it, and it is clear from the expert report
that there are checkpoints within Baghdad, being the place to which he
would be returned.

In the circumstances, given the lack of any challenge to the content of the
expert report, I remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that
the appeal is allowed.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside such that the appeal is allowed on  international
protection (Refugee Convention) and also Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.


Signed                              Date: 23 April 2019




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

