
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02428/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2019                   |On 28 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                     E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D Selwood, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Wylie ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 5 August 2019 by which the
appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to
grant him international protection was dismissed.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew granted permission to appeal. In
her decision she reasoned that only four of the six grounds advanced were
arguable, namely grounds 3 to 6 but she failed to incorporate her intention
to grant permission on limited grounds within the decision section of the
standard document, where she simply stated, 'permission to appeal is
granted'. There were no words of limitation and therefore the appellant has
permission to argue all grounds: Safi & Ors (permission to appeal
decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC), [2019] Imm AR 437.



Anonymity

The Judge issued an anonymity direction. There was no request from the
representatives to set aside this direction and so I confirm:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no reports
         of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
         directly or indirectly identify the appellant. This direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent. Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of
         serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents of the
         protection claim being known to the public.



Background

The appellant is an Albanian national who is aged 28. In 1999, when aged 8,
he witnessed the murder of a member of his family who was a police officer.
On the day in question the family member was off duty but sought to
intervene when two groups started to shoot at each other. The incident led
to the deaths of ten people. The applicant asserts that threats were made
to kill him and his family if he revealed what he saw. Ongoing problems
continued over time and the appellant states that he was subjected to
extreme violence on at least nine occasions from members of a family
connected to the incident resulting in multiple fractures and scars upon
his body. Consequent to one attack in 2004 he was hospitalised for some
three to four months.

He left Albania some time in 2009 or 2010 and lived in different European
cities. He asserts that he was located by members of the family whilst
living in Belgium, beaten and left lying on the ground. The appellant
claims to have entered this country clandestinely in April 2011 and claimed
asylum in October 2015 after having been encountered by immigration
officials. He initially provided false documents, claiming that he was an
Italian national. The respondent refused the application by means of a
decision dated 26 February 2019.





Hearing before the FtT

The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross on 23 July 2019.
She refused an adjournment request which was sought so as to permit the
appellant the opportunity to instruct a psychologist for a cognitive
assessment. Her reasoning is provided at [7] and [9] of her decision:

         'I considered the request. I had regard to Nwaigwe (adjournment:
         fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and the over-riding objective of
         the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and
         Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. The asylum application had been made in
         October 2015, and an adjournment would mean that the appeal would
         not be dealt with for another six months, probably early in 2020.
         Further delay was unlikely to be in the interests of the appellant
         particularly having regard to his mental health.'

         ...

         'I concluded that by treating the appellant as a vulnerable witness
         taking account of the Presidential guidance, the matter could be
         dealt with today on the evidence currently available. I confirmed
         with Ms Karbani that she would be aware of the sensitivities in her
         cross-examination, and that I would be pro-active in ensuring that
         the proceedings were in accordance with the guidelines.  I
         therefore refused to adjourn the hearing to another date.'

Ms Fitzsimons, who represented the appellant before the Judge, provided an
explanation as to why the appellant was not called to give evidence,
recorded at [11] of the decision:

         'When we reconvened, Ms Fitzsimons advised that, taking account of
         the reports of Dr Cohen and Dr Lohawala, the diagnosis of PTSD and
         symptoms of depression, struggles with memory and cognitive
         impairment, and weighing up the probative value of cross-
         examination with the interests of the appellant, she did not
         propose to call him to give evidence. Accordingly, the case was
         restricted to submissions only.'

I observe at this juncture that no judicial assessment was taken as to the
applicant's decision not to give oral evidence in the absence of medical
evidence opining that he was unfit to give evidence. Dr. Lohawala provides
no opinion as to whether the appellant is fit to give evidence. The extent
of Dr. Cohen's opinion is that the appellant's ability to give evidence and
to be cross-examined in compromised: [76].  This is not the same as being
unfit to give evidence and there appears to have been no exploration before
the Tribunal by the appellant's counsel as to suitable means of presenting
and considering oral evidence in light of the guidance of the Court of
Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2017] EWCA Civ 1123, [2018] 4 WLR 78. Both doctors were content to rely
upon the information provided by the appellant in consultation. The failure
to assess the appellant's failure to give oral evidence is a noticeable
failing.

Having considered the evidence and submissions presented, the Judge
concluded that she was not satisfied, taking into account of the lower
standard of proof, that the appellant had established that he was involved
in a blood feud with the opposing family, at [102]:

         'The country expert Dr Tahiraj confirms that this family were
         notorious, and there were reports of criminal activity and
         political feud. It appears to me that he had fabricated his account
         of a blood feud with a notorious family from his area, in order to
         make a claim for asylum. I note that in this initial screening
         interview, when asked why he had come to the United Kingdom, he
         answered 'I wanted to come to UK because I like London not
         Albania.'

She determined in the alternative, at [103]:

         'Even if there was a blood feud, the criteria laid out in EH (blood
         feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) are not met. It may well
         be the case that his cousin 'KD' was a police officer shot when he
         was off-duty and trying to intervene in a dispute between the
         'opposing family' and another group. It may well be the case that
         the appellant witnessed this shooting. However, I would have
         expected there to have been some press reporting of the incident,
         particularly since the appellant had said that ten people were
         killed in that incident. In any event, it would seem that the feud
         was between the 'opposing clan' and another group, and that the
         appellant's family were not involved. There would be no reason for
         revenge by the 'opposing clan' against the appellant's family as
         they are the family suffering the death of their member.'



Grounds of Appeal

Ms Fitzsimons drafted the grounds of appeal that are relied upon by the
appellant and identified six complaints as to errors of law.

A failure to adjourn the hearing for a neuropsychological report.

A failure to lawfully assess the scarring evidence.

A failure to have regard to relevant medical evidence addressing PTSD.

Inadequate consideration of the impact of vulnerability.

Unfair selective reliance on one aspect of the screening interview without
regard to other material considerations.

The assessment of risk failed to take account of material considerations as
regard to country guidance experts' reports.

In granting permission to appeal JFtTl Andrew reasoned, at [2] - [7]:

         'Ground 1: I do not find that the refusal to adjourn this matter is
         an arguable error of law. The Judge considered all the medical
         evidence that was before her including that the Appellant had
         cognitive difficulties and a further report showing this would be
         otiose.

         Ground 2: The Judge accepted that the medical evidence of scarring
         was provided by reputable medical practitioners. However, this does
         not mean that the Judge should accept their evidence without
         considering it, which the Judge did at paragraph 95 of the
         decision, finding that there could be alternative reasons for
         scarring. Further, the Judge was right to comment that the report
         from Albania had not been before the medical experts.

         Ground 3: I accept that the Judge did not refer to the diagnosis of
         PTSD. Had he done so this may have influenced her decision in
         relation to credibility and I find that this is an arguable error
         of law.

         Ground 4: I accept the Judge did not consider the Appellant's
         vulnerability and that this is an arguable error of law.

         Ground 5: I accept that the Judge's reliance on a question in the
         screening interview is an arguable error of law.

         Ground 6: I accept there is an arguable error of law in the Judge's
         consideration of the country guidance and expert reports and his
         assessment of risk.'

No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.



The Hearing

Following a brief discussion with the representatives, Mr Jarvis
appropriately acknowledged that upon reappraising [92] and [97] pf the
decision and reasons the Judge had not made clear findings as to whether or
not she accepted the nature and essence of the appellant's cognitive
impairment and therefore it is unclear as to whether there was appropriate
consideration as to the diagnosis of memory loss when consideration was
given to discrepancies in this matter. Mr Jarvis wished to observe that the
decision was in the main very skilfully and carefully prepared and whilst
it had been his intention to seek to defend the judgment, it was on this
particular issue that he accepted on behalf of the respondent that the lack
of clarity as to the consideration of vulnerability and the failure to
clearly identify relevant guidance from the Court of Appeal judgment in AM
(Afghanistan) meant that there was a material error of law.



Decision on Error of Law

I consider grounds 3 and 4 together as they overlap. When refusing to grant
an adjournment the Judge reasoned, inter alia, at [8]:

         'There was evidence that he had memory difficulties, and this would
         affect his ability to give evidence and be cross-examined. I did
         not consider that a formal cognitive assessment would be necessary
         to enable the appeal to be dealt with.'

The Judge observed at the outset of her credibility assessment that the
appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD, at [66]:

         'I take account of the appellant's mental health as set out in the
         two psychiatric reports, that he meets the diagnosis criteria for
         post-traumatic stress disorder and has symptoms of depression and
         post-concussive symptoms. He has poor memory, poor concentration,
         episodes of dizziness and possible seizures. I take into account
         that in 2017, and currently, his ability to recall and recount his
         experience was and is severely compromised. I have noted the
         description given by the legal representative at the first
         cancelled interview on 25 November 2015. At the time of his
         screening interview and his substantive asylum interview I accept
         that his ability to recall and recount his experiences was likely
         to be impaired.'

She further noted, at [67]:

         'I take account of the statement by the caseworker from the
         appellant's solicitors in which she sets out the number of meetings
         with the appellant and the time spent with him in the preparation
         of the witness statement dated 4 July 2019, as well as the very
         lengthy meetings subsequent to the signing of the statement.'

The Judge appears to accept that the appellant suffers from PTSD, poor
memory and poor concentration. She expressly considered that from at least
2017 the appellant has been identified as severely compromised as to his
ability to recall and recount his experiences. In such circumstances, she
was required to consider the guidance of the Court of Appeal in AM
(Afghanistan) at [21] and [22] of the judgment and though there is no
exhaustive or immutable checklist the following principles are applicable:

      a) there is a lower standard of proof;

      b) assessments of personal credibility are not a substitute for
         application of the criteria for refugee status which has to be
         holistically assessed;

      c) medical experts' findings have to be treated as part of the
         holistic assessment, not as an 'add-on';

      d) medical evidence can be critical in explaining why an account might
         be incoherent and inconsistent;

      e) credibility has to be judged in the context of the known objective
         circumstances and practices of the relevant state;

      f) the highest standards of procedural fairness are required.

There is no express reference to the Court of Appeal judgment within the
Judge's decision, nor express reference to the identified principles. This
is not a material error of law per se but the Judge runs a real risk of
materially erring in law if he or she does not have the principles clearly
in mind when assessing a claim by a vulnerable person.

Having noted the appellant's health concerns, the Judge proceeded to
undertake a credibility assessment and gave several reasons for not
believing elements of his stated history. Certain adverse findings were
capable of being made independent of any consideration of the appellant's
mental health, primarily as to evidence from the appellant's father
presented by means of a letter. However, several other adverse findings
were made as to the appellant's evidence where there was a requirement to
consider his health concerns, for example at [92], [96] - [98]:

         'It appears to me that his cognitive impairment, were it to have
         existed before 2015, did not prevent him from managing to live,
         obtain false papers, and presumably work in a country foreign to
         him for over four years.'

         ...

         'It appears to me that the appellant is a young man with a history
         of fighting.  The injuries he has sustained are likely to be
         resulting from this behaviour.

         He has a mental health condition, and it appears that this was
         diagnosed before the age of eighteen by Albanian medical
         practitioners. Despite his mental disorder, he was able to cope
         with travelling throughout Europe and clandestinely entering the
         United Kingdom, and then to live for a number of years without
         coming to the attention of the authorities.

         He had claimed that he was at risk because of a relationship with a
         niece of one of the leading members of the opposing clan, but he
         could not remember her name.  However, he was able to remember the
         names of other girls with whom he claimed relationships causing him
         ill-treatment by their families.'

In progressing through her credibility assessment, the Judge does not
return to the diagnosis of PTSD and memory loss and so fails to conduct a
holistic assessment. The consideration of medical evidence relevant to
credibility is an important part of the process undertaken to reach a
conclusion as to credibility and an artificial separation of the medical
evidence from the rest of the evidence when reaching such conclusions is a
structured failing, not just an error of appreciation. There is no express
consideration to the mental health diagnosis post [66] and so no express
assessment as to whether such concerns attributed to the lack of
consistency found in later paragraphs. It could be open for a Judge to take
into account the medical evidence presented in this appeal and reasonably
find on the lower standard that the appellant cannot establish his claim
consequent to a holistic assessment but such consideration must be lawful
and be in accordance with the principles identified in AM (Afghanistan).

Despite the clear efforts of the Judge to carefully consider the appeal
before her the failure to assess the materiality of the appellant's PTSD
when rejecting his credibility strongly suggests that the relevant
principles were not applied and so the Judge materially erred as to her
assessment of credibility and the only appropriate course available is for
this decision to be set aside.  I am therefore not required to consider
grounds 1 to 2 and 5 to 6.



Remittal

As to remaking the decision, given the fundamental nature of the error of
law that has been identified, I have considered the submissions made by
both Mr Sellwood and Mr Jarvis that clear findings of fact have yet to be
made in this matter and to date there has been no careful consideration
given to the medical evidence presented to the Tribunal. Both
representatives submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal.

I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statements of the
First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals
in this Tribunal, which reads as follows, at [7.2]:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
         remake the decision instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
         Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that

(a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case
to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

(b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary
in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having
regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
the case to the First-tier Tribunal.'

I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit this matter
to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters. The
appellant has not yet enjoyed an adequate consideration of his asylum claim
to date and has not had a fair hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 5 August
2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
Act 2007.

This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
before any Judge other than Judge Wylie.  No findings of fact are
preserved.

The anonymity direction is confirmed.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 24 October 2019

