
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02558/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 July 2020 remotely              |On 27 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FYH
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Capel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the respondent (FYH).  This direction applies to both
the appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I will for
convenience refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier
Tribunal.

Background

The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on 15 May 1958.

She claims that she came to the UK illegally in 2005 as a result of an
arrangement made with a Snakehead in China to whom her family paid 20,000
RMB exclusive of interest.

Having arrived in the UK, the appellant lived with her uncle for about
twelve years.

During that time, the appellant formed a relationship with a Mr L who had
also been brought to the UK by Snakeheads.  He was involved in a kidnap and
ransom offence in respect of which the appellant gave the police a
statement and Mr L was sentenced to twelve years' imprisonment having been
convicted in 2015.

During her time with her uncle, he involved her in buying cannabis and in
2016 she was arrested in relation to that.

The appellant worked as a cleaner.  One of her customers, "A" wanted to
have sex with her and, when she refused, he sexually assaulted her and did
not let her leave.  Subsequently, she was raped by a number of men over a
period of time whom, she, were paying "A".  The appellant was, in effect,
held in captivity at "A's" house where men would come and have sex with
her.  "A" also involved her in drugs and she was eventually stopped and
arrested for possession of drugs.

Following her release from custody, she again went to live with "A" after
she suggested that they enter a relationship and that she would only have
sex with him and not other men.  He agreed but throughout the relationship
if the appellant refused to have sex with "A" he would threaten to bring
other men to the house.

The appellant had a key and, on behalf of "A", collected drugs for him.
She was again arrested in May 2017 and again in July 2017 for drug offences
involving cannabis.

Between 14 November 2016 and 8 May 2017, the appellant was convicted on
three occasions for offences relating to controlled drugs, namely cannabis.
 In each case, she did not receive a custodial sentence.

However, on 6 July 2017 she was convicted of possession with intent to
supply a class B drug (cannabis) and of breach of a conditional discharge.
On 17 August 2017, she was sentenced at the Wood Green Crown Court to eight
weeks' imprisonment.

On 30 August 2017, the appellant was served with a notice of intention to
deport her.  On 4 September 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.  There
followed screening and asylum interviews on 28 November 2017 and 7 December
2017 respectively.

On 9 February 2018, the appellant was referred by the Salvation Army to the
National Referral Mechanism ("NRM") and, on 26 February 2018, received a
positive Reasonable Grounds decision that she was the victim of
trafficking/modern slavery.

On 22 January 2018, the Secretary of State refused her claims for asylum,
humanitarian protection and human rights.

On 18 December 2019, the NRM reached a Conclusive Grounds decision in her
favour that she is a victim of trafficking/modern slavery.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing on
10 February 2020, Judge Rai allowed the appellant's appeal.  The judge
accepted that the appellant had been trafficked to the UK and that there
was a real risk of her being re-trafficked if she returned to China.  The
judge found that the Chinese authorities would not be able to provide her
with a sufficiency of protection and that internal relocation was not
reasonably open to her.  On that basis, the judge allowed the appellant's
appeal under the Refugee Convention.  The judge also allowed the
appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
On 1 March 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Resident Judge J F W Phillips)
granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.  The grounds, upon
which permission was granted, were that: (1) in allowing the appellant's
appeal the judge had failed properly to apply the relevant country guidance
decisions in finding that the appellant would be at risk of being re-
trafficked; and (2) in allowing the appeal under Art 8, the judge had
wrongly found that the appellant was not a "foreign offender" on the basis
that there was no public interest in her prosecution for the drugs offences
given the circumstances.

The Hearing

In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the appeal hearing to determine
whether the judge's decision contained an error of law was listed for a
remote hearing by Skype for Business.  Neither party objected to the
hearing being remote.

As a consequence, on 9 July 2020, the appeal was listed before me to be
heard by Skype for Business.  I was based in the Cardiff Civil Justice
Centre.  Ms G Capel, who represented the appellant, appeared remotely by
Skype.  Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State, was unable to
connect to the hearing by Skype due to problems with his broadband.
However, he connected to the hearing by telephone and was content to
proceed with the hearing on that basis.

As a consequence, in addition the detailed written submissions made by the
parties in response to the UT's earlier directions, I heard oral
submissions from Mr Howells and Ms Capel.

The Judge's Decision

Judge Rai heard oral evidence from the appellant.  The judge accepted the
appellant's credibility and her account that led to her being recognised as
a victim of trafficking/modern slavery.  The judge's factual findings in
that regard are not challenged.

Consequently, on the basis that the appellant was a victim of modern
slavery by sexual exploitation and forced criminality in the UK together
with her finding that the appellant had been trafficked to the UK by
snakeheads, the central issues before the judge were (a) whether the
appellant could establish a real risk of persecution on return to China at
the hands of the snakeheads to whom she owed a debt including being re-
trafficked to the United Kingdom; (b) whether, if that were the case, she
could obtain a sufficiency of protection from the Chinese authorities; and
(c) whether internal relocation was available to her.

In reaching her findings, the judge was directed to a number of country
guidance cases dealing with loan sharks or snakeheads.  In addition, the
judge had a number of expert reports: a country expert report by Joshua
Kurlantzick, a trafficking report by Elizabeth Flint and a psychological
report by Dr Martha Nikopaschos.

The essence of the argument before the judge appears to have been that the
country guidance decisions dating back to 2002 and 2009 had to be seen in
the light of the expert evidence, in particular of Joshua Kurlantzick,
which established that there was indeed a risk of re-trafficking by
snakeheads and an insufficiency of protection from their actions by the
state in China.

The judge's consideration of the country guidance cases is at paras 53-55
of her decision.  There, she said this:

"53. The leading country guidance on loan sharks or Snakeheads is ZC &
Others (Risk - illegal exit - loan sharks) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00028.  It
found that HL (Risk - Return - Snakeheads) China CG [2002] UKIAT 03683 is
applicable.  HL found that

          i) the totality of the evidence does not establish that a
             returning failed asylum seeker who is indebted to Snakeheads
             or loan sharks will come to harm on return to China.

         ii) The principal reason for our conclusion that the appellant
             would not be at risk on return is the lack of any country
             information to indicate that would be at risk.  Nevertheless,
             logic also supports this conclusion.  The Snakeheads and loan
             sharks are violent and unscrupulous, but they are running what
             is likely to be a highly profitable business and would prefer
             to avoid actions which might damage that business.  Violent or
             other persecutory actions against those who are returned to
             China would be unlikely to result in the recovery of much
             money, but would be likely to discourage future customers.
             Amongst the press reports submitted by Mr Yuen are reports of
             snakeheads going to great lengths to build spectacular houses
             to show to potential customers, as an indication of the sort
             of accommodation and lifestyle they can expect if they travel
             to a western country.  If the snakeheads and loan sharks go to
             these lengths it is not likely that they would risk deterring
             potential customers by taking hostile action against those who
             have returned, usually through no fault of their own. Clearly
             it is a different matter to ensure that those who remain
             abroad and are able to pay continue to pay for fear of what
             might happen to them or their relatives at home.

54.  In ZC & Others the Tribunal declined to depart from HL.  The UT also
stated that with respect to the issues of the appellants registering with
the authorities in another part of the country under the hukou system,
there is no evidence before me to suggest that the authorities would pass
on their details to unlawfully operating groups.

55.  However, having considered the objective evidence presented in this
case, and the latest country expert reports, there are good reasons for why
the ZC & Others should be treated with caution.  It is case law that is now
10 years old, and HL even older.  The Tribunal in HL specifically said that
their conclusions on risk on return from snakeheads was based on an absence
of country evidence.  The Tribunal does not appear to have considered
whether snakehead gangs utilise internal or transnational trafficking as a
means by which to recoup the debt owed."

The judge then went on to consider the reports of Elizabeth Flint and
Joshua Kurlantzick at paras 56-59 as follows:

         "56. The appellant's account of events in China and in the UK are
             externally plausible having considered the objective evidence
             by way of trafficking report by Ms Flint and the country
             expert report by [Joshua] Kurlantzick.  Both provide an
             objective background in which the appellant's fears of the
             Snakeheads and Mr [L] was ......... to be considered.  The US
             State Department TIP Report 2018 referred to in both reports
             confirms China is a source, destination and transit country
             for sex trafficking.  In terms of prosecutions of trafficking,
             the same 2018 report found that the government maintained
             insufficient law enforcement efforts and continued to report
             statistics for crimes outside the definition of human
             trafficking making it difficult to assess progress.  Joshua
             Kurlantzick talks specifically about the infiltration of the
             police by Snakehead gangs.  He states 'that in many parts of
             the country it makes it difficult for survivors to trust that
             the police and the local officials will relocate them without
             informing the gangs of their location'.  He goes on to states
             (sic) 'people who still owed a trafficking [g]ang a debt - at
             least, a debt as construed by the gang - would be an obvious
             target for re-kidnapping, especially in Fujian and other
             Southern and South-Eastern provinces where snakehead gangs
             operate most widely and have the largest number of members'.
             This evidence was not challenged by the respondent.

57.  Ms Flint explains in her report that in a situation of 'debt bondage',
the trafficker's intention is not to ensure that the loan is repaid within
the required timescale but to ensure that the victim cannot do so and is
trapped into paying off the ever-increasing interest on the loan.  This is
consistent with the appellant being told by the Snakeheads, work was
arranged in a clothing factory in her asylum interview, which was clarified
by her representative shortly after the interview to the Snakeheads gave an
example to the appellant while still in China that he may be able to find
work in a clothing factory in the UK but did not provide a job for her.
Her witness statement states that she was only brought to the UK and had to
find work herself to pay back the debt.  Her son and his family were
threatened, and assaulted and had to be moved away from the area to avoid
any harm coming to their son.  The appellant's grandson.  Overall the
evidence indicates that the trafficking situation in China has evolved in
recent years, with criminal organisations operating in a region becoming
more organised, professional and diverse.  There has been an increased use
of violence and coercive measures such as threats, direct force and
kidnapping facilitated by organised criminal groups.  Both experts consider
the appellant would be at real risk of persecution, including re-
trafficking by her former traffickers.

58.  There is sufficient evidence on balance taking all the evidence into
account to find that the appellant's concerns about being unable to repay
the debt on return, and that that would lead to being re-trafficked is
credible in her circumstances.

59.  In HC & RC (Trafficked women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027 (18 July
2019), the respondent conceded at [36] that former victims of trafficking
for sexual exploitation could form a particular social group in China."

As can be seen, having set out the relevant CG decisions, and in particular
HL, the judge went on to consider expert reports from a trafficking expert
and a country expert concerning the current position about how snakehead
gangs behave in relation to returnees who owe them a debt.

The judge returned to the issues of risk on return, sufficiency of
protection and internal relocation at paras 62-68 of her determination as
follows:

"62. The core of the respondent's submission rests on the appellant not
having demonstrated to the required standard that she is a victim of
trafficking because of her inconsistent account, as such the four
convictions relating to drug offences should not be looked at within the
prism of the trafficking.  In the event she does demonstrate she is a
victim of trafficking, she could still relocate to China.

63.  I have found the appellant is a vulnerable person with mental health
difficulties, who has been trafficked to the UK for the purpose of forced
criminality and sexual exploitation.  With that comes a social stigma
particularly at an age in her 60[s].  She is at risk of being further
exploited and re-trafficked as she has not repaid the debt to the
Snakeheads and originates from Fujian.  The appellant has a lack of
supportive family ties in China as her husband is elderly, blind and
bedridden.  Her eldest son and his family have relocated elsewhere
following an assault and threats from snakeheads and she has had no contact
with him.  Her youngest son provides income for the family from temporary
work.  The appellant herself is uneducated and lacks employment prospects
given she did not work whilst living in China.

64.  I am satisfied that from the country expert reports, there is
insufficient protection for victims of trafficking.  In terms of internal
relocation China is ranked Tier 3, of the lowest tier, of countries that
have the worst problems with human trafficking.  This means China does not
fully meet the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking and is
not making significant efforts to do so.  With regard to the US TIP report,
the police continue to arrest and detain women on suspicion of
prostitution.  Joshua Kurlantzick states Xi Jinping is ignoring organised
crime in regions further from Beijing, particularly in Southern and South-
Eastern China.  He accepted that local officials across the country are
engaged in widespread collusion with organised crime groups and other
criminal organisations.  He goes on to say that the Chinese Government has
not made any clear progress into shutting down/arresting major snakeheads
or people smuggling gangs.  The respondents takes no issue with the
expert's qualifications or expertise, but describes him as making 'sweeping
assertions made without authority or further information'.

65.  I remind myself that the starting principle is that country guidance
cases are authoritative on any subsequent appeal only insofar as that
appeal relates to the country guidance issue in question and depends on the
same or similar evidence: Practice Direction 12.2.  The Guidance Note at
para 11 states that if credible fresh evidence relevant to the issue that
has not been considered in the country guidance case or, if a subsequent
case includes further issues that have not been considered in the CG case,
the judge will reach the appropriate conclusion in the CG case so far as it
remains relevant....

 66. I am satisfied that the Tribunal in HL came to their conclusion on the
basis of an absence of country evidence, whereas Joshua Kurlantzick
provides compelling evidence that individuals owing debts to snakeheads are
at real risk of serious harm.

67.  For these reasons I conclude that the appellant is at real risk of re-
trafficking and will be provided with sufficient protection nor could she
internally relocate.  [The sense is that it should read 'would not be
provided with sufficient protection'].

68.  As such I find that the appellant has demonstrated to the lower
standard, that she has a well-founded fear of persecution as a woman who
has previously been trafficked.  For the reason given above she is
classified as a member of a particular social group.  She continues to be
at risk of persecution if returned by virtue of that reason and would be
unable to avail herself of state protection or to be able to relocate
within China.  Therefore the appellant's removal would cause the United
Kingdom to be in breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention."

The Secretary of State's Challenge

On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Howells relied upon the grounds of
appeal and his skeleton argument dated 2 June 2020 which he expanded upon
in his oral submissions.

First, he submitted that the judge had erred in law by departing from the
country guidance decisions in HL, ZC and HC & RC.  He submitted that the
judge had been wrong to conclude that HL had been "based on an absence of
country evidence" (see para 55 of the determination).  He submitted that
the case of HL, as the judge's citation of it at para 53 of her
determination showed, was also based upon an argument of logic that there
would be no risk to a returning trafficked person who was indebted to
snakeheads.  He reminded me that the judge had also said that HL was based
upon an "absence" of country evidence at para 66 of her determination.

Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had been wrong to find that
there were "strong grounds based upon cogent evidence" to depart from the
CG decisions relying upon the report of Joshua Kurlantzick.  He submitted
that the judge had failed to deal with the submission, made in the
respondent's written submissions following the hearing, that Mr
Kurlantzick's conclusions were "sweeping assertions made without authority
or further information".  Likewise, it was wrong of the judge to state in
para 56 that the expert's evidence was "not challenged by the respondent".
Mr Howells submitted that the respondent had specifically challenged that
part of Mr Kurlantzick's report where, at para 45, he had concluded that
the police had been infiltrated by snake gangs in many parts of the country
and so it was difficult for survivors to trust the police and local
officials in relocating and providing a sufficiency of protection.  Mr
Howells submitted that the judge had been wrong to conclude at para 66 that
Mr Kurlantzick's evidence provided "compelling evidence" that individuals
owing debts to snakehead gangs were at real risks of serious harm.

The Appellant's Submissions

On behalf of the appellant, Ms Capel also adopted her written submissions
dated 11 June 2020 which she expanded upon in her oral submissions.

First, she submitted that the judge had correctly set out the relevant
country guidance decisions in HL, ZC and HC & RC.

Secondly, the judge had correctly directed herself on the effect of country
guidance in para 65.

Thirdly, Ms Capel submitted that the judge had not fallen into error in
departing from the country guidance.  Dealing with a point in the secretary
of state's grounds, but not pursued with any vigour by Mr Howell's in his
oral submissions, Ms Capel submitted that the judge was entitled to take
into account that the CG cases were at least ten years old.  She referred
me to NM and Others (Lone Women - Ashraf) Somalia CG [2005] UKIAT 0076
[140] that the "passage of time" or "substantial new evidence" were
relevant in determining whether there was a good reason for departing from
a country guidance case.

Fourthly, Ms Capel submitted that the judge had not failed to deal with the
respondent's challenge to Mr Kurlantzick's evidence.  She pointed out that
the judge specifically referred at para 64 of her determination to the
submission made on behalf of the respondent that his conclusions were
"sweeping assertions made without authority or further information".
However, Ms Capel submitted that Mr Kurlantzick was clearly an expert
witness and his report was sourced with some sixteen endnotes including
endnote 14 in para 45 which referred to "author interviews with Chinese
officials, Dec 2014" which was at the end of the sentence which read "the
infiltration of the police by Snakehead gangs, in many parts of the
country, makes it difficult for survivors to trust that the police and the
local officials will relocate them without informing gangs of their
location."

Ms Capel submitted that the judge was entitled to rely upon this expert
evidence as "cogent evidence" justifying a departure from the CG decisions
and her finding in relation to risk on return, sufficiency of protection
and internal relocation.

Fifthly, Ms Capel acknowledged that the AIT in HL had reached its
conclusion not simply on the "lack of any country information" that a
person would be at risk on return but had also deployed an argument of
"logic" that snakeheads would not seek retribution against returnees.
Nevertheless, Ms Capel submitted that the judge was fully entitled to reach
a different finding if it was based upon cogent evidence such as the expert
report of Mr Kurlantzick.

Sixthly, Ms Capel submitted that, in fact, the most recent country guidance
case of HC & RC did not exclude a finding in a particular case that there
was a real risk from traffickers on return to China.  All that case
decided, Ms Capel submitted, was that set out in para 2 of the headnote,
namely that "women and girls in China do not in general face a real risk of
serious harm from traffickers." However, she submitted, the AIT went on to
find that:

"Where, however, it can be established in a given case that a woman or a
girl does face a real risk of being forced or coerced into prostitution by
traffickers, the issue of whether she will be able to receive effective
protection from the authorities will need careful consideration in the
light of background evidence highlighting significant deficiencies in the
system of protection for victims of trafficking.  But each case, however,
must be judged on its own facts."

Ms Capel submitted there was nothing in the decision in HC & RC to preclude
the judge in this case, based upon the expert evidence, finding in the
appellant's favour both as regards risk on return, sufficiency of
protection and internal relocation.

Discussion

The judge set out correctly the conclusions of the AIT in HL at para 53 of
her determination.  That case decided that, on the evidence before the AIT,
it was not established that a returning failed asylum seeker who was
indebted to snakeheads or loan sharks would be at risk from those
snakeheads or loan sharks.  That conclusion, reached in 2002, was endorsed
seven years later by the AIT in ZC & Others in 2009.

The judge plainly took that as her starting point.  The judge recognised
that the effect of a CG decision was to determine in future cases the
factual issue which had been determined in the CG decisions (see para 65 of
her determination).  Although the judge did not directly quote the well-
known phrase used by Stanley Burnton LJ in SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ
940 at [47] that a CG decision must be followed unless there are "very
strong grounds based upon cogent evidence", the judge clearly had that in
mind when looking at the expert evidence and indeed concluded that there
was "compelling evidence" on the basis of that evidence that individuals
such as the appellant on return would be at real risk of serious harm.  The
crucial issue in this appeal is whether the evidence that the judge relied
upon justified departure from HL and ZC & Others.

First, I see nothing untoward in the judge observing that ZC & Others was
now "ten years old" (decided in 2009) and that HL was even earlier (decided
in 2002).  Of course, the fact that a CG decision was decided some years
ago is not, in itself, a good reason for departing from it.  However, the
passage time may potentially give rise to a change of material
circumstances in the country which might lead to a different conclusion
based upon evidence about the current circumstances.  In NM and Others, the
AIT noted (at [140]) that:

"There may be evidence that circumstances have changed in a material way
which requires a different decision, again on the basis that proper reasons
for that view are given; there may be significant new evidence which shows
that the views originally expressed will require consideration for revision
or refinement, even without any material change of circumstances.  It may
be that the passage of time itself or substantial new evidence itself
warrants a re-examination of the position, even though the outcome may be
unchanged."

Secondly, the expert evidence both from Ms Flint and Mr Kurlantzick does
support the appellant's case in relation to risk on return, a lack of
sufficiency of protection and the unavailability of internal relocation.
Mr Howells' challenge was to the integrity of that evidence, in particular
of Mr Kurlantzick.

Mr Kurlantzick produced a detailed report dated 28 June 2018 (at pages 208-
227 of the bundle) and an addendum report dated 19 June 2019 (at pages 205-
207 of the bundle).  There can be no doubt reading Mr Kurlantzick's
experience and qualifications that he is an expert.  I did not, in fact,
understand Mr Howells to suggest otherwise.  Instead, Mr Howells'
submission was that the evidence of Mr Kurlantzick was not sufficiently
referenced and was vague and unsubstantiated which was a submission that
the judge did not deal with.

I do not accept that the judge failed to have regard to that submission as
she specifically refers to it in para 64 when considering Mr Kurlantzick's
evidence and what weight she should place upon it.  I acknowledge that at
para 56, having set out some of Mr Kurlantzick's evidence, she states that
the evidence was "not challenged by the respondent" but whilst inconsistent
with what she has said in para 64, it is not in itself a reason for
regarding her reliance upon that evidence as unwarranted.

As I have already said, Mr Kurlantzick is undoubtedly an expert.  The
particular passage in his evidence at para 45 is footnoted by reference to
interviews with Chinese officials.  Given the nature of such evidence, and
the importance of anonymity, he could do little more than reference his
source in this way.  He is, after all, an expert who acquires expertise
through experience, research and knowledge about events in the country
concerned.  Here, he sets out in para 45 evidence which supported the
appellant's claim and the judge's ultimate finding:

"The infiltration of the police by Snakehead groups, in many parts of the
country, makes it difficult for survivors to trust that the police and
local officials will relocate them without informing gangs of their
location.[FN 14]  Indeed, there has been no report of prosecutions of
village and other level police and other officials have received bribes
from trafficking gangs.  This lack of prosecution suggests that police and
other officials work with snakehead gangs with impunity; it may also
testify to the breadth of gangs' networks and to their significant
resources, especially in finding people who once went abroad and re-
kidnapping them.  People who still owed a trafficking gang a debt - at
least, a debt as construed by the gang - would be an obvious target for re-
kidnapping, especially in Fujian and other Southern and South-Eastern
provinces where snakehead gangs operate most widely and have the largest
number of members." (footnote omitted)

Mr Kurlantzick's evidence does not sit alone in supporting the appellant's
claim.  At para 57, the judge referred to the evidence of Elizabeth Flint
which was supportive of the appellant's account of being trafficked - which
is now accepted including that she was the victim of modern slavery in the
UK.  It suffices to set out a number of extracts from Mr Kurlantzick's
report to demonstrate the under-pinning of the judge's findings.

Returning to Mr Kurlantzick's report, at para 12 onwards he deals with "the
situation regarding corruption and criminal syndicates", and at para 15
notes that

"In fact, Fujian province, along with Guangdong province, is the center of
snakehead activity in the entire country.  Given the sheer number of
snakehead groups in Fujian, it would be very difficult for the national and
provincial governments to make inroads against Fujian snakeheads, and
anyone from Fujian who has dealt with the snakeheads in the past would be
in serious danger returning to Fujian, where the snakeheads are most
powerful and have informants in every village, in my experience (my
emphasis)."

Then at para 16, he continues:

"People who are pursued by organised criminal groups, and are alleged not
to have repaid debts, can be particularly threatened by organised criminal
organisations, and by arbitrary arrest and detention without due process by
a police linked to organised criminal groups."

At para 17, he notes that:

         "People dealing with criminal gangs indeed have little recourse.
         The police force is viewed as highly corrupt, as the Chinese
         government has essentially admitted".

At the end of that quotation an endnote refers to an internet page
announcing a "crackdown on police corruption".

At para 20, Mr Kurlantzick notes that:

"The Chinese government has taken a handful of formal steps to crack down
on criminal syndicates and assist potential victims of criminal syndicates,
including people who have been trafficked and/or fear being trafficked from
the country, as well as people who migrated voluntarily, who were
physically and/or psychologically damaged by their migration, and may have
significant trouble reintegrating into Chinese society, finding work again,
and accessing medical and psychological care.  But these formal steps,
including the Xi administration's recent announcement of a new tough
campaign against organised crime and corrupt village and local-level
officials, are inadequate in protecting victims and helping people who
migrated using snakeheads reintegrating to Chinese society."

At para 25, Mr Kurlantzick deals with re-trafficking:

"The scope of trafficking of Chinese nationals is extremely broad.  Some
nationals do indeed engage willingly with snakeheads in order to leave
China, while others are essentially kidnapped or forced in other ways into
modern-day slavery.  People who are trafficked once, victimised once by a
loan shark, or voluntarily migrate once are indeed at much higher risk of
being retrafficked, because of debts incurred, by trafficking networks to
the United Kingdom and other European countries, if they are returned to
China.  This is because, even though they have voluntarily migrated out of
China, they are often followed by trafficking gangs and are traumatised by
their previous experiences and unable to find employment and permanent
shelter in China, even though reforms of China's hukou system has made it
much easier, in recent years, for Chinese citizens to move around their
country.  As a result, even if they once travelled out of China willingly,
when they are back in China they are at a very high risk of being
retrafficked against their will, since they are among the most vulnerable
members of society and may still owe debts to a snakehead gang."

At para 26, Mr Kurlantzick continues:

"Combined with endemic graft in the police force and a climate of the
deteriorating rule of law, the lack of protection for victims means that
people cannot look to the law enforcement to help them combat syndicates
who might be looking to traffic them upon their return to China."

At para 29, Mr Kurlantzick notes that it would be "extremely difficult" for
the appellant to find work in China.

Then at para 30 he states:

"Snakehead groups also, if they have connections with any police units,
could follow people returning to China, since local police forces
throughout China are amassing extensive surveillance abilities and massive
amounts of personal detail on all citizens in the country."

At para 32, he continues:

"As a result, it is plausible that a person returned to China who is still
of interest to a snake gang group would be followed around the country,
especially if she was unable to work or repay her debts.  ...  Snake gang
groups further use regular visits to the family of someone who has been
retrafficked to get updated information about whether, and when, that
person might be returning to the country."

At para 34, Mr Kurlantzick notes that the appellant is a person who left
China illegally and then returned to the country would find it

         "even harder for her to enlist the assistance of Chinese law
         enforcement in protecting her from any future problems with a
         snakehead gang."

Having set out the appellant's account, which of course the judge accepted,
Mr Kurlantzick at para 53 onwards of his report sets out the potential
problems for the appellant if she returns to China.  At para 55, he
continues that if the appellant

"were returned to China, she could, in my view, be tracked down by the
snakehead and loan sharking gang, wherever she eventually lived in China,
and particularly if she lived in Fujian or other Southern provinces.  There
is no evidence that, despite the large size of the country, and the recent
reforms of the hukou system, she would be able to escape the criminal
syndicate if she cannot pay her debts - and its potential connections among
Chinese officials and law enforcement - or could find long-term shelter
upon return.  She further would find it difficult to obtain employment of
any kind, since she likely would be unable to remain in any one part of the
country for long.  Without employment, she might be unable to pay her debts
to the snakehead and could be endangered physically."

Mr Kurlantzick then goes on to note that the appellant would be "highly
vulnerable" even in larger cities (para 56) and then at para 57:

"indeed, there is no sufficient protection in China available to people who
return to the country after migration, especially those with a reach to
send people abroad.  There is no internal relocation available in China,
such relocation would allow [the appellant] to be able to escape the
snakehead gang to whom she still owes money, if she cannot pay them back.
Such criminal networks likely would have contacts across China."

The judge had this report and, as is clear from some of the comments,
plainly took it into account even beyond the parts that were quoted by her,
in particular at para 56.  For example, at para 64 of her determination,
the reference to China being ranked Tier 3 in terms of trafficking, is
plainly based upon para 22 of Mr Kurlantzick's report.

In my judgment, the judge was entitled to rely upon the expert opinion of
Mr Kurlantzick supported, in particular in relation to the modern slavery
and trafficking issues in the UK and the appellant's circumstances by the
report of Elizabeth Flint, in concluding that there was "very strong
grounds based upon cogent evidence" to reach a different conclusion to the
country guidance cases of HL and ZC & Others.  The "logic" point made by
the IAT in headnote (ii) of HL had to give way to the different expert
evidence before the judge.

This evidence formed a reasonable and rational basis for concluding that
the appellant was at real risk from her traffickers if she returned to
China both in terms of being re-trafficked or otherwise subject to serious
harm.  The judge was entitled to take into account, as she found and that
is not now challenged, that the appellant is a vulnerable person.  That was
supported by the expert psychological report.

The judge was entitled to find, in addition, that the Chinese government
would be unable to provide a sufficiency of protection against snakeheads
and that internal relocation was not an option open to her given her
circumstances and the risk that she might be tracked down by the
snakeheads.

Finally, I also accept Ms Capel's submission that nothing in HC & RC
precluded the judge reaching the decision that she did.  Paragraphs (1) and
(2) of the headnote read as follows:

"(1) Although the Chinese authorities are intent upon rescuing and
rehabilitating women and girls trafficked for the purposes of prostitution,
there are deficiencies in the measures they have taken to combat the
problem of trafficking.  The principal deficiencies are the lack of a
determined effort to deal with the complicity of corrupt law enforcement
officers and state officials and the failure to penalise as trafficking
acts of forced labour, debt bondage, coercion, involuntary servitude or
offences committed against male victims.

(2)  Women and girls in China do not in general face a real risk of serious
harm from traffickers.  Where, however, it can be established in a given
case that a woman or a girl does face a real risk of being forced or
coerced into prostitution by traffickers, the issue of whether she will be
able to receive effective protection from the authorities will need careful
consideration in the light of background evidence highlighting significant
deficiencies in the system of protection for victims of trafficking.  But
each case, however, must be judged on its own facts.  China is a vast
country and it may be, for example, that in a particular part of China the
efforts to eliminate trafficking are determined and the level of complicity
between state officials and traffickers is low.  If an appellant comes from
such an area, or if she can relocate to such an area, there may be no real
risk to her."

In my judgment, this decision dating back to 2009 itself recognises that
there may, in a particular case, be a real risk to a woman from her
traffickers in China and also that, on a fact-sensitive basis, there may be
cases where a sufficiency of protection is not established and internal
relocation is not safe.  Those are fact-sensitive matters and in respect of
which the judge was entitled to rely upon the expert evidence to reach her
findings.

For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to depart from
the earlier country guidance cases on the basis that there was "very strong
grounds based upon cogent evidence" derived from the expert reports, in
particular that of Mr Kurlantzick and to find that the appellant would be
at real risk of being retrafficked (or other serious harm) at the hands of
the snakehead gang who originally trafficked her to the UK; that she would
be unable to obtain a sufficiency of protection and that internal
relocation would not be reasonably and safely available to her within
China.

For these reasons, therefore, the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in
allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Article 8

The Secretary of State also challenged the judge's conclusion that the
appellant's return to China would breach Art 8.  Given her conclusion in
respect of the asylum claim, which I have decided she was entitled to
reach, it is perhaps unnecessary to reach a conclusion in relation to the
Art 8 finding.

Before me, both representatives engaged with the judge's reasoning in
relation to Art 8, in particular whether the judge was entitled to find
that the appellant was not a "foreign criminal" so that s.117C of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) did not apply
because the appellant's conviction (for which she was sentenced to less
than twelve months' imprisonment) had not caused "serious harm" and she was
not a "persistent offender" (s.117D(2)(c)(ii) and (iii)).  There are,
undoubtedly, difficulties with the judge's reasoning in that regard; in
particular in taking into account what the judge called her "forced
criminality".  It is not readily apparent why that was relevant in
assessing whether the consequences of her offending caused "serious harm"
or whether, given the repetition of offending, that offending was not
"persistent" (see the approach of the Court of Appeal to s.117D(2)(c)(ii)
and (iii) in  R(Mahmood)  v UTIAC and SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 717 at [34]-[45]
and [71]). Any "excuse" or "mitigation" for her offending would not deflect
from a finding that it "caused serious harm" or that she "keeps breaking
the law" and that therefore she is a "persistent offender" if those
findings would otherwise be the appropriate findings on the facts.  Also
problematic is the judge's finding that her offending was so mitigated by
the circumstances in which she was required to commit the offences in the
UK that there is "no public interest" in deporting her.  Whilst the
mitigation might be relevant to the "weight" to be given to the public
interest, her deportation, if she is a "foreign criminal", "is in the
public interest" (see, s.117C(1), my emphasis).

At the conclusion of the hearing, I invited the representatives to indicate
what their position would be in relation to the Art 8 decision if the
judge's conclusion on the asylum claim stood.  Ms Capel, quite fairly,
indicated that without taking instructions from the appellant (who was not
present in the hearing) she could not say.  Mr Howells, likewise, was
reluctant to express a view other than to acknowledge, as the judge had
found in para 74, that if the appellant was a victim of trafficking and at
real risk of persecution on return, her Art 8 claim should succeed.

I do not consider the judge's reasoning in relation to whether the
appellant is a "foreign criminal" to be sustainable for the reasons I gave
above.  However, in the light of my conclusion that the judge's decision to
allow the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds stands, it would be
pointless to set aside her decision that the appeal should also be allowed
under Art 8.  Given the findings in the asylum appeal, the inevitable
conclusion is that the appellant cannot be deported and her removal would
necessarily breach Art 8.  The judge decided as much in para 74. Any re-
hearing of her art 8 claim would be wholly superfluous because she was, and
would be, bound to succeed under Art 8 given the conclusion in the asylum
appeal.  Consequently, I do not consider it appropriate to set aside the
Art 8 decision in her favour.

Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
appellant's appeal on asylum grounds did not involve the making of an error
of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

In relation to the decision to allow the appeal under Art 8, for the
reasons I have set out above, it is not appropriate to set aside that
decision and so the decision to allow the appeal under Art 8, on the basis
I have set out, also stands.

Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is
dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               15, July 2020

