
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02754/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2019                             |On 9 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    M A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, a solicitor from Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the appellant is an asylum  seeker  and  so  is  entitled  to
privacy.

2. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the appeal of the appellant against a decision of the respondent
on 4 March 2019 refusing him asylum and/or humanitarian protection or leave
to remain on human rights grounds.

3.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   For  the  purposes  of
introduction, it is his case that he is at risk because  of  activities  in
the United Kingdom and the main reason for his having permission to  appeal
against the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  is  that  the  judge,
arguably, did not  have  proper  regard  to  the  background  material  and
therefore made findings of fact that were unsafe.

4. To understand this appeal it is necessary to look carefully both  at  the
decisions complained of by the Secretary of State  and  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

5. This shows that the appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  in  1982.
He appears to have lived in the United Kingdom  since  June  2007  when  he
entered on a student visa.  His leave was extended until  30  October  2015
but curtailed when his sponsor's licence was revoked.  He was given further
leave but that too was curtailed because the sponsor's licence was  revoked
and his leave expired on 25 December 2015.

6. He claimed asylum shortly before that  leave  expired.   The  application
was refused and an appeal dismissed.  His appeal rights were  exhausted  on
27 October 2017.  On 11 April 2018 he made further  submissions  which  the
respondent decided did not amount to a fresh claim but upon judicial review
the respondent looked again at the submissions and further submissions  and
then made the decision complained of.

7. The claim is summarised.  It is said that the appellant identified  as  a
member of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and  he  claimed  to  have
been ill-treated by the Awami-League Party  (ALP)  and  he  maintained  his
claim to have been ill-treated in Bangladesh.

8. He also said that he had been politically active  as  a  blogger  and  to
have campaigned  for  the  BNP  in  demonstrations  against  the  ALP.   He
supported the claim with newspapers and online articles.  He  said  he  had
been photographed.  It was his case that he would be  identifiable  in  the
event of his return and risked persecution as a result.

9. The Secretary of State then looked at the previous  application  and  the
reasons for refusing it and,  appropriately,  took  that  decision  as  the
starting point.

10. The further submissions that had not  been  considered  previously  were
summarised as a claim that he would be persecuted both by  the  Bangladeshi
authorities and members of the ALP because he was a member of the BNP, that
he had actively campaigned  for  the  BNP  against  the  Bangladeshi  prime
minister whilst he was in the United Kingdom and that as a  result  of  sur
place political activities the Bangladeshi authorities  and  ALP  activists
were aware of his role.

11. The Secretary of State considered background material and accepted  that
"interparty violence is common in Bangladesh and some  political  opponents
face harassment and ill-treatment".  It was also accepted  that  "prominent
members of the BNP have faced arrest and that ALP activists have previously
threatened BNP supporters and candidates".

12. The respondent  then  explained  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
appellant would be at risk.  He had not shown that he had been  politically
active in Bangladesh or that ALP activists were aware of him.

13. The respondent set out explain that decision to refuse the application.

14. The respondent considered letters from  the  BNP  Party  in  the  United
Kingdom.



15. One, from M A Malique, says that the appellant is "personally known"  to
the writer because of his activities with the BNP and describes him  as  an
"online activist" and says he has been an active member of  the  BNP  Party
since 2002.  The writer believed that  the  appellant  was  on  a  list  of
government agency lists and would be persecuted in the event of his  return
as his pictures had been published in newspapers. The  Secretary  of  State
did not accept that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  due  to  political
activities sur place or that the authorities were aware of him.

16. The second letter was from one Nasir Ahmed Sahin,  also  describing  the
appellant as an active member of Jatiyobati Shecchasebok but the respondent
then said (paragraph 39) that it was:

  "... noted that the letters provide no real insight into  your  political
  activities  and  does(sic)  not  give  individual  accounts  of  how  the
  signatories know you personally and politically.  Further the letters  do
  not state specifically where they have gotten  [sic]  their  information.
  It is considered that as the letters only give a generic account of their
  involvement with you that they have been produced to bolster  your  claim
  for asylum and do not give a  true  reflection  of  you  having  had  any
  involvement with the BNP".

17. The respondent then looked at supporting documents from  relatives.   It
is a feature of his case that  his  brother  has  been  granted  asylum  in
France.

18. The respondent looked  at  the  "Country  Policy  and  Information  Note
Bangladesh: Journalists, publishers  and  internet  bloggers,  July  2017."
This recognised that the Bangladeshi  authorities  were  reported  to  have
sometimes used legal provisions to harass, detain,  threaten  or  persecute
publishers, editors and journalists including internet bloggers and  social
media users.  The  same  Note  also  recognised  that  certain  Bangladeshi
writers, bloggers and human rights activists in the UK  "have  appeared  on
'hit lists' issued by extremist groups in Bangladesh".  The Note encouraged
decision makers to  assess  the  risk  alleged  by  a  claimant  against  a
background of factors including the nature  and  extent  of  the  activity,
whether the material produced by the person in the UK  has  received  media
coverage or publicity in Bangladesh, whether the person has been subject to
serious threats from extremists in Bangladesh after  leaving  the  country,
and the likelihood that the person will be recognised and pursued  by  non-
state actors on return.

19. The respondent did not accept  that  the  multiple  photographs,  social
media posts and articles submitted demonstrated either that  the  appellant
is politically active in the UK or that he would  be  of  interest  to  ALP
activists or the Bangladeshi authorities.

20. The respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  produced  "multiple
photographs" of him attending BNP demonstrations between February and April
2018 but gave no details of  what  contribution  he  had  made  other  than
attending.  The respondent decided the photographs showed only that he  had
attended and that was not enough to put him in the category of  people  who
were at risk.  The respondent described him as a  "low  level  participant"
and that he was "simply a member of the crowd".

21. The respondent referred again to the letter from Mr M  A  Malique  which
explained how the appellant had attended multiple demonstrations  and  that
he was identifiable.  The second letter  said  that  the  appellant  was  a
member of the BNP and that he had played a "prominent part in co-ordinating
event and programmes, demonstrations and party gatherings".  The respondent
regarded these claims as "inconsistent with each other"  as  the  appellant
was described in one as a participant and the other as an organiser.

22. The appellant had produced multiple articles saying that he  had  posted
on his blog "The Journal of Freedom" but he had only submitted  five  posts
in the course of four years and none of the posts mentioned his involvement
with the BNP.  He had provided no evidence to demonstrate the extent of his
blogging activities or his follower count.

23. The respondent accepted that the appellant had  posted  online  but  not
that he had shown he was a prolific blogger that had attracted attention.

24. The respondent was similarly unimpressed with a  series  of  screenshots
from the appellant's Facebook profile.  The posts began  in  January  2019.
He had provided no evidence that he had attended activities before that  or
that his Facebook profile remained open.  Screenshots were of poor  quality
and did not help the respondent decide any possible risk.

25. The appellant produced an article from the Dhaka  Tribune  published  in
February 2018 which he said  showed  him  attacking  the  Bangladeshi  High
Commission in February 2018 and he had  produced  a  photocopy  of  a  Brit
Bangla 24 article which  was  undated,  and  a  photocopy  from  the  Daily
Observer dated 28 April 2018.   The  respondent  did  not  regard  them  as
reliable documents.  They were photocopies and the translators' credentials
were obscure.

26. The respondent noted (paragraph 78) that the Country of  Origin  Request
Bangladesh - Media - journalist fraud use (9 November 2018) drew  attention
to

  "Fraudulent newspaper pages, produced to  a  high  standard  by  external
  parties, are also available in Bangladesh, sometimes involving  reputable
  publications such as The Daily Star and The Dhaka Tribune".

27. The respondent did accept that the appellant's  image  had  appeared  on
something that appeared to be the Dhaka Tribune website but not that it was
a genuine website.  No names were listed in the article and the appellant's
appearance in the photographs suggested he was a member of the crowd.   The
respondent further complained that the posted images from  Brit  Bangla  24
were of poor quality.  The photocopy from the Daily Observer dated 28 April
2018 was said to identify the appellant at  the  Bangladeshi  "Embassy"  in
London but there is no picture identifying the appellant nor was  his  full
name published.  Neither was the Secretary  of  State  satisfied  that  the
photocopy was in fact a true photocopy from the published newspaper.

28. All in all, the Secretary of State considered the evidence but formed  a
very unsatisfactory view and that led to the application being refused.

29. In her Decision and Reasons the First-tier Tribunal Judge  set  out  the
case  and  particularly  recognised  evidence  that  the   authorities   in
Bangladesh have been  involved  in  closing  down  "YouTube  channels"  and
"Facebook IDs" originating from people who had been involved in making anti-
government comments.

30. Importantly she said at paragraph 24:

  "I  find  that  such  information  shows  that  although  there  is  some
  surveillance of the internet, such surveillance  is  at  its  operational
  beginnings and it is very limited.  In my view, the appellant would  need
  to be a prominent adversary of the government to attract their  attention
  when considering the sheer volume of internet postings,  blogs,  Facebook
  accounts and web pages that are available".

31. The judge then looked at the  letter  from  Mr  Malique  who  identifies
himself as the president of the BNP in the UK.  She acknowledged  that  the
appellant is described there as a "very active and  dedicated  member"  but
also found little evidence to confirm those claims.   Certainly  there  was
evidence that the appellant was in a crowd and held a banner but the  judge
did not regard that as evidence that he was a prominent speaker.

32. The judge noted that Mr Malique had  not  explained  why  the  appellant
would be on  the  list  of  people  targeted  just  because  his  name  and
photograph had appeared, and in any event his full name  did  not  seem  to
have been published.

33. The judge found that the most prominent photograph was  at  page  44  of
the supplementary bundle and that the appellant was barely recognisable  in
the others.

34.  The  judge  decided  that  there  were  "thousands  and  thousands"  of
photographs on the internet in respect of BNP demonstrations.

35. The judge looked very carefully at the appellant's  blog  entitled  "The
Journey of Freedom".  There were two articles posted in 2015, one in  2017,
one in 2018 and two in 2019.  No one had commented and it was not signed in
the appellant's full name.  The judge described the  interaction  with  the
appellant's blog as "non-existent" and found that would not  be  sufficient
to bring any adverse attention from the authorities upon return.

36. The judge had also seen video clips and found  that  the  appellant  was
not prominent in any of them or on screen for more than a few seconds.  The
judge found they did not show the appellant as someone prominent  or  doing
anything to attract attention.

37. The appellant's Facebook account attracted few comments  and  less  than
2,000 followers.

38. The judge  then  commented  on  the  fact  that  close  members  of  the
appellant's family had been recognised as refugees.  Like the Secretary  of
State, she regarded this as a little more than passing interest.  Cases are
decided on the evidence presented in them and it did nothing to enrich  the
appellant's claim.

39. At paragraph 32 the judge said:

  "I do not, therefore, find that he is a sufficient  active  or  prominent
  member of the BNP  to  be  of  adverse  interest  on  return.   There  is
  insufficient evidence provided which shows that he is a known  person  in
  Bangladesh or that he is likely to be targeted on return due to any  'sur
  place' activities.  I find that he  has  failed  to  establish  the  core
  elements of his claim".

40. Although not identified as such the grounds supporting  the  application
for permission serve as a  skeleton  argument.   The  grounds  particularly
challenge the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding that  the  appellant  was
"among thousands" in a photograph.  They assert he was clearly  visible  in
the front line and amongst less than hundreds.

41. They also complain that the appellant  produced  clear  photographs  for
use at the hearing and should not be criticised for the deficiencies in the
copies provided in the bundle.

42. The grounds contend that the judge was wrong to write  off  the  dangers
arising from the postings on YouTube and the like.

43. Further, the judge was said to have erred by not explaining her  finding
that the appellant's critical remarks would  not  be  of  interest  to  the
authorities and her finding that he would not come to their attention.  The
judge should have concluded from the evidence that the appellant's  brother
was recognised as a refugee that the  appellant  comes  from  a  family  of
political activists and this should have supported his case.

44. The grounds particularly relied on the Odhikar  Human  Rights  Report  -
October 2018 which was said to support the appellant's case.

45. Paragraph 13 of that report made reference to  "many  cases  were  filed
against grassroots level  leaders,  activists"  and  also  to  the  accused
persons including people living abroad.  Paragraph 4 of  a  similar  report
for  January  to  March  2019  referred  to  "many  dissenters,  opposition
activists and ordinary citizens" being sued for defamation.   There  was  a
further reference to "ordinary citizens critical of the  government"  being
subject to such cases. The Human Rights  Watch  Report  entitled  "Creating
Panic - 2018" referred to "widespread surveillance" and that  according  to
the BNP over 300,000 of its leaders and activists had  been  implicated  in
false and fabricated cases.  It gave  an  example  of  a  British  national
arrested  in  the  Sylhet  district  accused  of  straightforward  criminal
offences but the relatives claiming that he was not a criminal  but  a  BNP
activist.  Again, according to Human Rights Watch  there  was  a  telephone
recording in which a senior police officer could be  heard  explaining  how
that person "was arrested for protesting  against  the  prime  minister  in
London".

46. Similar comments found in the Home  Office  Country  Information  Report
for January 2018 which recorded  how  since  2009  opposition  leaders  and
activists have faced  harassment  and  intimidation  in  various  forms  at
paragraph 2.2.4 and at paragraph 6.1.10 there are attacks against  "leaders
and activists of opposition  political  parties,  women  and  children  and
ordinary citizens".

47. The grounds supported  the  contention  that  the  judge  had  just  not
engaged  adequately  with  the  background  evidence  before  reaching  her
conclusions.

48. In his oral submissions Mr Shah concentrated on the  guidance  given  in
BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36.

49. I  acknowledge  the  obvious  comment  that  that  concerned  Iran,  not
Bangladesh but Mr Shah argued that that decision had wider application than
just Iran.  Mr Shah particularly drew to my attention paragraph  64  in  BA
where the Court of Appeal identified the most relevant factors in assessing
a risk on return because of sur place activity.  They are the nature of the
sur place activity,  the  risk  of  being  identified,  factors  triggering
enquiry or action on return, consequences of identification on the risk  of
being identified on return rather than the risk of  being  identified  from
sur place activities.  I accept Mr Shah's point that this is not considered
in any great deal in the Decision and Reasons but  that  is  only  material
fault if there is some reason to think that the most detailed consideration
would have helped the appellant.  The problem I have with  the  appellant's
case is that although I can see that the photographic evidence  might  have
been underplayed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  because  there  are
certainly good quality photographs before me, albeit copies, from which the
appellant could be identified, I have not found anything in the  background
material that establishes the risk consequent on sur  place  activities  of
the kind carried out by this appellant.  My attention has not been drawn to
any decided case where a person has been identified because  of  sur  place
activities and persecuted on return.

50. I take Mr Shah's point that there is evidence that low  level  activists
can be in trouble in Bangladesh and even of  activists  not  in  Bangladesh
being "identified" in some way as having done  wrong  not  because  of  any
misconduct but because the authorities want and excuse to condemn them.

51. This does bring me to a lurking concern  about  the  appellant's  family
having been recognised as refugees.  I do not  know  the  quality  of  that
evidence.  Again, I have seen  nothing  in  the  background  material  that
suggests that a person will be in trouble simply for being the  brother  of
somebody who has done some bad things in the minds of the authorities.

52. Rather, I find there are  two  categories  of  risk.   People  who  have
reached a sufficiently prominent degree of activism may  well  be  at  risk
although each case has to be looked at on its own facts.  This  appellant's
activities are  not  of  high  order.   He  has  openly  taken  part  in  a
demonstration and he has "blogged"(?) but does not seem to  have  attracted
much support.

53. Like the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I cannot find anything that  bridges
the gap between the possibility of ill-treatment and the real risk of  ill-
treatment.

54. The standard of proof is low and the threshold is low but the  case  has
to be proved I cannot find evidence that suggests that the appellant  would
be at risk.

55. No doubt anticipating this line of argument if not addressing  questions
based on it, Mr Shah drew my attention to a document in the bundle at  page
289, beginning at 282 headed "Creating Panic" and published by Human Rights
Watch.  This report states that:

  "Thousands of cases had been filed in recent months against  leaders  and
  supporters of  opposition  parties.   'The  police  are  indiscriminately
  arresting  people,'  a  newspaper  columnist  told  Human  Rights  Watch.
  According to a law professor, 'they do not bother with legal formalities,
  these police. They are arresting people just to harass and  put  pressure
  on the politicians'".

56. The same report then referred to the BNP stating that  over  300,000  of
its leaders and activists have been implicated in  "false  and  fabricated"
cases. I find 300,000 a staggeringly high  number  and  although  I  accept
completely that this is the number reported to Human Rights  Watch  I  have
great difficulty accepting that that figure in the absence of some sort  of
confirmation.

57. Be that as it may, it does not assist the appellant.  The  arrests  seem
to be random and, bearing in mind that Bangladesh is  a  populace  country,
the risk of such ill-treatment is low.

58. I agree with  Mr  Tarlow  that  there  is  no  basis  for  finding  this
appellant would be singled out for ill-treatment.  He is not a  high  level
activist.  His activity is low level and there is nothing to  suggest  that
low level activists generally are at  risk.   There  is  some  evidence  of
random charging but no reason to conclude that there is a  real  risk  that
this appellant being one of the unfortunate people chosen for that kind  of
ill-treatment.

59. Clearly the appellant is desperate not to  be  returned  to  Bangladesh.
He would prefer to be in the United Kingdom but he  has  not  satisfied  me
that there is anything in the papers not  considered  fully,  or  obviously
considered fully by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that  could  support  a
different conclusion.

60. Putting all these things together although  I  understand  entirely  why
permission was granted I dismiss the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 March 2020                   |



