
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02524/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2020                 |On 05 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Maqsood, Counsel instructed by Archbold
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Feeney
promulgated on 4 June 2019.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Andrew on 10 July 2019.

The hearing was held remotely. Neither party objected to the hearing being
held by video. Both parties participated by UK Court Skype. I am satisfied
that a face to face hearing could not be held because it was not
practicable and that all of the issues could be determined in a remote
hearing. Both parties confirmed that the hearing was fair.

Background

The appellant is a national of Pakistan who entered the UK with entry
clearance as a domestic worker. An application for further leave on this
basis was refused and an appeal against this decision was unsuccessful. On
18 August 2016 the appellant was apprehended by immigration officers and
detained. He claimed asylum on 24 August 2016. The claim was refused and
certified. Following judicial review proceedings, a new decision to refuse
the protection claim was taken on 5 March 2019. This is the decision under
appeal.

The appellant claims to fear persecution from 'land mafia' who have
appropriated the home the appellant purchased in Pakistan and threatened he
and his wife. The appellant's wife and children have fled to Brazil where
she has claimed asylum.

The respondent accepted that the appellant's home had been appropriated by
'land mafia', that both the appellant and his wife had been threatened,
that the appellant  had made a criminal allegation against the mafia and
that the appellant had lodged civil proceedings in Pakistan to have his
land returned to him. However, when assessing future risk, the view of the
respondent was that there is both sufficiency of protection in Pakistan and
a viable option for internal relocation. The appellant comes from Sialkot
but it is open to him to relocate to another place such as Karachi which is
over a 1000 miles away. The appellant failed to demonstrate that the 'land
mafia' has an ongoing interest in or motivation to pursue him and there is
no external evidence that they have power and influence or that they are
connected to the government.  It is not plausible that the 'land mafia'
would locate the appellant in Pakistan.  The respondent concluded that
there would be no very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration
in Pakistan and that there were no exceptional circumstances which would
warrant a grant of leave outside of the Immigration Rules.

The appellant's position

The appellant's position is that he has well founded fear of persecution
from the 'land mafia'. He has previously been the victim of persecution and
he would be persecuted again. The 'land mafia' are well connected and there
is no sufficiency of protection throughout Pakistan.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

Given that the appellant's account was accepted by the respondent, the only
issues before the judge were that of sufficiency of protection and internal
relocation.  The judge concluded that there were legal frameworks in
Pakistan to address the problems of land grabbing, although she found that
proceedings took a long time to conclude which was consistent with the
court documents lodged by the appellant to demonstrate that he had issued
civil proceedings to recover his land.  The judge also concluded that given
the background material in respect of the lack of effectiveness of the
police, the level of police corruption and limitations of the police that
the appellant would not be able to avail himself of protection from the
authorities in the local area.

The judge made a clear finding at [36] that although the appellant feared
that the 'land mafia' might issue a false criminal allegation him, there
was no evidence that this had been done. The judge concluded that the
appellant would not be of interest on arrival in Pakistan.

The judge then turned to the issue of internal relocation. The judge noted
at [39] and [40] that Karachi is over 1,000 miles from the appellant's home
region, that it has a population of 16 million and that Karachi is
described as having a mixed ethnic and religious community. The Punjabi
language is spoken by 48% of the population and Punjabis represent 44% of
ethnic groups in Pakistan.  The appellant can safely relocate to another
part of Pakistan. The judge also found that there was insufficient evidence
before her that the civil proceedings were extant and commented that it was
unclear why the appellant would be of interest after such a passage of
time. The judge at [50] summarised the position, concluding that
notwithstanding his subjective fear the appellant did not have a well-
founded fear of persecution.

The judge went on to dismiss the human rights appeal finding that it is not
a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR to remove the appellant from
the UK.

Grant of Permission

First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew granted permission on the basis that
"there was an arguable error of law in the determination in that the judge
states at [45] that he has not seen documents to show on what basis the
appellant's wife had claimed asylum in Brazil. In fact the documents were
included in the bundle and 'may corroborate the appellant's claims".

The Grounds of challenge

    Ground 1

It is said that the judge failed to consider the appellant's assertion that
a First Information Report ('FIR') had been filed against him in Pakistan
but that due to the his financial circumstances he is unable to obtain it.
It is said that there is a material misdirection in law by failing to give
proper consideration to the appellant's full account.

    Ground 2

The judge has failed to take into account that there is a lack of
sufficiency of protection throughout Pakistan.

    Ground 3

At [45] the judge has erred in law by misreading the documentary evidence.
The appellant has submitted documents relating to the applicant's wife's
and children's claim for asylum in Brazil. The wife's claim is consistent
with and corroborative of the appellant's claim in the UK.

No challenge was made to the judge's decision on the Article 8 ECHR claim.

Respondent's Position - Rule 24 response

The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. It is submitted that the
judge directed herself appropriately and there is no material error of law.


Decision on Error of Law

At the outset of the hearing, Mr Maqsood clarified that it is not the
appellant's case that he has a FIR registered against him. The appellant's
fear is that a FIR may be registered in the future and it is no longer
submitted that the judge erred in the way asserted in the grounds.  The
only ground relied on is Ground 3 which is the ground on which permission
was granted.

For the sake of clarity, I am satisfied that Ground 2 is not made out in
any event. The judge finds that there is a lack of sufficiency of
protection in Pakistan in the local area and indicates at [37] that the
evidence before her is that sufficiency of protection is not generally
available. However the judge goes to find that she is not satisfied for the
reasons given, that the 'land mafia' who are third-party agents of
persecution would be interested in pursuing the appellant now or outside of
his home area and that the appellant can safely relocate elsewhere in
Pakistan. In my view Mr Maqsood was correct not to pursue this ground.

    Ground 3

Mr Maqsood submitted that the judge failed to take into account the
documentary evidence in the bundle relating to the appellant's wife and
children. The asylum application sets out the basis of the wife's claim.
The documents are said to confirm that the wife and children were granted
status from 15 October 2015 until 2016. The appellant's son now has a
Brazilian passport. He submits that given that the appellant's wife and
children have been granted refugee status, this must be weighty evidence
that the Brazilian authorities accepted that internal relocation is not
possible and corroborates the appellant's account. There should be a
holistic appraisal and an inference made that the appellant's claim to be
at risk from the 'land mafia' is made out.

I am not satisfied that the judge failed to take into account the documents
in respect of the appellant's wife's asylum claim and further that even had
the judge failed to take these documents into account, that the error would
have been material.

In his bundle at pages 8 to 16 the appellant enclosed a copy of his wife's
claim for asylum. At page 17 to 19 there are some untranslated copies of
status documents in Portuguese and at 20 to 22 there are some documents
which appear to be health care permits.   There is also evidence that the
appellant's son is now a Brazilian national.

At [45] the judge stated;

         "I also take into account that his wife has sought asylum in Brazil
         and that his son now has Brazilian citizenship, but I have not seen
         any documents to show the basis upon which his wife was granted
         status and the appellant could have obtained these documents quite
         easily from his wife in Brazil as he speaks to her daily. He tells
         me she has been granted asylum, but his witness statement asserts
         that her claim is pending so there is some confusion to what her
         current status is and the basis upon which she has been allowed to
         stay".

I agree with Mr Clarke for the respondent. Firstly, I am satisfied that the
judge has taken into account the documents in the bundle from the judge's
reference to the fact that she accepts that the appellant's son is a
Brazilian citizen.

In her application for asylum the appellant's wife states;

         "If I go back my country enemies of my husband and me could be
         [sic] killed us".

         "Me and my children have a problem in Pakistan. Because my husband
         MS live in England, bought a house for us to live with a peace in
         our house. But just like I was lonely with my childrens. Some group
         of land mafia want to stole my house and land of house. They threat
         me to leave the house, if not you will suffer. I am lonely woman
         and could not do anything against my enemies. They threat me if I
         did not leave this house for them, they will kill me and my
         children. This reason I have to leave my country and come to
         Brazil".

The document provided relates to her claim for asylum, rather than to the
outcome of her claim and cannot be said to demonstrate the basis on which
the appellant's wife was granted status in Brazil. There is no error in the
judge's approach to this evidence.

The judge also correctly comments that there is no document confirming that
the appellant's wife has been awarded refugee status. The documents at page
70 to 72 are headed 'Documento Provisorio de Identidade de Estrangeiro' and
are not translated.  The judge was properly entitled to find that these
documents on their own did not demonstrate the basis on which the
appellant's wife has been granted status in Brazil. The judge was also
entitled to rely on inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence about the
status of his wife's claim for asylum which had described as 'pending' in
his witness statement and was entitled to draw an inference from the fact
that the appellant's wife had not provided any further evidence to
demonstrate the basis on which she has been granted status.

Since there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that the appellant's
wife has been granted refugee status, I do not accept Mr Maqsood's argument
that the fact that the appellant's wife has been granted status means that
the Brazilian authorities have accepted that there is no sufficiency of
protection for her and that she is not able to relocate internally.

I am also satisfied from the contents of the wife's application, that the
appellant's wife's claim was made on the same factual basis as that of her
husband but that she was claiming asylum as someone who would be returning
to Pakistan as a single female which is a different scenario to that of the
appellant which may in any event have led to a different outcome in
relation to the issue of internal relocation.

I am satisfied that there was no error of law in the judge's approach to
this evidence.

I am further satisfied that this evidence, even if it had been ignored by
the judge, is not material to the outcome of the appeal. The judge accepted
that the appellant's land was taken by 'land mafia', that the land mafia
have threatened him and his wife and that he has issued civil proceedings.
This is the same factual basis of the appellant's wife claim. The factual
basis of the appellant's wife's claim does not take the appellant's claim
any further.

Even had the appellant's wife been granted refugee status, it does not
automatically follow that her husband has a well-founded fear of
persecution. As I have already stated there may have been different
considerations surrounding the issue of internal relocation.

I am satisfied that the judge properly considered the issue of sufficiency
of protection and found that this was not available. The judge gave cogent
and sustainable reasons for finding that there is no FIR against the
appellant which would lead to his arrest in Pakistan and the appellant
confirms that there is no FIR currently outstanding against him. The judge
gave cogent and sustainable reasons based on the evidence, for finding that
the 'land mafia' would have no interest in pursuing the appellant. The
mafia have taken the land and there has been a passage of time since these
events occurred. The appellant is not at risk outside his own area and for
the reasons properly given by the judge at [38] to [40] the judge finds
that the appellant has the option of relocating within Pakistan to another
area where he will not be at risk of serious harm.

Conclusion

It follows that none of the grounds of appeal are made out and the
appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The FtT decision does not contain an error of law and I do not set it
aside.


Signed R J Owens
Date 29 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

