
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02831/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Teams    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2021                     |On 10 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     IA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS (V)

The appellant is a citizen of Iran, who appealed against the respondent's
decision dated 6 March 2020, refusing his international protection and
human rights application to remain in the United Kingdom ('UK').  The
appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal ('UT') against a decision of
the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') promulgated on 20 January 2021, dismissing
his appeal against that decision on asylum and human rights grounds.

I am satisfied that the appellant is vulnerable and I have treated him as
such during the hearing before me.

SSHD concession

Although the respondent submitted a rule 24 notice dated 23 March 2021,
opposing the appeal, at the beginning of the hearing before me, Mr McVeety
accepted that the FTT failed to consider for itself whether the appellant
should be treated as a vulnerable witness, and the impact of the medical
evidence upon his oral evidence as well as the evidence he has given over
time during the course of interviews.  Mr McVeety conceded that in these
circumstances the FTT decision must be set aside and the matter remitted to
the FTT.  He was right to do so for the reasons I now give.

Medical evidence

There was clear and apparently cogent evidence that the appellant was
vulnerable.

          i) In many letters spanning 2017 to 2019, GPs from the Failsworth
             Group Practice referred to the appellant as having been
             diagnosed with anxiety, depression and PTSD.  By way of
             example, in a letter dated 23 November 2017 Dr Tahghighi
             described the appellant as having been on medication to
             control his low mood, anxiety and PTSD.  He was said to be
             requiring counselling and unable to attend any interviews due
             to the nature of his mental health.  He was said to
             "experience extreme distress and anxiety and this can also
             have an effect on his cognitive abilities".  In a letter dated
             17 January 2019, Dr Birch repeated these concerns.  She
             highlighted that there had been little progress with his
             mental state despite completing medication, CBT and
             counselling.  Dr Birch urged the respondent to take this into
             account when interviewing him.

         ii) The appellant has also been seeing a mental health liaison
             practitioner at his GP surgery.  In a letter dated 18
             September 2020 she described his mental health challenges as
             well as the long-term abuse suffered by the appellant in his
             NASS accommodation, which culminated in him becoming a victim
             of an assault.

        iii) The appellant has been regularly seeing a psychiatrist at
             Pennine Care NHS Foundation Trust.  By way of example, in a
             letter dated 16 October 2019, Dr Hose, a Consultant Liaison
             Psychiatrist, described the appellant as having "significant
             mental health problems as a direct result of the trauma he has
             experienced...as a result, he can struggle with emotional
             regulation in challenging situations".  Dr Hose went on to say
             this:

                  "this would be aggravated by legal proceedings, which are
                  likely to trigger his trauma memories, and perhaps lead to
                  episodes of disassociation ( where [he] may be
                  superficially calm, but unable to meaningfully take part
                  in what is happening around him despite responding to
                  short questions).  This is made more likely by being put
                  under pressure to answer complex questions in a short time
                  frame, or being given too much information too quickly.
                  {he] would require adjustments to any formal proceedings
                  to allow for this..."

             In a more up to date letter dated 8 September 2020, Dr Hose
             clarified that the appellant suffers from depression, PTSD and
             functional neurological disorder ('FND').  She described his
             FND as having started following torture in Iran.  Dr Hose also
             highlighted that cognitive difficulties are a common aspect of
             FND, which worsens under acute stress.  Dr Hose noted that the
             appellant's reports of his torture have been consistent,
             albeit he struggles to remember dates and sequence "and can
             get himself quite mixed up as a result of the cognitive side
             effects of the PTSD, depression and FND.  Again it is
             important to state that these are a direct result of the
             torture experiences he had in Iran and he had no prior mental
             health difficulties".  Dr Hose repeated suggested adjustments
             to the asylum process, including extra time, support around
             sequencing and breaks.  She noted that the appellant struggled
             to ask for such amendments himself and might be seen as
             unreliable as he may forget details or make errors in an
             effort to engage.

Legal framework

In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, Sir Ernest Ryder, the
Senior President of Tribunals, said this (my emphasis):

             "30. To assist parties  and  tribunals  a  Practice  Direction
             'First-tier and Upper Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
             Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by the Senior President,  Sir
             Robert Carnwath, with the agreement of the Lord Chancellor  on
             30 October 2008. In addition, joint Presidential Guidance Note
             No 2 of 2010 was issued by the then President of UTIAC,  Blake
             J and the acting President of  the  FtT  (IAC),  Judge  Arfon-
             Jones. The directions and guidance contained in them are to be
             followed and for the convenience of  practitioners,  they  are
             annexed to this judgment. Failure to  follow  them  will  most
             likely be a material error of law. They are to be found in the
             Annex to this judgment.

             31.  The PD and the Guidance Note [Guidance] provide  detailed
             guidance on the approach to be adopted by the tribunal  to  an
             incapacitated or vulnerable person.  I  agree  with  the  Lord
             Chancellor's submission that there are five key features:

                  a.   the early identification of issues  of  vulnerability
                  is encouraged, if at all possible, before any  substantive
                  hearing through the use of a CMRH  or  pre-hearing  review
                  (Guidance [4] and [5]);

                  b.   a person who is incapacitated or vulnerable will only
                  need to attend as a witness to give  oral  evidence  where
                  the tribunal determines that "the evidence is necessary to
                  enable the fair hearing of  the  case  and  their  welfare
                  would not be prejudiced by doing so" (PD [2] and  Guidance
                  [8] and [9]);

                  c.   where an incapacitated or vulnerable person does give
                  oral evidence, detailed provision is to be made to  ensure
                  their welfare is protected before and during  the  hearing
                  (PD [6] and [7] and Guidance [10]);

                  d.   it is necessary to give special consideration to  all
                  of the  personal  circumstances  of  an  incapacitated  or
                  vulnerable person in assessing  their  evidence  (Guidance
                  [10.2] to [15]); and

                  e.    relevant  additional   sources   of   guidance   are
                  identified in the Guidance  including  from  international
                  bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).

The Guidance referred to above states as follows (my emphasis):

             "13. The weight to be placed upon factors of vulnerability may
             differ depending on the matter under appeal,  the  burden  and
             standard of proof and whether the individual is a  witness  or
             an appellant.

             14.  Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different
             degrees of understanding by witnesses and  appellant  compared
             to those are not vulnerable, in the context of  evidence  from
             others  associated  with  the  appellant  and  the  background
             evidence before you. Where there were clear  discrepancies  in
             the oral evidence, consider the extent  to  which  by  mental,
             psychological or emotional  trauma  or  disability;  the  age,
             vulnerability or sensitivity of the witness was an element  of
             that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

             15.  The decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
             concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child,  vulnerable
             or  sensitive,  the  effect  the   Tribunal   considered   the
             identified vulnerability had in assessing the evidence  before
             it and thus whether the Tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the
             appellant had established his or  her  case  to  the  relevant
             standard of proof. In asylum appeals, weight should  be  given
             to objective indications of risk rather than necessarily to  a
             state of mind."

    Error of law

Mr McVeety was entirely correct to concede that the FTT materially erred in
law in its approach to the medical evidence relevant to the appellant's
vulnerability.  In particular, the FTT erred in law in:

         iv) failing to identify whether or not the appellant should be
             treated as a vulnerable witness - the reference to the
             appellant as having "a degree of vulnerability" at [47],
             entirely fails to address the issue;

          v) failing to directly engage with the detailed evidence
             regarding the appellant's mental health from treating
             professionals, as summarised above beyond the brief summary at
             [56] and [57]; although the FTT indicated at [46] that it gave
             "very careful attention to all of the evidence" there is no
             indication that it clearly directed itself to the evidence
             from Dr Hose or took it into account when making findings;

         vi) finding that the 'NHS reports' are not persuasive on the basis
             that the appellant did not describe that he attempted to
             return to Iran when the letters do not purport to be
             comprehensive reports or assert that everything reported was
             repeated in the relevant letters;

        vii) not addressing the manner in which the appellant's particular
             experiences and vulnerability might have impacted upon his
             ability to give consistent evidence over the course of his
             interviews - the FTT's reference to the appellant not having a
             diagnosis at the date of the interviews at [48] is difficult
             to follow when there was clear evidence of diagnoses and
             related concerns well in advance of the 18 November 2019
             asylum interview;  in this regard, Mr McVeety was able to
             confirm from checking the Home Office electronic system that
             the immigration officer who interviewed the appellant was made
             aware of the appellant's mental health and indicated that this
             was taken into account during the interview, albeit Mr McVeety
             was unable to say what adjustments were made;

       viii) not addressing the manner in which the appellant's
             vulnerability might impact upon his ability to give evidence
             during the hearing;

         ix) failing to identify whether and if so how, consideration was
             given to ensure that the appellant's welfare and concentration
             was protected during the hearing, given his diagnosis and in
             the light of Dr Hose's recommendations;

          x) merely labelling the inconsistencies as "quite stark" at [48]
             without considering the extent to which this was as a result
             of the appellant's mental, psychological or emotional trauma
             or disability;

         xi) deprecating the absence of expert evidence of physical
             injuries [55] without directing itself to the import of the
             psychiatric evidence said to be corroborative of torture.

Unfortunately these errors were not particularised in the grounds of appeal
drafted by Mr Khan, albeit he raised overarching concerns regarding the
FTT's approach to the appellant's mental health issues.  Mr McVeety did not
take this point against the appellant, accepting as I do that the FTT
committed obvious errors of law.

The FTT's errors completely vitiate the adverse findings of fact, which
must be remade entirely.

Disposal

Both representatives agreed with me that given the nature and extent of the
findings of fact, the matter should be remitted to the FTT.

As I observed at the hearing, it is regrettable that the appellant's
representatives did not prepare a skeleton argument before the FTT, that
drew attention to the evidence on vulnerability.  Mr Khan was keen that
this defect should be rectified as soon as possible and accepted that it
would be helpful for there to be a direction, which I gave, that the
appellant's representatives shall file and serve within 14 days of today's
date written submissions that: a) summarise the medical evidence concerning
the appellant's vulnerability; b) sets out the adjustments sought by the
appellant at the FTT hearing in the light of this; outlines the appellant's
position regarding the reliability of his responses at interviews in the
light of the medical evidence and the extent to which any adjustments were
made.

It would also be helpful for this matter to be listed promptly as a case
management hearing before the FTT.  There has already been considerable
delay in determining the appellant's asylum claim and the medical evidence
indicates this has exacerbated his mental health.  I was also told that Dr
Hose wrote a letter dated 7 June 2021 explaining that the appellant had
been hospitalised following the promulgation of the FTT decision and that
his mental health has worsened.

It follows that all concerned with this case must carefully reflect on the
most appropriate way of taking account of this appellant's vulnerability.



Notice of decision

The appeal against the FTT's decision is allowed and the decision shall be
remade in the FTT by a judge other than FTT Judge Bannerman.



Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 3 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

