
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02599/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10th May 2021                           |On 23rd July 2021               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   Mr S A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by Ata & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart dated 19th January 2021 whereby she dismissed
the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
the appellant's protection and human rights' claim.

The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 11th August 1992 and was
brought up in Sangar Village of the Laghman Province.  He maintains that
his father ran a construction company which worked on various contracts for
the Afghan government, particularly in the Helmand Province where the U.S.
and allied reconstruction projects were taking place.  Owing to targeting
and attack by the Taliban, the appellant's family fled Afghanistan because
of their association with the Afghan and international forces.

The appellant adds that in 2008, he was kidnapped and brought to Europe and
was then aged 16.  He escaped from his captivity, was placed in foster care
and claimed asylum.  Through his social worker the appellant contacted a
distant relative in Afghanistan and was informed that since his departure
his parents and three of his siblings had been killed and his younger
brother and sister had been temporarily returned to Afghanistan.  The
appellant's protection claim was refused in March 2009 but he was granted
discretionary leave to remain and he appealed the refusal of his protection
claim.  By determination on 17th June 2011 Judge Cameron accepted the
appellant's account but found that following the death of his father he
would no longer be at risk on return.

In early 2015 the appellant was removed to Afghanistan and he located his
brother at his grandmother's home but maintains that after a short period
he was forced to flee again, this time with his brother, who has
subsequently claimed asylum in France, and returned to the United Kingdom.

It was asserted that the appellant had suffered from a mental health
condition since the attack on his family and has been treated in the UK for
anxiety, depression, stress and psychosis and now has a diagnosis of major
depressive disorder.

Following a lengthy delay, on 15th October 2019 the respondent refused the
appellant's human rights claim.  His appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of permission to appeal challenge the decision on five grounds.

Ground 1 - the assessment of the medical evidence

The medical evidence produced was relevant to the appellant's claim both in
relation to persecution, serious harm and to the Article 3 medical claim.
It relied on the evidence of Dr Jolliffe, Clinical Psychologist, which
summarised the appellant's medical history, and provided a diagnosis and a
prognosis of the likely outcomes.  Dr Jolliffe observed that the appellant
lacked the skills and awareness to seek help that he needed and that he had
been actively self-harming until 2017.

It was submitted that the judge at paragraphs 64 and 65 irrationally
minimised the extent of the appellant's ill-health and referred to the
appellant currently receiving no treatment but immediately contradicted
this by reference to the medication and made no reference to the treatments
prescribed by Dr Jolliffe which he considered necessary and imperative to
the appellant's ability to maintain even the standard of health he has.
There was no reference to the prognosis for the appellant's health if
returned to Afghanistan.

Both DH (Particular Social Group: Mental Health) Afghanistan [2020] UKUT
223 (IAC) and the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17 emphasised the importance of the medical
diagnosis and prognosis in such cases.  In Miao [2006] EWCA Civ 75 Sedley
LJ held:

"The Immigration Judge was wrong to dismiss it [an opinion on the basis of
his clinical knowledge] as merely an opinion, much less to treat it as
speculative or conjectural.  Like any prognosis it might turn out to be
wrong, but the uncontroverted evidence the Immigration Judge had ... was
that ... ... the father's state, ... would markedly worsen."

The judge failed to address the medical opinion adequately.

Ground 2 - an incorrect approach to DH (Particular Social Group)

DH held that if there was sufficient evidence that the appellant would be
perceived as different by to society to which they would be returned and if
they would face ill-treatment as a result they may be at risk of
persecution as a member of a particular social group.  The key issue was
how the appellant would be perceived on return. No such assessment was made
of how the appellant would be viewed on return.

Ground 3 - there was no consideration of the background evidence or the
country guidance case of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan (CG) [2020] UKUT
130

The medical evidence produced concluded that the appellant was considered
to be a risk to himself and that should he be removed his health was likely
to deteriorate rapidly.  The appellant's claim to face serious harm and/or
his inability to relocate was also reliant on an assessment of the support
systems available for the medical care and it was thus incumbent upon the
judge to make a proper assessment of the evidence presented.  AS (Safety of
Kabul) Afghanistan [2020] confirmed there was a lack of facilities
available to provide treatment in Kabul and the background reports in the
appellant's bundle illustrated the dire medical facilities relating to
mental health care.  Dr Giustozzi highlighted the shortcomings in access
and provision of services both in hospitals and outside and concluded that
access to treatment was only really available to those living in Kabul and
even then access was extremely limited.  This was not contradicted by the
respondent, whose burden it was to do so.

There was no proper assessment of the background evidence or in relation to
AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan.

Ground 4 - material factual errors

It was submitted that the judge made factual errors regarding the
appellant's current and prospective support network.

In relation to the family in Afghanistan the documents at page C6 to 9 of
the respondent's bundle refer to the maternal uncle living in Iran and
returning to see the appellant.

In terms of the support network in the UK the judge notes that the
appellant's community support consisted solely of his extended family.

Dr Jolliffe noted that in fact it was his friends with whom he lived
without whom he was likely to suffer a serious deterioration in his health.

Ground 5 - very significant obstacles - there was a failure to consider
relevant evidence

The judge failed to address the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) in the
appropriate manner.  In relation to Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 Sales LJ
indicated that:

"The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made
as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms of
understanding how life in the society in that other country is carried on
and a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity
to be accepted there."

The judge needed to have regard to all the facts relevant to whether the
appellant would be able to engage but failed to consider that he suffered
from chronic mental health difficulties.

Dr Giustozzi noted the very high levels of violence, the dire economic
conditions and the deterioration due to the COVID-19 crisis and the
Tribunal in AS (Afghanistan) emphasised that when considering the ability
of an individual to navigate the challenges of finding work and housing,
those who had left Afghanistan as children and thus had no working
knowledge of adult life in Afghanistan were less likely to be able to cope.
 Dr Jolliffe made it clear that the appellant has no current capacity to
find work or care for himself without support.

Permission to appeal was granted save for grounds 'a. and b.' and stated
'The Tribunal fully considere the appellant's current mental health issues
including Dr Joliffe's report, in concluding that he will not exhibit
behavioural traits in Afghanistan that will expose him to a real risk of
persecution in accordance with DH'.

At the hearing before me Mr Fripp submitted that the judge's consideration
of the mental health condition was confined to and focussed on
consideration of DH (Particular Social Group).  The mental health condition
was not properly addressed when considering paragraph 276ADE.  Mrs
Pettersen agreed that the focus was on paragraph 276ADE.

Analysis

There was some confusion in the grant of permission to appeal because the
judge referred to grounds (a) to (d) when in fact there were five grounds
of appeal.  It would appear the ground in relation to consideration of
background material and country guidance AS (Safety of Kabul), ground 3,
was not addressed at all in the permission.  Nor had the judge when
granting permission, indicated in the line of grant that the grounds were
limited.  When turning to consideration of the mental health and when
attempting to confine the grant, it is clear from the grant that the judge
did indeed direct her focus only towards a consideration of DH.

In the light of my observations above and in the light of EH (PTA: limited
grounds; Cart JR) Bangladesh [2021] UKUT 0117 (IAC), I consider that
permission was granted on all grounds and notwithstanding, all the grounds
are before me, as set out in the notice of appeal.

Ground 1: the mental health of the appellant is a thread that runs
throughout the appeal.  The appellant had been diagnosed with a major
depressive disorder and had been self-harming until 2017. He had been
previously prescribed with anti-psychotic medication and continues,
according to the report of Dr Jolliffe, with ongoing mental health
difficulties.  I do not accept that the judge considered the mental health
of the appellant in the light of a particular social group only as per DH
but she did, in error, draw unsupported inferences from the fact that the
appellant had been discharged from mental health on 26th March and found,
"he is not engaging with mental health support in the UK".  (The appellant
was in fact discharged three days after lockdown on 23rd March 2020).  The
judge also then contradicts the engagement point at paragraph 72 by
reference to the medication the appellant takes.  Further the judge made no
reference to the treatments prescribed by Dr Jolliffe.

When turning to the application of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan, as
identified below, the judge assumed that the appellant has an uncle
available in Afghanistan and assessed the appellant's mental health
difficulties and the ability to cope both in relation to Article 15(c) and
paragraph 276ADE in the light of that fact.  Nor is it clear how the
appellant would make use of the support of those in the UK with his long-
standing and chronic mental health condition.  It was Dr Jolliffe's report
that identified that it was those who he lived with that gave him support.

With reference to ground 3 it was submitted that there was no proper
consideration of the background material or AS (Safety of Kabul). I agree.
The judge found the appellant could return to Laghman Province, but the
judge also observed that as set out in the Giustozzi report, there are "no
mental health facilities in Laghman".  It would appear that the appellant's
account (credibility) was accepted by the previous First-tier Tribunal
decision and Dr Guistozzi in his latest report stated 'The Taliban no
longer need to use Mr A to blackmail his father but might well have
blacklisted him as well.  The risk to Mr A will be highest in Laghman'.
That report does not appear to have been factored properly into the
assessment of the risk to the appellant.

As argued in ground 4, the documents refer to the maternal uncle living in
Iran and returning to see the appellant.  It was submitted that the uncle
did not live in Afghanistan as the judge presumed.  The judge thus made an
axiomatic factual error when drawing conclusions on the appellant's current
and prospective support network.  In part it was access to family support
that caused the judge to conclude that the appellant's mental health
problems were not so severe as to prevent his relocation to his home in
Laghman Province or to Kabul.

There were contradictory findings in relation to the appellant's mental
health condition, and, factual errors or inadequate reasoning in relation
to the appellant's support network when considering his ability to return
to his home area or to relocate and integrate within Kabul.

In view of the nature of the errors, including the treatment of the
background country material, and that the mental health assessment is
fundamental to the consideration of appeal as a whole, I consider that the
decision should be set aside, and no findings should be preserved.

    Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 26th May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

