
                             [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/02846/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th April 2017                |On 2nd June 2017               |
|                                  |                               |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

                                   Between

                                    Mr NJ
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                               Appellant

                                      v


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs C. Johnrose, counsel instructed by Broudie,
Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Sudan, born on [ ] 1990. He arrived in
the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 28 July 2015 on the basis that he
is of mixed ethnicity from South Kordofan and he fears persecution on this
basis, as a non-Arab Darfurian, if returned to Sudan and on the basis of
his imputed political opinion due to the fact that he was arrested and
detained in 2012.
2. His asylum application was refused on 3 November 2015 and he appealed
against that decision. His appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge
Shergill for hearing on 22 December 2016. In a decision and reasons
promulgated on 6 January 2017, he dismissed the appeal, essentially on the
basis that he found that the Appellant is not a non-Arab Darfuri and would
not be at risk on return to Sudan.

3. The grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal to
the Upper Tribunal, which was made in time, assert that the Judge erred
materially in law:

(i) in relying on issues in the expert report not raised during the
hearing, thus acting in a manner which was procedurally unfair;

(ii) in materially misdirecting himself with regard to the expert report of
Peter Verney;

(iii) in failing to make findings on whether the Appellant would be at risk
on account of his non-Darfuri ethnicity/race;

(iv) in failing to take account of material evidence in the expert report;

(v) in imposing a requirement of corroboration;

(vi) in placing undue weight on section 8 issues whilst speculating.

4. In a decision dated 9 March 2017, permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the basis that:

      "It is of concern that the First tier Tribunal Judge appears to have
predicated  his assessment of the appellant's evidence on the fact that he
travelled through      other countries and that he did not claim asylum in
Turkey. Turkey is not a      signatory to the Refugee Convention. It is
arguable the judge appears to have      failed to take account of his duty
to assess the evidence as a whole and in the       round rather than in
specific parts. All of the grounds relied upon by the    Appellant are
arguable."

5. The Respondent lodged a rule 24 response dated 27 March 2017 in which
she argued that the Judge did consider the evidence as a whole and in the
round and deals with the expert report and was entitled to find that on
core elements of the claim the expert did not give an opinion.

Hearing

6. At the hearing before me, Mrs Johnrose sought to rely on both the
renewed and original grounds of appeal in their totality. She submitted
that at [21]-[29] the Judge has taken great issue with the Appellant's
claim to asylum in Turkey over the 3 year period he was there and the fact
that he had not claimed asylum there, but as identified by UTJ Coker,
Turkey is not a signatory to the Convention. In respect of section 8, it is
not determinative but can be used in assessment of credibility, however,
the Judge has placed significant weight on section 8 issues and from those
issues he concludes at [27]-[29] when looking at all the evidence in the
round that the Appellant's credibility is damaged cf. [28]. She submitted
that such great weight placed on section 8 matters renders the decision
unsustainable. Mrs Johnrose also drew my attention to [25] and the finding
that the Appellant was deliberately vague and that there was no
corroborative evidence as to whether he had fled as claimed but in light of
the decision in Kasolo (13190) such corroboration is not required.

7. In regards to the other findings in the determination, Mrs Johnrose
submitted that whilst the Judge at [19] correctly directed himself as to
the issues to be determined he has failed to look at the evidence in the
round and has materially misdirected himself in that the Judge failed to
make any decision as to whether the Appellant would be perceived as non-
Arab Darfuri, despite the clarification provided by Peter Verney as to how
and why the Appellant would be perceived. Peter Verney distinguishes
between Mesiriya Zurag and other Mesiriya, what the Judge refers to as "so-
called Arab tribes". They are disadavantaged as non-Arabs and at [147] the
expert clarifies that there is no contradiction in the Appellant's
description and this was significant evidence before the Tribunal.

8. Mrs Johnrose submitted that the Judge has adopted a very unfair approach
in respect of the evidence of the expert and in his assessment of the
reasons why he is dismissing the appeal, which were not matters raised by
the Respondent in the refusal or at the hearing but issues that the Judge
has post hearing looked at and expressed his concern cf. [30] through to
[65] where he concludes he is going to attach very little weight to the
report. The Judge has looked at Peter Verney's report and criticized his
methodology, but there is no evidence in the decision that Peter Verney
accepted the Appellant's claim at face value and the Judge failed to give
the Appellant any opportunity at all to address this issue or any concerns
he might have about methodology. In any event, this assertion is baseless:
see ground 2(a) and [42] and [43] of decision, which are clearly concerned
with credibility, whereas the expert is not entitled to consider
credibility and if he had done so he would have been criticized for acting
ultra vires. The Judge's starting point is the same as the Respondent ie.
there is no rejection by the Respondent that the Appellant's mother is
Berti and his father is half Berti and half Mesiriya. To criticize the
expert for accepting the Appellant's claimed ethnicity shows that the Judge
is misunderstanding the position of the Respondent.

9. Mrs Johnrose also sought to challenge the findings of the Judge at [49]
where he asserts that the evidence of the expert in relation to the arrest
of the Appellant is contrary to the second headnote of IM & AI CG [2016]
UKUT 00188 (IAC) which distinguishes between those who are arrested and
detained for a short period versus those who are at greater risk of serious
harm. Mrs Johnrose drew my attention to the fact that the expert was the
same in the country guidance case, which did not criticize him and the
evidence relied on by the Upper Tribunal in respect of the treatment of
those arrested was Peter Verney's evidence, consequently his report cannot
be inconsistent with his evidence in the Country Guidance case: there is no
evidence of that and it is highly unlikely. The Judge erred in looking at
the evidence incorrectly by focusing on the way an individual is treated in
detention. In his letter of 19 January 2017 Peter Verney explains that his
methodology is the same as that used in the CG cases and this letter was
provided with the application for permission to appeal. Mrs Johnrose
submitted that it was very important to note that the Judge is utilising
his finding that Peter Verney was accepting the Appellant's credibility at
face value to place little weight on the report but this was not the case.
She submitted that the issue here is not whether the Appellant was arrested
or detained but would he be perceived as non-Arab. Even if the expert had
taken on face value the account of past persecution, the Respondent had
accepted the Appellant is of mixed ethnicity and is a quarter Mesiriya and
the Judge's conclusion as to how the Appellant would be treated would not
be affected by past persecution. The Judge erred in failing to go on to
consider how the Appellant would be perceived once he found that he was a
non-Arab.

10. Mr Bates sought to rely upon the Rule 24 response. He accepted that
Turkey not a member of the EU, but there is an agreement with Turkey and it
is viewed as a safe place where refugees can claim asylum. In addition,
there were opportunities to claim asylum in Italy, Greece and France.
Whilst at [27] the Judge found that the Appellant's credibility was damaged
but found that this was fatally so for reasons give at [28] viz reference
to delay issue, incoherence and implausibility and other significant
adverse findings. Mr Bates submitted that it was open to the Judge to make
the findings he did.

11. In relation to the Peter Verney report, the Judge did not simply
dismiss the expert report in its entirety but what the Judge is saying at
[38] is that on the particular facts of this case the expert got it wrong
and cannot be expected to be perfect all the time. The expert has not
provided a commentary to provide a basis for the Judge to go on to assess
the credibility of the account. Mr Bates submitted that the Judge was
clearly aware that the expert is well regarded but on the facts of this
particular case, whatever the expert has done in the past, there were areas
he expected the expert to deal with but he did not. He took me through the
Judge's findings on the expert report at [39]-[65] of the decision and
submitted that the Judge has given cogent reasons as to why he treated the
expert report in the way he did.

12. Mr Bates submitted that the Judge has at [66] onwards specifically
dealt with the fact that the Appellant is from a non-Arab Darfuri tribe and
that he was not satisfied with the witness evidence put forward and it was
open to the Judge to make an adverse credibility finding and to conclude at
[69] that he was not satisfied the Appellant would be at risk on account of
his skin colour and ethnicity. The Judge further concludes at the end of
[69] that no concrete conclusion can be drawn on this basis, absent
evidence of linguistic differences. The Judge reached his findings with
regard to the sum total of the evidence, including the oral and expert
evidence and made no material errors of law in so doing.

13. In her reply, Mrs Johnrose submitted that what is overlooked or omitted
is the uniqueness of this particular case viz the Appellant's mixed
ethnicity in light of the Respondent's acceptance of this aspect of the
case. She submitted that the failure to assess the effect of the
Appellant's mother's tribe and the concentration on his father's tribe is
the key issue, given that it is already accepted that the Berti are from a
non-Arab Darfuri tribe, hence the decision to instruct Peter Verney to
consider his father's tribe. The Judge has not incorporated into his
assessment whether the Appellant is an African or an Arab and this is a
fundamental flaw which has not been addressed by the Presenting Officer. It
was incumbent on the Judge to look at this. The expert states at [242] that
the Appellant is likely to be from Mesiriya as he claims and gives reasons
for this viz that member of this tribe are easily mistaken for non Arabs
and that the Appellant is mixed ethnicity and at [245] the expert makes the
point that the Appellant's account is "distinctively individual" but Judge
has not taken this into account when determining the appeal.

Decision

14. I found a material error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
Judge Shergill and announced my decision at the hearing. The parties were
content for the appeal to be remitted back to the First tier Tribunal to be
heard de novo. I now give my reasons.

15. I find that the first ground of appeal is made out in that the Judge
made extensive criticisms of the expert report of Peter Verney, however, at
no stage were any of the points raised by the Judge or the Presenting
Officer during the hearing in order to give the Appellant's representatives
the opportunity to address them, either in the form of submissions or in
the form of additional evidence from Mr Verney. I find that this was
procedurally unfair

16. I further find that there is merit in the second ground of appeal.
Whilst the Judge was not obliged to accept the contents of the expert
report and whilst the Judge did provide reasons for rejecting certain of
the expert's findings, he appears to have proceeded on an erroneous basis,
in that it was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant is of mixed
ethnicity and thus the task of the expert was to consider the risk on
return to Sudan in light of that acceptance. I also accept Mrs Johnrose's
submission that given that the expert was also the expert in the CG case of
IM & AI CG [2016] UKUT 00188 (IAC) the Judge erred in finding that his
conclusions in respect of this Appellant were inconsistent with his
evidence and the findings of the Upper Tribunal in the second headnote in
the CG case, which in any event concerned patterns of detention rather than
risk of serious harm.
17. In respect of the third ground of appeal, I do not accept Mrs
Johnrose's submission that, having concluded (erroneously in light of the
expert report) that the Appellant is not a non-Arab Darfuri at [71] the
Judge compounded his error by failing to consider whether he would be
perceived as such, due to his mixed ethnicity.  At [69] and [71] the Judge
considered and rejected the contention that the Appellant would be
identified as "African" rather than "Arab" due to his skin colour and thus
effectively determined this issue.

18. However, I find that there is merit in Ground 4 viz that the Judge
failed to take properly into consideration the evidence contained in the
expert report of Peter Verney, as a consequence of his erroneous treatment
of that report, for the reasons set out in the first and second grounds of
appeal. This goes, in particular, to the issue of risk on return as a
person of mixed ethnicity. Grounds 5 and 6 raise issues that were not
determinative of the appeal but for the avoidance of doubt I find that the
Judge materially erred in imposing a requirement of corroboration at [25]
and in placing undue weight on the failure by the Appellant to claim asylum
in third countries at [25] and in finding that there was no plausible
reason why the Appellant could not have claimed asylum in Turkey at [23].

19.Moreover, it is apparent from the decision that the Judge considered and
rejected the credibility of the Appellant's account prior to his
consideration of the expert report of Peter Verney, which is an erroneous
approach cf. Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

20. For the reasons set out above, I find that the First tier Tribunal
Judge erred materially in law and I set aside his decision and reasons. The
appeal is remitted back to the First tier Tribunal in Manchester for the
appeal to be heard de novo. None of the findings of fact are preserved.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

31 May 2017


