
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02578/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2019                    |On 18 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     HG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Braganza, Counsel, instructed by Camden
                    Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

I have anonymised the Appellant because of the nature of the claim.  She is
a citizen of Eritrea.  Her date of birth is 1 July 1984.

The Appellant came to the UK on 14 January 2009.  She made an application
for asylum on the same day.  The application was refused on 1 May 2009.
She appealed against this decision.  Her appeal came before Immigration
Judge Katharine Gordon on 18 June 2009.  Judge Gordon dismissed the
Appellant's appeal on 24 June 2009.  She found that her account that she
was a Pentecostal Christian and that she would be forced to complete
military service on her return to Eritrea was not credible.  There was a
reconsideration by the Respondent arising from an application for judicial
review against a decision by the Respondent pursuant to paragraph 353 of
the Rules.  The application was refused on 27 February 2019.  This was an
appealable decision.  The Appellant appealed.  Her appeal was dismissed by
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P B Conrath in a decision that was
promulgated on 6 June 2017, following a hearing at Taylor House on 11 April
2017. Applications to appeal were refused by the First-tier Tribunal and
the Upper Tribunal.  A "Cart" application was successful.  Permission to
appeal was granted to the Appellant by the Vice President on 29 May 2019,
following the decision of the High Court to quash the decision of the Upper
Tribunal to refuse permission to appeal against the decision of Judge
Conrath.

Error of law

Following an error of law hearing on 23 July 2019.  I found against the
Appellant in relation to grounds 1 and 2 (concerning Judge Conrath's
findings about unlawful exit and national service). Judge Conrath's finding
that the Appellant would not be at risk on return, applying MST and Others
(national service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443, was
maintained.  However, I found an error of law in respect of the findings
about the Appellant's Pentecostal Christian faith for the following
reasons:-

"30. I conclude that ground 3 is made out.  I accept that the judge did not
give adequate reasons to explain why he did not attach weight to the
evidence of Mr Parr and Mr Sahlu in the light of the continuity of the
evidence in respect of the appellant's faith and the supporting evidence in
the appellant's bundle.  Whilst it is a matter for the judge what weight to
attach to the evidence, I am satisfied that in this case the judge did not
give adequate reasons why he seemingly at [42] found the evidence
unreliable, in the light of the body of evidence before him which was not
before the first judge and the passage of time since the decision of the
first judge.  In the alternative I conclude that the judge did not take
this evidence into account.  The evidence in support of did not simply
consist of pro-forma statements, which in any event, despite their format
were capable of corroborating the appellant's evidence.  The judge said at
[41] that matters were not materially different to what they were before
Judge Gordon: a conclusion that the judge was entitled to reach, had he
properly engaged with the evidence that was not before the first judge, but
I am satisfied that he did not do so.  The error is further compounded by
the approach taken by the judge at [43] to the respondent's submission,
which does not represent a lawful approach to the appeal and the guidance
in Devaseelan.  It cannot be the case that in the absence of evidence about
the appellant's faith in Eritrea, the appeal could not succeed.

31.  Whilst the decision of the first judge is the starting point, it was
incumbent on the judge to properly consider the evidence as a whole.
Whilst there were significant credibility issues before the judge and no
further evidence of the appellant's claims about events in Eritrea, the
task for the judge was to consider the position at the date of the hearing.
 The judge accepted that the witnesses were credible but did not engage
with the totality of their evidence which was supported by the written
evidence from witnesses.  The judge materially erred.  I set aside the
decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal.

32.  I communicated my decision to the parties at the hearing with the
expectation that the decision could be remade.  There was no objection to
the matter being remade in the UT.  It is accepted by the respondent that
if the appellant is a Pentecostal Christian she would be at risk on return.
 However, the appellant failed to comply with the directions of the UT.
The appellant's bundle prepared for the hearing before me did not contain
evidence on which the appellant sought to rely; namely, a letter from Rev
Getachew Zergaw of 23 July 2019.  Ms Braganza said that it was intended
that this witness give evidence.  He had been unable to attend the hearing
on 23 July 2019.  Furthermore, the appellant had made a further witness
statement dated 20 July 2019 which was not in the bundle.  Mr Melvin
indicated that he did not have a record of the appellant's bundle or the
appellant's witness statement having been received by the respondent.  He
did not object to the admission of the evidence but reasonably sought time
to consider it.  Thus, an adjournment was requested by both parties.  I
expressed concern about the appellant's representative's conduct of the
case.  If it were not for the failure to comply with directions, the UT
would most likely have been able to remake the decision as envisaged by
standard directions.  I reluctantly adjourned the case."

    The resumed hearing

At the resumed hearing Mr Melvin relied upon a skeleton argument of 30
September 2019.  Ms Braganza relied on a skeleton argument of 1 October
2019.  The Appellant relied on the original bundle that was before the
First-tier Tribunal (AB1) and an additional Appellant's bundle (AB2).
There was also additional evidence including photographs of the Appellant
at the dedication ceremony of the Appellant's son that took place at the
Ethiopian Christian Fellowship Church (ECFC).

The Appellant relied on the numerous witness statements in the AB1 and the
AB2.  In addition, seven witnesses attended the hearing and gave evidence.
They were all cross-examined by Mr Melvin.

The Evidence of Daniel Tulu

Mr Tulu's evidence is contained in a letter of 30 July 2019 (page 7 of the
AB2).  In addition, he gave oral evidence at the hearing.

Mr Tulu's evidence can be summarised. He is an elder at the ECFC UK in
King's Cross.  The Appellant is a devoted Christian and serves in the
church.  She has regularly attended services since 2010.  Mr Tulu described
his role as a church elder in some detail.  He explained the distinction
between Pentecostal Christians and other Christians.  He said that
Pentecostal Christians believe in the empowerment of the Holy Spirit and
the manifestation of "gifts" from the Holy Spirit.  He said that
Pentecostal Christians believe in the Trinity and the Holy Spirit.  The
Holy Spirit gives gifts to people. These gifts are speaking in tongues,
prophecy and healing. Not all those who follow the faith have been given
the gifts.  He personally has been given the gift of speaking in tongues.
He does not know what gifts the Appellant has, if any. He described other
characteristics of Pentecostal faith including the way members of the
church worship and sing. In other denominations people are baptised when
they are children, for example Catholicism.  However, Pentecostal
Christians are baptised after they accept Jesus Christ.

The congregation evangelise at the end of every month and every Good
Friday.  He described this as going out and handing out leaflets about
Jesus Christ and how people can be saved.  He described going to hospitals
and prisons amongst other things.  The Appellant evangelises.  The last
time he was aware of her evangelising was in 2018.

In cross-examination, he described how he became qualified to become an
elder.  He was asked why there was no reference to Pentecostal in the name
of the church or in their mission statement.  He did not know why. He said
that the church is a Pentecostal church and that all the congregation are
committed to the faith. He did not see any reason why the word Pentecostal
would be put into a letter from him to the Appellant's solicitors.  He was
not aware whether there is a reference to Pentecostal in the leaflets that
the congregation hand out when evangelising. The Evidence of Jonathan Parr

Jonathan Parr's evidence is contained in his letter of 28 April 2014 to
Emily Thornberry MP.  At that time Mr Parr was the Assistant Director of
Jesuit Refugee Service UK, on whose behalf he wrote the letter.  There is a
second letter to Camden Community Law Centre from Mr Parr on behalf of the
Jesuit Refugee Service UK of 28 March 2017.  He gave oral evidence at the
hearing. His evidence can be summarised.

Mr Parr is not a Pentecostal Christian.  The Appellant is a committed
Pentecostal Christian.  Mr Parr was asked whether it was necessary to speak
in tongues in order to be a Pentecostal Christian and he said in answer to
that that he suspects that the practice varies between churches.   He was
cross-examined about whether Pentecostalism and evangelism were different
religions. He said that this was a misunderstanding.  They are not mutually
exclusive. Evangelism is an aspect of Pentecostalism.  He did not know why
the word Pentecostal did not feature on the church's website because. He
was not party to any decision relating to its content. However, he has
visited the church on occasions and those participating describe it as a
Pentecostal church and describe themselves as Pentecostal.  The Appellant
presents herself as a Pentecostal Christian.  In his view, the Appellant is
genuine and very impressive in her faith.

The Evidence of Martha Gemechu

Martha Gemechu's evidence is contained in her letter of 2 August 2019 (page
11, AB2).  In addition, she gave oral evidence which can be summarised.

She is a Deacon at the ECFC in King's Cross.  She described her role.   Her
experience of the Appellant is that she is a practising Pentecostal
Christian.  She met the Appellant in 2010.  The Appellant regularly comes
to the church to practise her faith. They evangelise every month and on
Good Friday.  The last time she saw her evangelise was Good Friday 2018. In
cross-examination, she was asked whether she viewed Pentecostalism and
evangelism as the same thing.  She said that in their faith they need to
evangelise and tell the truth about God. The congregation is Pentecostal
because it is a Pentecostal church.

The Evidence of Selam Ghebremichael

Ms Ghebremichael's evidence is a short letter (page 18, AB2).  In addition,
she gave oral evidence.  Her evidence can be summarised.  She has known the
Appellant for eight years.  They first met through the ECFC UK church.  The
church is Pentecostal.  The witness can speak in tongues.  The Appellant
does not have the gift.  The majority of the congregation has the gift of
speaking in tongues.  She has no idea why the word Pentecostal does not
appear in the church's mission statement or on their website.  However, she
confirms that the church is Pentecostal.

The Evidence of Rahel Mogos

Ms Mogos's evidence is a short letter (page 20, AB2).  In addition, she
gave oral evidence.  Her evidence can be summarised. She has known the
Appellant since 2010.  They met at the ECFC UK church. She has seen the
Appellant evangelising.  She thinks this was sometime in 2018.  However,
they are always going out as a group together in order to evangelise.  They
distribute leaflets and proselytise their faith.  The leaflets are in three
languages, English, Amharic and Tigrinya.  The Sunday service is in
Amharic.  The witness has the gift to speak in tongues and does so at the
time of prayer when the Holy Spirit initiates it. The Appellant cannot
speak in tongues.  She was asked specifically by Mr Melvin whether you can
only be a Pentecostal if you are able to speak in tongues and she said
categorically that this was not the case.

The Evidence of Atsede Abraham

Ms Abraham's evidence is a short letter (page 16 of the AB2).  In addition,
she gave oral evidence. Her evidence can be summarised. She is a British
citizen.  She has known the Appellant since 2011 and they attend the ECFC
UK.  The Sunday service at the church is in Amharic.  The church is
Pentecostal.  She was asked specifically whether the church accepts people
from other religions and in answer she stated that "if they accept the only
saviour is Jesus Christ". There are courses that they go through and they
get baptised.  She did not know if the Appellant had attended courses and
she had heard that the Appellant had been baptised in Eritrea.  She did not
know why the word Pentecostal was not mentioned on the church's website or
in its mission statement.



The Evidence of Freweyni Tekleab

Ms Tekleab's evidence is contained in a witness statement of 21 March 2017
(page 105, AB1).  In addition, there is an up-to-date letter from the
witness of 23 July 2019 at (page 13, AB2). She attended the hearing and
gave oral evidence. Ms Tekleab's evidence can be summarised.  She has known
the Appellant for a long period of time.  They met at church. They both
regularly attend.  In cross-examination, she confirmed that the church that
she attended was a Pentecostal.  She explained that there are people from
different nationalities in attendance.  She is not sure whether there are
people of different religions but the congregation speak different
languages.  She said the church is free for everyone to attend.  She was
asked by Mr Melvin whether if he were an Eritrean Methodist he would be
able to attend the church and she stated that it was free for everyone.
She confirmed that it is the gathering of people who believe in Jesus
Christ.  She has never heard the Appellant speak in tongues but confirmed
that she herself has the gift.

The Evidence of Mariam Gemechu

This witness's evidence is found in a short letter of 1 August 2019 (page 9
of the AB2).  In addition, she attended the hearing and gave oral evidence.
 Her evidence can be summarised. She is a Deacon at the church the
Appellant attends.  The Appellant is a well-known and beloved sister.
There are other Ethiopian Fellowship churches in London that are
Pentecostal.  However, most of them are offshoots from the church in King's
Cross, which is the oldest ECFC.  When she was asked what separates the
Pentecostal church from Methodist or Baptist churches she stated that as
Pentecostals they believe in the Holy Spirit and that they practise and
preach their religion and tell people about the Gospel.  She was not able
to comment about other churches.  She was asked about the difference
between evangelism and Pentecostalism and stated that she was a born again
Christian and Pentecostal.  She was asked whether the church targets
Eritreans and Ethiopians and in response she said that she preaches "for
everyone."

The Appellant's Evidence

The Appellant's evidence is contained in her witness statement of 11 April
2017 at (pages 80 and 81 of the AB1).  In addition, she relied on a more up-
to-date witness statement of 20 July 2019 (pages 1 and 2 of the AB2).  In
addition, she gave oral evidence.  Her evidence can be summarised.

The Appellant identified herself on the photographic evidence (attached to
the letter from Camden Community Law Centre of 22 August 2019).  She said
they the pictures are of her son's dedication ceremony.  She described
herself as a Pentecostal Christian, confirming that she does not speak in
tongues but that she does evangelise.  She evangelises on Good Friday and
at the end of the month.  She identified the three gifts as speaking in
tongues, healing and prophesy.  She confirmed that she does not have any
gifts but she sees dreams and described this as seeing something that could
happen in the future.  She was baptised into the Pentecostal church in
Eritrea before she came to the UK.  The last time she had contact with
family members was two years ago.  Her parents do not respond to her
attempts to contact them and the information that she has is from her
sister.  The last time she had contact with her sister was after the
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in 2017.  She was asked how she was
able to make contact with her.  She described a random meeting with a
neighbour from Eritrea at London Bridge. He gave her the telephone number
of her sister.

The telephone call to her sister was curtailed because the Appellant ran
out of credit. . She was not able to obtain details of her parents, her
sister's address or that of her child.   She said that her parents do not
respond to her attempts to contact them.  They cannot speak.   She did not
ask her friends at the church for funds.  It was put to her by Mr Melvin
that she was deliberately trying to mislead and that she was not being
truthful about contact with her family members in Eritrea.  It was put to
her that it was not credible that she would not ask her Christian friends
at the church to assist her in making contact with her family in Eritrea.
The Appellant stated that she was not able to ask them because they were
giving her accommodation.

The church here accepted her as a Pentecostal Christian when she first
attended.  There were no enquiries into her background or religion.  There
is no contact at the date of the hearing between the Appellant and the
father of her child here in the UK.  She is a genuine convert to the
Pentecostal faith.  The main aim of her attending church is to have a
relationship with God and Jesus Christ.

She was re-examined about her parents being unable to speak.  She had
stated in cross-examination, that her parents are both unable to speak and
that her father has hearing problems.  They were both born with these
disabilities. Her mother is not deaf.

Other Evidence

There are many letters and documents in support of the Appellant's case in
AB1 and AB2. There is no need for me to set them out in any detail here. I
refer to the evidence to which my attention was drawn by Ms Braganza when
summarising her submissions.

Submissions

Mr Melvin relied on the 2017 reasons for refusal and the case of Devaseelan
[2002] UKAIT 00702.   He said that there was no further evidence from
Eritrea. It was not credible that the Appellant would meet a neighbour from
Eritrea at London Bridge station.  This was fiction.  It was not credible
that the Appellant would not ask friends at the church to assist her to
make telephone contact with her family in Eritrea. He asked me to uphold
the decisions in 2019 and 2017 and conclude that the Appellant is not a
Pentecostal Christian and was not a Pentecostal Christian prior to coming
to the UK.  In relation to any sur place claim there is no evidence of a
genuine conversion.  There is no evidence of a baptism or the Appellant
going through the rigours of the religion.  The church blindly accepted her
and welcomed her into its fold, where she has participated in services
whilst doing a cleaning job at the church at the same time as pursuing a
claim for asylum on religious grounds.

Mr Melvin indicated that he accepted that many of the witnesses that gave
evidence genuinely want to believe that the Appellant is a Pentecostal
Christian, however, they have not made any attempt to verify her claims of
a previous baptism in Eritrea.  The majority of the witnesses are either
Eritrean or Ethiopian.  They have come to the UK over a large period of
years.  There is no reason why enquiries have not been made to verify the
Appellant's faith.  Mr Melvin conceded initially that the evidence to
support the church being a Pentecostal church was "overwhelming".  However,
he drew my attention to there being no reference on the church website to
Pentecostal and that he said that it was seriously doubted that it was
Pentecostal as claimed. He accepted though that there was "a substantial
amount of evidence" pointing to the church being Pentecostal.

Mr Melvin submitted that although the witnesses may be Pentecostal the
church is multi-denominational. He made reference to "diverse" in the
mission statement.  He confirmed the Respondent's case.  It was not
accepted that the Appellant is or ever was a Pentecostal Christian.  It is
not accepted that the church is Pentecostal or Evangelical or that the
Appellant is a Pentecostal/Evangelical Christian.

In submissions, Ms Braganza drew my attention to the Respondent's
concession that the Appellant is a member of the ECFC.  Ms Braganza drew my
attention to evidence in the Appellant's bundle which supports the
Appellant's case that the ECFC is Pentecostal.  She drew my attention to
the issue having been raised for the first time in Mr Melvin's skeleton
argument and therefore all the references to Pentecostal in the written
evidence were made before it was an issue.  She drew my attention to Mr
Melvin's cross-examination, stating that none of the witnesses had been
challenged as to their credibility.  There was no expert evidence to
support an assertion that the church was not Pentecostal.  She drew my
attention to the extensive period of time the evidence covers and the range
of the evidence.   In her submission, there was not much more that the
Appellant could do to establish that she genuinely pursues the faith.

The Appellant has never made reference to being able to speak in tongues.
It was not challenged that the church evangelises every month and that the
Appellant evangelised on Good Friday in 2018.  That was the Appellant's
evidence and that of the witnesses.

AB1 comprises 288 pages.  Much of the evidence is letters from various
witnesses, some of those who attended the hearing before me.  Ms Braganza
drew my attention to the various pieces of evidence which refer to the
church being Pentecostal.  In particular, the letter from Dr Ephrem Sahlu
of 24 September 2013.  Dr Sahlu is a Minister in the ECFC church. He makes
specific reference to the Appellant's Pentecostal Christian faith and her
being a true follower of the Pentecostal faith.  In addition, his evidence
is that the ECFC is the "first Ethiopian Pentecostal church to be
registered as a charity and been so since 1992".  Ms Braganza drew my
attention to the evidence of Senior Pastor Reverend Brian Nicholls of 1
April 2010 (page 94, AB1), which is evidence that the Leeds Christian
Fellowship Church that the Appellant was said to attend at the time was
Pentecostal and that the Appellant was a Pentecostal Christian. There are
several witness statements (pages 98 - 119, AB1) which are capable of
supporting the Appellant being a Pentecostal Christian.

Findings and Reasons

The Respondent's position prior to Mr Melvin's skeleton argument, having
considered the refusal letter of 27 February 2017, was that it is not
accepted that the Appellant is a practising Pentecostal Christian. It is
accepted that it may well be the perception of the witnesses that she is.
The Respondent relied on Devaseelan to refuse her application; Judge Gordon
having found in 2009 that the Appellant had a complete lack of knowledge
about the faith.  The Respondent's case was advanced on this basis before
Judge Conrath.  Mr Melvin's skeleton argument indicated a shift in
position.  It is accepted that the Appellant is a member of the Ethiopian
Christian Fellowship Church (ECFC) In Kings Cross, London; however, the
case was advanced on the basis that ECFC is not a "Pentecostal" church.
This was not an issue that had previously been raised by the Respondent.
In addition, the Respondent's case as set out in Mr Melvin's skeleton
argument was that the Appellant had not made any attempt in the last 9
years to evangelise or pursue any obvious traits of Pentecostalism.  There
was no evidence of the Appellant trying to evangelise or to spread the
word.  The Respondent's case, articulated in Mr Melvin's skeleton argument,
is that the Appellant's attendance at church is more likely to be for
social not religious reasons.

When assessing credibility and applying Devaseelan, the findings of
Immigration Judge K Gordon on 18 June 2009 are the starting point.  She
dismissed the appeal on political and religious grounds.  Judge Gordon
found that the Appellant's entire account was fabricated.  Whilst Judge
Conrath's decision to dismiss the Appellant's asylum appeal has been set
aside; there are lawful and sustainable findings that the Appellant is not
credible in the context of risk on return on political grounds.  The fact
that the Appellant has been disbelieved by two separate judges undermines
her credibility.  I must consider whether this is fatal to the Appellant's
case.

I remind myself that the first judge's decision should always be the
starting point; however, facts happening since the decision of the first
judge can always be considered by the second judge.  I must consider all
the evidence in the round, including that which was not before Judge
Gordon.  There is a considerable amount of evidence before me capable of
supporting the Appellant's claim to be a Pentecostal Christian covering a
period of up to 10 years that was not before Judge Gordon.  The evidence
concerns events that post-date the hearing before Judge Gordon.  I had the
benefit of hearing evidence from several witnesses in addition to the
Appellant.  I found that the witnesses were entirely credible.  There was
no significant challenge made by Mr Melvin to their credibility as regards
their own faith, the ECFC and the Appellant's faith.

The first issue that I need to consider is whether ECFC is a Pentecostal
Christian Church.  In Mr Melvin's skeleton he sought to rely on an extract
from a website to support the contention that in order to be baptised in
the Pentecostal faith a person must have the ability to speak in tongues.
There was no disclosure of the source of this.  Ms Braganza was unable to
access the website at the hearing.  Mr Melvin sensibly decided not to rely
on this "evidence."

Mr Melvin relied on the Church's website and mission statement wherein
there is no reference to the word Pentecostal.  In the "History" section of
this document the following is stated; "In the initial stages of the
Church's history, this was predominantly through the arrival of evangelical
Christians from Ethiopia." He relied on what is stated in the document
under the heading "Name" where church's "diverse denominational background"
is referred to.  Mr Melvin relied on the latter to seek to establish that
one did not have to be a Pentecostal Christian to be a member of the
church.  However, Mr Melvin conceded that the evidence was "overwhelming"
and that there was a "substantial amount of evidence" which would point to
the church being Pentecostal.

I find that no inference can reasonably be drawn from the omission of the
word Pentecostal in the mission statement of the ECFC or the reference to
diverse denominal background or the failure of the witnesses to be able to
recollect if the word Pentecostal featured in church leaflets (a point
raised by Mr Melvin during the hearing).  The evidence from all the
witnesses was that the ECFC is Pentecostal and they articulately explained
(particularly Church Elder Tulu) what this meant and what distinguishes it
from other Christian faiths.  Mr Melvin said that he did not accept that
the witness Mr Tulu was a Pentecostal Christian; however, he did not put
this to him in cross-examination.  He did not challenge any of the witness
about their faith.  In any event, there is simply no rational basis on
which to draw the conclusion that any of the witnesses were not telling the
truth about their faith, the church or the Appellant. There is simply no
rational basis on which to conclude that they are mistaken about their own
faith or that of the Appellant.  The evidence strongly supports the
opposite.

There is a substantial amount of material in the AB1 (that was before the
Judge Conrath) and in the AB2 which, together with the oral evidence,
strongly supports that the ECFC is a Pentecostal church.  I consider the
evidence of Dr Sahlu (p93, AB).  His evidence is that the ECFC is the first
Ethiopian Pentecostal Church to be registered as a charity since 1992.  Mr
Melvin referred me to the omission of the word Pentecostal in some of the
witness statements; however, to be fair on the Appellant, the issue
relating to whether the ECFC is a "Pentecostal" church was raised for the
first time in Mr Melvin's skeleton served the day before the hearing.  In
any event, there are a number of references in the material before me to
the church being Pentecostal.  The evidence supports that the
congregation/members of the ECFC are Pentecostal Christians, albeit they
may have come from other faiths and backgrounds.

I find from the evidence that evangelism is a feature of the Pentecostal
faith.  I understood that at one point during the cross-examination of Mr
Parr, Mr Melvin was seeking to establish that evangelism is a separate
faith to the Pentecostal faith.  All the witnesses were consistent about
when and how members of the church evangelised.  I find that evangelism, in
this context, is an element of the Pentecostal faith.  I am not sure
whether any distinction between evangelism and Pentecostalism would make
any difference to the Respondent because Evangelism as a distinct religion
would still put an Appellant at risk. I was confused by Mr Melvin's cross
examination because I understood that it was not accepted that the
Appellant evangelised. In any event, in the light of my findings nothing
turns on this.

I now turn to the Appellant.  There is a wealth of evidence before me that
was not before Judge Gordon in 2009 about her faith.  The evidence is
extensive. It spans a period of 8-10 years.  It is not challenged that she
has been attending ECFC throughout this time.  All witnesses had no doubt
that she was a genuine Pentecostal Christian.  They gave consistent
evidence about her evangelising.  I find that the Appellant evangelises.
The Appellant's evidence was consistent with the witnesses that she does
not have the gifts of talking in tongues, healing or prophesy.  However,
from the evidence, I find that these are, according to the faith, "gifts"
that not all those who follow the faith have.  It does not undermine the
Appellant's evidence that she does not have the "gifts".  She has never
claimed to.  Her evidence is entirely consistent with the witnesses on the
issue.  It is unarguable that in order to be considered a Pentecostal
Christian a person would have to have the gift of talking in tongues.

I do not find that it undermines the ECFC or the evidence of the witnesses
that enquiries were not made by ECFC with the Pentecostal Christian church
in Eritrea that the Appellant claimed to attend prior to coming to the UK.
This was a point made by Mr Melvin in cross-examination of the Appellant
and in submissions.  However, the church bears no responsibility to examine
or scrutinise the faith of a member of the congregation.  It would in my
view me unreasonable to expect the church to have made enquiries by
contacting the church in Eritrea.

I accept that there are significant credibility issues as regards the
Appellant.  Her evidence is that she was a Pentecostal Christian prior to
coming to the UK.  Her account of what happened in Eritrea and whether she
is in contact with her family there is not entirely satisfactory.  In oral
evidence before me she said that her mother was not deaf.  This is at odds
with the evidence in her first witness statement.  I find that she has not
been candid about what happened in Eritrea.  I share Mr Melvin's view about
the evidence of meeting a neighbour at London Bridge.  However, I am
satisfied that this Appellant has for at least 10 years regularly attended
the ECFC and followed the Pentecostal faith.  There are several credible
witnesses who corroborate her account.  Some of the witnesses have
significant roles within the church and have known her over a significant
period.  It would be some feat if the Appellant has successfully hoodwinked
these individuals over such a significant period so much so that they would
all be willing to attend the Tribunal and give oral evidence in support of
their written testimonies.

Mr Parr is an example of a witness whose evidence about the Appellant has
been consistent over a period of 9 years.  This was his second appearance
before the Tribunal.  His opinion is that the Appellant has always
presented as a Pentecostal Christian with a strong commitment to the church
and Pentecostalism.

I consider the Appellant's evidence that she was baptised in Eritrea.  The
evidence is that she has not been baptised here.  I infer that ECFC is
satisfied that she has been baptised as she claims and that therefore there
is no requirement for her to be baptised here.  I have considered this in
the light of the problems with the Appellant's account about what happened
in Eritrea and the reasons for coming to the UK; however, I do not find
that this undermines her evidence that at the date of the hearing before me
she is a practising Pentecostal Christian.  Church attendance over a
significant period and involvement in evangelising support this.  There was
nothing inherently implausible about the Appellant's evidence before me
relating to her faith and commitment to the ECFC.  I find that she is an
active participant in the church.  It is likely to be the case that the
ECFC is a vehicle for socialising with fellow Eritreans; however, this does
not undermine the evidence of genuine commitment.  It may also be that the
Appellant has at some time used her religion as a means to stay here.
However, I remind myself of what the Court held in SA (Iran) v SSHD [2012]
EWHC 2575 (Admin), particularly at [24]:

"...It is a dangerous thing for anyone, and perhaps especially a judge, to
peer into what some call and man or woman's soul to assess whether a
professed faith is genuinely held, and especially not when it was agreed
that she was and is a frequent participant in church services. ... I am at
a loss to understand how that is to be tested by anything other than
considering whether she is an active participant in the new church...."

It may be that the Appellant was not a genuine Pentecostal Christian in
2009 and that over time her commitment has evolved.  It may be that her
claim is properly characterised as arising sur place.  She certainly did
not know very much about the faith in 2009.  She had at that time not been
long in the UK.  There was only one live witness before Judge Gordon.  He
was an elder of Leeds Fellowship Church.  In any event, considering the
overwhelming evidence before me supporting the Appellant's genuine faith at
the date of the hearing before me, there is very good reason to depart from
Judge Gordon's findings.  Given the standard of proof, the issues properly
raised concerning the Appellant's credibility do not fatally undermine her
case.

On the totality of the evidence, I conclude that the Appellant is a genuine
Pentecostal Christian.  For this reason, the Appellant's appeal is allowed
properly applying YT ( Minority church members at risk) [2004] UKAIT 218.

 There is no need for me to make findings about the Appellant's rights
under Article 8 as regards her son.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 17 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

