
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02646/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On July 31, 2019                     |On August 7, 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  Miss Y C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Trumpington, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a Chinese national who came to the United Kingdom in March
2015 and, after notifying the Asylum Department in December, 2015 formally
claimed asylum on January 12, 2016.  This application was refused by the
respondent on March 1, 2019.

On March 21, 2019 the appellant appealed this decision under Section 82(1)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and her appeal came
before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Oliver, who in a decision
promulgated on May 29, 2019, dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
grounds.

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision and permission
to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on
June 27, 2019 on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge arguably
failed to take into account the principles of paragraph 339L HC 395 or the
guidance given by the Tribunal in KB & AH (credibility - structured
approach) [2017] UKUT 491.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

UNLESS AND UNTIL A TRIBUNAL OR COURT DIRECTS OTHERWISE, THE APPELLANT IS
GRANTED ANONYMITY.  NO REPORT OF THESE PROCEEDINGS SHALL DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY IDENTIFY HER OR ANY MEMBER OF HER FAMILY.  THIS DIRECTION
APPLIES BOTH TO THE APPELLANT AND TO THE RESPONDENT.  FAILURE TO COMPLY
WITH THIS DIRECTION COULD LEAD TO CONTEMPT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS.

submissions

MR TRUMPINGTON RELIED ON THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND SUBMITTED THAT THE
DECISION SHOULD BE SET ASIDE, AND THE MATTER REMITTED BACK TO THE FIRST-
TIER TRIBUNAL.  HE ARGUED THAT FINDINGS REFERRED TO IN PARAGRAPHS 3(I),
(III), 4 AND 5 WERE STRONG REASONS FOR AN ERROR IN LAW.

Mr Trumpington submitted that in finding the appellant was an unreliable
witness, the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons for that finding.
The Judge's finding that she had travelled on her own passport was not a
finding that should have been made because she had stated snakeheads had
arranged a passport, with her photograph but not her details, and the
respondent had failed to demonstrate the appellant had used her own
passport.  The finding at paragraph 39 that the appellant had travelled on
her own documents amounted to an error in law.

Whilst acknowledging paragraph 3(ii) of the grounds of appeal was not
necessarily the strongest ground, Mr Trumpington submitted the Judge had
erred by making no reference to the country evidence when assessing her
credibility.

The account provided by the appellant explained why the authorities
considered she was a leader and the absence of any injury did not undermine
her claim to have been beaten.  The approach by the Judge, in paragraph 37
of the decision, lacked structure and did not take into account the
guidance given in KB & AH.  The Judge had failed to enquire why she had
used an agent when making an adverse finding in paragraph 36 and failed to
give any weight to how she had funded her trip.

Any delay in applying for asylum should have been dealt with under
paragraph 339L and not Section 8 of the 2004 Act.  The Judge failed to give
any weight to her explanation that she had not applied for asylum because
she was under the control of a snakehead and only made her claim once her
mother had secured her release.

Mr Lindsay opposed the application and submitted whilst the Judge's reasons
were brief, they were adequate.  The Judge rejected her core claim that she
had come to the attention of the authorities and the reasons provided were
not perverse and stemmed from the reasons provided in the decision letter.
The Judge had rejected her claim that she had come on a false passport and
concluded, following the decision letter, that she had entered the United
Kingdom using her own passport details.  Those findings were open to the
Judge and were the cornerstone of his decision.

The guidance in KB & AH are indicators and not conditions integral to a
decision and credibility was fact sensitive. The law does not require the
case itself to be stated and as long as the Judge considered what is
relevant and gave reasons for rejecting the claim, then there was no error
in law.

Having heard these submissions, I reserved my decision.

ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE AND findings ON ERROR IN LAW

THE APPELLANT HAD ENTERED THE UNITED KINGDOM IN MARCH 2015 BUT DID NOT
CLAIM ASYLUM IN THE UNITED KINGDOM UNTIL JANUARY 2016 ALTHOUGH AN
INDICATION THAT SHE WISHED TO CLAIM ASYLUM WAS MADE IN DECEMBER 2015. THIS
DELAY WAS A MATTER THE JUDGE TOOK INTO ACCOUNT WHEN REJECTING THE CLAIM.

This matter came before the First-tier Tribunal and while Mr Trumpington
argued the Judge had not provided full details of her account, it is clear
that this information was provided between paragraphs 11 and 23 and
thereafter the Judge set out her oral evidence between paragraphs 29 and
34.  The Judge clearly was aware of her claim.

The Judge also set out between paragraphs 24 and 26 the Respondent's view
on the matter and developed those arguments when giving reasons for
dismissing the appeal.

The grant of permission criticises the failure to follow the guidance in KB
& AH or the approach in paragraph 339L HC 395.

Paragraph 339L HC 395 concerns the procedure whereby a person should claim
protection.  It states that it is the responsibility of the appellant to
substantiate their claim and corroboration is not necessarily needed if the
conditions set out in subparagraphs (i) - (v) are met.

The Tribunal in KB & AH provided guidance as to how an appeal should be
approached when credibility was at issue.  It is said that if a structured
approach was followed it would help Judges avoid the temptation to look at
the evidence in a one-dimensional way or to focus in an ad hoc way solely
on whichever indicator or factor appears foremost or opportune.  The advice
continues that the indicators are indicators and not conditions and that
the assessment of credibility was a highly fact-sensitive affair and that
the use of indicators did not negate the requirement to consider the
evidence as a whole or in the round.

The Judge's consideration of the evidence must be looked at in the round
and against the background of the whole decision.

The Judge made an adverse finding about how she came to this country.  At
paragraph 36, the Judge found that a false document was used and Mr Lindsay
referred me to paragraph 56 of the decision, which recorded that the
passport used in a visa application had contained the appellant's own
personal details.  The Judge criticised the appellant with regard to her
explanation as to how her parents were able to raise funds to pay for two
different false passports as well as an earlier bribe to secure her release
from the police.  The Judge found those matters troubling.

The Judge also rejected her explanation why she would be at risk when she
was an employee with limited responsibility as a secretary.  The Judge made
several findings in paragraph 37 and rejected her claim, even taking her
case at its highest, that she was one of the first to shout out.

Mr Trumpington argued that the Judge erred by finding that she suffered no
injury when she had previously claimed she had suffered a bloody nose.  The
Judge found her account of injury was inconsistent with the mistreatment
she claimed she had been subjected to and that was a point made by the
Judge in the decision.  It was said there was a wanted poster and the Judge
criticised her for not sending some form of evidence to the Tribunal on the
basis it would have been a simple task for her parents to take a picture of
the poster and forward the same to the appellant. The findings on both
these issues were open to the Judge who had the opportunity to listen to
cross-examination.

Mr Trumpington's submission is that this was a scattergun approach to the
case and did not follow the guidelines set out in KB & AH.  Mr Lindsay
submitted that those findings were based on the content of the decision
letter and ultimately were findings open to the Judge.

At paragraph 39 the Judge found she was an unreliable witness, having
rejected her claim to have used false documents.  The Judge also rejected
her claim that she had a prominent role in an anti-government demonstration
or that her picture had been on a wanted poster.  These findings were, in
my view, open to the Judge and reasons for rejecting the same had been
given.

Mr Trumpington submitted that the Judge should have properly considered the
case under paragraph 339L HC 395 and not Section 8 of the 2004 Act.  Whilst
her failure to claim asylum was just an additional factor in refusing the
claim but it was a finding made at the end of the decision and made after
all the other adverse findings. If there was an error in approach on that
issue, I find it was not material in this Judge's decision.

There is no error of law in this decision. The findings were open to the
Judge and that whilst the decision could perhaps have been better
structured, it does contain all the necessary information and findings that
were required and poor structure does not amount to an error in law.

decision

THERE IS NO ERROR OF LAW.  I UPHOLD THE ORIGINAL DECISION.


Signed                              Date         1 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date         1 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
