
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03668/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2019                   |On 28 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    G N D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R Parkin, Counsel, instructed by David Wyld & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Freer ('the Judge') issued on 10 June 2019 by which the appellant's appeal
against the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant him international
protection was dismissed.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew granted permission to appeal. In
her decision she reasoned that only one of the grounds advanced was
arguable, namely the ground detailed at [4], but she failed to incorporate
her intention to grant permission on limited grounds within the decision
section of the standard document, where she simply stated, 'permission to
appeal is granted'. There were no words of limitation and therefore the
appellant has permission to argue all grounds: Safi & Ors (permission to
appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC), [2019] Imm AR 437.



Anonymity

The Judge issued an anonymity direction. There was no request from the
representatives to set this direction aside and so I confirm:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report
         of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
         directly or indirectly identify the appellant. This direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent. Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of
         serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents of his
         protection claim being made public.



Background

The appellant is a national of Vietnam and is presently aged 25. He arrived
in this country in 2010 as a 16-year old. Following referral to the
National Referral Mechanism a positive conclusive grounds decision was
issued on 3 March 2019 confirming the appellant to be a victim of human
trafficking or slavery, servitude, or forced/ compulsory labour. The
respondent accepts that the appellant was trafficked to this country and
forced to grow cannabis so as to pay off a loan with interest.

The appellant asserts that his parents died when he was aged 3 and he was
supported by a paternal grandmother until the age of 11. He commenced
working at this age, initially in a restaurant and then on a building site
from the ages of 12 to 14. He then worked at a roadside caf� in Hanoi.
Whilst working at the caf� he was approached and asked if he wanted to work
abroad. He was informed that he would be aided in securing money for the
trip and could repay the loan later. He agreed to a loan of $25,000 to be
repaid within a year, otherwise interest would have to be paid. He also
agreed to pay 20% interest a month if he failed to work two shifts a day.
Having arrived in this country in or around April 2010, he was taught how
to grow cannabis and did so at several houses before escaping. He resided
with a Vietnamese friend called Michael until 2016 and commenced a
relationship with his partner later that year. He claimed asylum in April
2017.





Hearing before the FtT

The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House on 16 May 2019.
The applicant contended that he possessed a well-founded fear of
persecution from traffickers in Vietnam and that he was fearful of being
killed, suffering serious harm and/or being re-trafficked on his return to
his home country. The respondent's position in the decision letter of 3
April 2019 is that the appellant does not know the level of influence held
by his traffickers and so the chance of them coming across him in Vietnam
is slight: Nguyen (Anti-Trafficking Convention: respondent's duties) [2015]
UKUT 170 (IAC). Alternatively, it is asserted that there is a sufficiency
of protection existing in Vietnam and, further, the appellant can
reasonably relocate to Ho Chi Minh City. At the hearing the respondent
further asserted that the appellant had long paid off the debt to his
traffickers and had been willingly released by them. Consequently, no well-
founded subjective fear of persecution exists.

The Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal observing, inter alia, at [52],
[54] - [56]:

         'Bearing in mind these very particular findings, I am not persuaded
         that the expert report assists the Appellant. He has left debt
         bondage and has spent almost six years freely visiting his friends
         in Nail Bars according to his account. I do not find it shown there
         is any risk of being trafficked by any original traffickers. There
         is little risk that he will run into them or be recognised if he
         goes to a different region or to Ho Chi Minh City.'

         ...

         'The only slight risk appears to be trafficking by a new gang. The
         Appellant can move around from city to city in a country of 90
         million people. It is not clear how the old gang in the old city
         will look for him when he registers in a new city.

         The risk from new gangs appears to be mitigated by his diverse work
         experience. The expert has been told the Appellant worked in
         Vietnam in his teens as a restaurant worker and also on a building
         site. I suspect he has done similar work to sustain himself in the
         UK. Something has sustained him, and we have no evidence from the
         friends who are supposed to have done so. I can reasonably suspect
         that his income source is other than he described.

         I find that the Appellant will find his way into restaurant work or
         building work in Vietnam. He will be able to support himself. He is
         fit and in his mid-twenties.'



Grounds of Appeal

The appellant relies upon unnumbered grounds of appeal drafted by his
solicitors. In granting permission to appeal JFtT Andrew reasoned, at [3] -
[4]:

         'Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Grounds: I find they disclose no
         arguable error of law. It is apparent that there was a conclusive
         grounds decision in favour of the Appellant and that following this
         there is no obligation on the Respondent, in accordance with his
         Policy, to grant discretionary leave as the Grounds suggest.

         However, I do find that there is an arguable error of law in the
         decision in that the Judge merely adopted the arguments of the
         Respondent's representative without analysing the evidence that was
         before him and thus giving cogent reasons for the findings in
         relation to credibility.'

No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.



The Hearing

Following initial discussion with the representatives, Mr Jarvis confirmed
that the respondent accepted the Judge's decision to be flawed by legal
error such that it should be set aside. He accepted that whilst the
contents of [42] alone are not sufficient to automatically undermine the
lawfulness of the decision, there was a failure to clearly engage with the
appellant's evidence in cross-examination as to the circumstances arising
in this country and that included both his escape from the traffickers and
his time spent living with his friend 'Michael'.



Decision on Error of Law

I first consider [4] of the appellant's grounds of appeal.

'The approach taken by the First Tier Tribunal in resolving issues of
credibility and disputes of fact is materially wrong. At paragraph 42 of
the determination the First Tier Tribunal made a finding that: 'I found
that the arguments put by Ms John ('the Home Office Presenting Officer')
were accurate and cogent as a whole. I do not find any likely flaws. I am
inclined to adopt her submissions as my own for that reason to save space.'
It is submitted that the First Tier Tribunal has not developed its own
findings on material issues.'

The paragraph complained of is [42] of the decision, which states in its
entirety:

         'I found that the arguments put by Ms John were accurate and cogent
         as a whole. I do not find any likely flaws. I am inclined to adopt
         her submissions as my own for that reason, to save space.'

The submissions that the Judge was 'inclined' to adopt are detailed at [33]
to [37]:

         'Ms John for the Home Office asked me to accept the refusal letter
         issued last month in its entirety. This is an Appellant who arrived
         in 2010 but claimed [asylum] in 2017.

         The man was trafficked but there was a point where he paid off the
         debt. It could have been in one year but if that is not accepted,
         she put 2013 as the fall back date. This explains why the Appellant
         was able to leave the cannabis farm. It was not an escape and she
         questioned his truthfulness after that part of his account. The
         housemate once gave him �60. He made his way to Michael who runs a
         Nail Bar.  He was encountered at a Nail Bar. He was not paying off
         debt there but had already freed himself from debt. That explains
         why nobody else has come forward to give evidence on his behalf.

         She has tried to understand better his living arrangements after
         the cannabis farm but parts of it do not ring true. It is not the
         case he still has debts so he can go back to Vietnam. He just does
         not want to go back there. Michael treats him well, so why would he
         leave?

         The RFRL lists differences in his accounts producing discrepancies.
         This goes to his credibility. He is not being truthful and what the
         Secretary of State has highlighted is valid.

         The respondent has said he can move to a different city in Vietnam.
         The example of debt of �17,000 at Professor Bluth's report 5.2.7
         was paid off within two years in a cannabis factory. In three years
         at the most, the Appellant's debt must have been paid, using his
         own expert evidence. At 6.1 the expert says they are kept in
         bondage until deemed to have paid off the debt. This event
         basically depends on the greed of the traffickers. He says it can
         take years, but this Appellant had signed up for a one-year
         contract and was working for years, so he meets the criteria for
         clearing the subjective debt.'

It is important to observe that the submissions made on behalf of the
respondent address an issue that assumed importance for the first time at
the hearing, namely as to whether the appellant paid off his debt and was
permitted by the gang to leave their control. This is denied by the
appellant. The Judge does not weigh the appellant's evidence or his
Counsel's submissions on this issue in his assessments either at [42] or in
the subsequent paragraphs. The Judge boldly asserts without more at [46],
'this appellant was a grown-up when his work for the traffickers ended.'
Therefore [42] is the sole reasoning on this central issue and it is wholly
inadequate.

It is a long-established principle that proper adequate reasons must be
given that deal with the substantial points that have been raised in an
appeal and whilst it is unnecessary for a Judge to set out the evidence and
arguments before it or the facts found by it in detail, the reasons must be
proper, adequate and intelligible and enable the person affected to know
why they have been successful or unsuccessful. In this matter, the Judge
has provided no adequate reasons as to why the appellant's evidence on this
issue is not accepted, being mindful of the lower standard of proof
applicable in asylum appeals.

I observe that the appellant has been accepted by the respondent as being
credible with regard to his history of having been trafficked and this
ought properly to form part of the holistic exercise when assessing his
credibility as to events in this country. In such circumstances, the Judge
materially erred as to his assessment of credibility and the only
appropriate course available is for this decision to be set aside. I am
therefore not required to consider the other grounds raised in this appeal.



Remittal

As to remaking the decision, given the fundamental nature of the error of
law that has been identified, I note the submissions made by both Mr Parkin
and Mr Jarvis that sustainable findings of fact have yet to be made in this
matter and to date the appellant has not enjoyed a fair hearing. Both
representatives submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice
Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the
disposal of appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows at [7.2]:

         'The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
         remake the decision instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
         Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that

(a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case
to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

(b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary
in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having
regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
the case to the First-tier Tribunal.'

I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit this matter
to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters. The
appellant has not yet enjoyed an adequate consideration of his asylum claim
to date and has not had a fair hearing.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 10 June
2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
Act 2007.

This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Freer. No
findings of fact are preserved.

An anonymity direction is confirmed.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 24 October 2019
