
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/03983/2015
                                  IA


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2017                         |On 25 July 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                       VV
                   (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                         Appellant

                                  v


      SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                            Respondent


                 DECISION AND REASONS

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms E. Harris, counsel instructed by the Tamil Welfare
               Association (Romford Road)
For the Respondent: Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. This appeal came before me for a resumed hearing on 5 July 2017,
following an adjourned hearing on 20 April 2017. Directions in respect of
that hearing are appended.

2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 6 July 1953. He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 28.12.99 and claimed asylum on 11.1.00.
His asylum application was refused on 14.1.01 on the grounds of non-
compliance due to his failure to attend his asylum interview. It was
accepted on all sides that the reason for this was that the letter inviting
him to interview was not sent to the Appellant's correct address as a
consequence of which he failed to attend. On 13.6.13 the Appellant made
submissions in support of a fresh asylum claim and on 21.8.14 the
Respondent's agreed to consider these as a fresh claim. The Appellant was
then interviewed on 4.11.15 and his asylum application was refused in a
decision dated 7 December 2015.

3. The Appellant appealed and his appeal came before First tier Tribunal
Judge Blundell for hearing on 20.1.17. Prior to the substantive hearing a
litigation friend had been appointed on the basis that the Appellant was
unfit to provide instructions or to participate in the hearing. The appeal
thus proceeded on the basis of submissions only. In a decision promulgated
on 10.2.17 the Judge dismissed the appeal.

4. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time on or about 21.2.17. Two sets of grounds of appeal were submitted:
initial grounds (undated) and grounds of appeal settled by the Appellant's
counsel dated 21.2.17. Permission to appeal was granted by First tier
Tribunal Judge Ford on 2.3.17 limited to the following:

      "5. The only argument with any merit is that the assessment of
Article 8   proportionality was inadequate taking into account the length
of the      Appellant's residence in the UK, his mental health condition,
his fear of return     and the impact on him of such a return as described
by Dr. Lawrence. This is     the only ground."

5. At the hearing on 20 April 2017 both parties sought an adjournment: Ms
Isherwood because she was not in possession of the Home Office file and Ms
Harris, because she sought to rely on the additional grounds of appeal,
which had not been determined by the Upper Tribunal as no IA68 was served
in order to give the Appellant the opportunity to renew the application to
the Upper Tribunal. In the interests of fairness to both parties, I acceded
to the request for an adjournment and informed the parties that I would
make a decision on the additional grounds of appeal at the adjourned
hearing.

6. Prior to the resumed hearing I received an amended rule 24 response by
Ms Isherwood dated 19.6.17 in response to the full grounds of appeal.

Hearing

7. I heard submissions from Ms Harris, who indicated that she was only
relying on the "additional" grounds of appeal of 21.2.17, which are quite
extensive and raise the following challenges:

(i) the Judge failed to assess the Appellant's claim in the round, taking
account all the evidence including the medical evidence and failed to
assess the common thread throughout the accounts in light of the
Appellant's circumstances  upon which the FtTJ was required to make
findings of fact;

(ii) the standard of proof was not appropriately considered in light of the
precautionary principle;

(iii) in finding at [45] that the Sri Lankan authorities would not visit
the Appellant and would inevitably form the conclusion that he suffered
from mental health problems and was of no further interest to them, the
Judge misapplied GJ at [169] and failed to take account of a material
consideration viz the medical evidence which makes clear that the
Appellant's mental health difficulties are not prima facie obvious;

(iv) the Judge erred in placing no weight on the conclusions of Dr Lawrence
as to the risk of suicide on return;

(v) the Judge materially erred in his assessment of the public interest
considerations as part of the assessment of proportionality.

8. Ms Harris submitted that the Judge erred at [42] in finding that the
Appellant does not currently put forward a version of events which are the
truth upon which he can make findings of fact.  She submitted that this was
compounded at [43] because the Judge should have but failed to look at
common things between the accounts ie what is consistent and failed to
assess his claim in the round, including his medical reports and make any
kind of findings of fact as to what happened to the Appellant in Sri Lanka.
This is axiomatic given that the Appellant cannot now give evidence about
it. She submitted that weight should have been given to earlier account and
the Judge makes no allowance for the Appellant's medical condition in
giving his later account, which amounts to a material error.

9. In respect of the precautionary principle and the question of how one
deals with a person who cannot give evidence or be cross-examined for
medical reasons, Ms Harris relied on the UNHCR Handbook at [210] and the
guidance that it is necessary to lighten the burden of proof. She submitted
that at [42] the Judge refers to this but fails to apply the shared burden
principle: see [207]-[212]. Ms Harris submitted that the fact that the
Appellant cannot answer questions does not mean he is not at risk or
vulnerable to persecution. She submitted that allowance is made for this in
respect of child refugees but no similar approach taken in respect of an
appellant who would be in a similar situation. Whilst the standard of proof
is the same for all applicants where you have someone with a mental
impairment you have take a precautionary approach to someone who might be
at risk as it is less easy for that person to meet that standard cf.
paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules.

10. Whilst the Judge engaged with the issue of a litigation friend at the
hearing at [15] and the procedure at the hearing, he failed to factor the
impact of this on to the Appellant in terms of his assessment of the asylum
claim. Dr Lawrence makes clear that the Appellant does not know anymore
which is why he did not give evidence. There is no guidance as to what is
then done with an asylum claim. The vulnerable witness' guidance [Joint
Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010] is premised on the basis that a
person is giving evidence and does not cover this situation. This is why we
say this aspect of the decision is in breach of the precautionary
principle. It would be nonsensical if the Convention would provide
protection for everyone other than those who are unable to answer questions
about their claim.

11. In respect of the "home visit" grounds, Ms Harris acknowledged that the
difficulty with the claim is the fact that the Appellant does not fall
neatly into the GJ categories. The Judge's failure at [45] to accept that
the Appellant would be visited entirely misunderstands and misinterprets
what is said in GJ which is that he must expect to be visited. The question
is whether there is then a real risk and what would happen when he was
visited. She submitted that, regardless of whether or not the authorities
have sophisticated intelligence, they are not going to know about his
mental health. This goes to the evidence of Dr Lawrence and the fact that
one cannot tell from looking at the Appellant that he has mental health
problems or the way that he comes across: good self care, engaged, did not
have a problem finding words. The Judge did not meet the Appellant as he
was outside court and the litigation friend was inside court because Dr
Lawrence recommended that he not come to court. The Appellant will not
understand that he has given a different answer and is not able to give an
account of where he has been. He is not able to give credible and
consistent answers and this would put him at risk with the authorities.

12. In respect of the suicide risk, what this comes down to is that the
Judge simply disregards what Dr Lawrence has to say about it. The Judge
finds at [51] that there is no proper evidential foundation upon which he
could conclude that the Appellant would take his own life, however page 28
of Bundle 2 clearly refers to a suicide risk and Dr Lawrence explains the
evidential foundation of the suicide risk. It is impossible to know the
level of risk with any certainty but Dr Lawrence looks at it as objectively
as possible and concludes whilst currently at low risk he would be at very
high risk of suicide if any attempt was made to remove him to Sri Lanka.

13. In respect of Article 8, this is considered by the Judge at [56] and
[57] which is a very short summary, which is inadequate. The Appellant had
been in the UK for 17 years. The Appellant claimed asylum two weeks after
arrival in 1999 and was then waiting for a decision for years. The Judge
does accept that the reasons for this are the responsibility of the
Respondent rather than the Appellant. In respect of the section 117B
considerations it makes no difference whatsoever as the Appellant will not
integrate in the same way as others and is being cared for by his
litigation friend. The Appellant will not be able to learn English. At [56]
the Judge accepted the Appellant has developed a private life since he came
to the UK, however, no consideration was given at all to his private life.
Ms Harris submitted that 17 years residence is going to give rise to more
than the minimum in that he has developed a debilitating illness and has
become more dependent on those around him. Delay is a material factor viz
chapter 53 of the CIG which provides that delay may be considered
exceptionally when a person has lived in the UK for more than 6 years and
cf. EB Kosovo at [15] and [16]. When the Appellant first made his claim in
2000 he would have been able to have been interviewed and he has been
prejudiced by the Respondent's delay, as his illness means he cannot now be
interviewed. The Judge materially erred in that there was no Razgar
assessment outside the Rules. Nothing in the Judge's article 8 assessment
demonstrates why the public interest is overwhelming despite all these
factors.

14. In response, Mr Duffy submitted that, in relation to the asylum claim
what the Judge does at [44] is enough and deals adequately with the claim.
The Appellant is not within the GJ categories. On the facts of this case
the Appellant could not succeed in light of GJ. Even if he was visited [45]
he would not be of interest as they would realize he is not a well man. It
was entirely open to the Judge to dismiss the claim on the grounds he gave.


15. In respect of the risk of suicide, if one looks at what Dr Lawrence
stated it was that if you attempt to remove him to Sri Lanka there would be
a very high risk but this could be managed by the UK and so there would be
no breach of article 3. If the Appellant returned to his wife in Sri Lanka
we do not know what the risk would be.

16. In respect of the Article 8 point. Mr Duffy submitted that Judge
Blundell addresses Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. The Appellant has spent a
large part of his life in Sri Lanka and his return would be managed by his
family on return and there would be no obstacles to integration. Mr Duffy
acknowledged that there had been a long delay in interviewing and deciding
his asylum claim and that it should have been looked at under the legacy.
In respect of the effect of delay he submitted that EB (Kosovo) is
concerned with cases where it is indicative of a system that has broken
down and where you get inconsistent results, whereas this is an unusual
case. The question is whether a person is in need of protection. The Judge
does acknowledge this at [56] and has taken it into account.

17. In respect of the precautionary principle, Mr Duffy submitted that the
only way one can deal with it is the way the Judge did deal with it at [45]
and he looks at the initial claim at its highest, given the situation is
that the Appellant is never going to be able to give consistent evidence
about his claim.

18. In reply, Ms Harris submitted that at [43] the Judge does not look at
the initial claim at the highest and finds the Appellant has not discharged
the burden of proof. In respect of the risk of suicide, it is clear from
the report of
Dr Lawrence in bundle 4 at page 26 in his addendum report that it is clear
the increased risk of suicide occurs in the context of sudden loss of
dissociative defences triggered eg by a period of detention when he would
become acutely aware of his emotions and may well become actively suicidal.
Ms Harris submitted that there was a serious question over integration on
return and whether he could properly integrate given his medical condition
and whether he could participate in society and be accepted there, even
with his wife and son there.

19. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Decision on error of law

20. I have concluded that whilst the decision of the First tier Tribunal
Judge is careful and reasoned and in many ways an exemplary example, the
Judge made material errors of law in the following respects.

21. At [45] of the decision the Judge considered whether the Appellant
would be visited at home by the Sri Lankan authorities in accordance with
the reasoning set out at [169] of GJ and concluded:

      "I do not consider that this appellant would be visited at his home
address. He      is a comparatively elderly individual who is demonstrably
mentally unwell.       The Sri Lankan authorities will know that he is of
no interest to them before he     arrives. What is important, of course, is
their perception of him but I do not    consider there to be any reason
that he would be perceived to be anything other    than a failed asylum
seeker who is returning to his wife after many years of  enduring mental
health problems in the UK. Even if he is visited by a police  officer or a
CID officer that is inevitably the conclusion at which they would   arrive,
particularly in light of the fact that their enquiries would be informed
by sophisticated intelligence and not merely by whatever information (if
any)  the appellant and his family volunteer."

22. The suggestion of a "home visit" comes from the submissions on behalf
of the Respondent in GJ at [169] that:

      "169. Mr Hall further accepted that forced returnees, whether
travelling on a  charter flight or scheduled flight, are asked for
confirmation of the address to    which they intend to proceed on leaving
the airport, and must expect to be      visited at that address by the
police or the CID in the days following return,    and if of interest, may
be detained or revisited thereafter ..."

23. Thus it is clear, in my view, that in using the phrase "must expect"
the Respondent's counsel in GJ was conceding that there is a serious
possibility of a visit to the home address by the authorities with the
purpose of ascertaining whether or not the forced returnee is a person of
interest and this applies to all forced returnees. I consider that the
First tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding that the Appellant would not be
visited by the authorities. I further consider that this is a material
error in that it is clear from [169] of GJ that a risk of detention arises
at the home visit and if, for whatever reason, the person is considered to
be of interest he may be detained (or revisited). The consequences of
detention are acknowledged in the previous paragraph of GJ viz "168. Mr
Hall accepted that individuals in custody in Sri Lanka continue to be at
risk of physical abuse, including sexual violence, and that such risk is
persecutory."

24. I consider that the First tier Tribunal Judge further erred in law in
his assessment of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. At [56] of his
decision the Judge agreed it was appropriate to consider Article 8 outside
the Rules on the facts of this particular case and made extensive reference
to relevant jurisprudence in reaching his decision on the proportionality
of removal of the Appellant. However, I agree with Ms Harris that it is
unclear from the Judge's article 8 assessment why the public interest is
overwhelming despite the factors telling in the Appellant's favour and I
find there to be inadequate reasoning in this respect. I also find that
there is no analysis of the Appellant's physical and moral integrity as
part of the assessment of the material private life factors that required
consideration.

25. For the avoidance of doubt, I do not find that the Judge materially
erred in his analysis of the Appellant's core asylum claim, given the
inherent difficulties caused by the inconsistencies between his original
account given in 2000 and his subsequent account, made after his mental
health began to deteriorate and which could not be relied upon, as was
accepted by all sides in light of the expert medical evidence of Dr
Lawrence. Consequently, even if the Judge had applied a more generous
standard of proof that would not have made any difference in the
circumstances, given that the Appellant was not able to discharge the
burden of proving that he would be at risk of persecution if returned to
Sri Lanka, regardless of whether or not a reduced standard of proof were to
be applied.

26. Nor do I find that the Judge erred in his assessment and conclusions
regarding the risk of suicide if the Appellant were to be returned, given
that Dr Lawrence's conclusion in this respect was speculative ["the
increased risk concerning suicide occurs in the context of sudden loss of
the dissociative defences. If that were to happen, triggered, for example,
by a period of detention, then this man would acutely and powerfully be
aware of his emotions. During such a point he may well become acutely
suicidal, he is almost certainly going to become agitated...  it is
impossible with any certainty to quantify that risk"] and the Judge cited
Dr Lawrence's opinion in full at [39]. Moreover, throughout the remaining
medical evidence there has been no indication that the Appellant entertains
suicidal thoughts and Dr Lawrence's assessment at the time he examined the
Appellant was that the risk of suicide was low. Given the high threshold
necessary to engage Article 3 I find that threshold has not been reached on
the evidence put forward.

27. In the event I found an error of law in the decision of the First tier
Tribunal Judge the parties agreed it would be appropriate to re-make the
decision, given that there was no oral evidence to consider and the
Appellant was not seeking to rely on any new evidence.

Findings on the substantive appeal

28. It was acknowledged by Ms Harris that the Appellant does not have a
profile that would fall within the risk categories set out in GJ and Others
(post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). As a
consequence of my findings at [23]-[25] above there are two issues
outstanding that require determination.

29. The first issue is whether there is a real risk or serious possibility
that in the course of a home visit following his forced return to Sri
Lanka, the Appellant would be detained with a consequent risk of
persecutory ill-treatment: [168]-[169] of GJ refer. I have concluded that,
whilst the risk cannot be excluded, it is essentially speculative and does
not reach the threshold necessary to establish a well founded fear of
persecution or ill treatment contrary to Article 3 of ECHR. This is due to
the fact that the purpose of the home visit is essentially to ascertain
whether or not the Appellant is a person of interest. Despite his very long
residence in the UK, the Appellant has not been involved with political
activities in the diaspora and has no profile that would bring him within
the GJ risk categories. Moreover, whilst the Appellant is mentally unwell,
his illness which is possibly Ganser's Syndrome, does not manifest itself
in such a way that it is obvious that he is unwell. This was a point made
by Ms Harris in her submissions [11. above] based on the medical evidence
and I find, given the purpose of the home visit is to exclude him as a
person of interest and there will be no intelligence to indicate otherwise,
that any questioning of the Appellant is likely to be brief and would not
arouse the adverse interest of the authorities with the consequence that
the Appellant would then be detained.

30. I turn to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, it having
been accepted that the circumstances of the case merit such consideration.
The First tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant had established a
private life in the United Kingdom over his substantial residence since
December 1999, which now amounts to 17 and a half years. Whilst the Judge
noted the Appellant's length of residence and the lengthy delay in deciding
the Appellant's asylum claim and that responsibility for this lies more
with the Respondent than the Appellant, he considered the Appellant's
health claim only to the extent that it qualifies as a "specific case" cf.
GS & EO [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at [87]. This is defined at [86] as follows:

      "86.     If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it does here),
Article 8   cannot prosper without some separate or additional factual
element which    brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm - the
capacity to form and enjoy   relationships - or a state of affairs having
some affinity with the paradigm.  That approach was, as it seems to me,
applied by Moses LJ (with whom    McFarlane LJ and the Master of the Rolls
agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012]   EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23."

The Judge resolved this issue in the Appellant's favour, due to his private
life ties formed over the length of his residence, particularly with his
litigation friend, Mr P with whom he also lives. However, the Judge failed
to analysis the impact of the Appellant's illness on the proportionality
assessment.

31. I summarise the Appellant's health claim as follows, based on his GP
and psychiatric reports from 2016-2017:

(i) in spite of taking seven hypertensive medications his blood pressure is
not very well controlled;
(ii) he was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease stage 3 in June 2009;
(iii) he suffers asthma and heart disease. His asthma is not well
controlled;
(iv) he has memory problems and a history of depression;
(v) he suffers from PTSD with secondary depression;
(vi) Dr Lawrence originally considered [report of 20.9.16] that the
Appellant was suffering from vascular dementia, due to cognitive
impairment, but following an MRI scan which concluded that he was suffering
from mild small vessel disease and a discussion with the Neurologist the
conclusion was that the vascular changes within the brain are insufficient
to account for his functional impairment. He concluded that the Appellant
is suffering from Ganser's Syndrome, which is a functional dementia brought
about by extreme stress.

32. I have taken account of the fact that the Appellant has a wife and
adult son in Sri Lanka. I also bear in mind that, in light of the
background evidence including that emanating from the Respondent, the
medical treatment available to the Appellant in Sri Lanka will fall below
that he is able to access in the United Kingdom, but this needs to be
balanced against the public interest cf. Akhalu (Article 8: health claim)
[2013] UKUT 00400 at [46].

33. Consequently, I conduct the balancing exercise based on the fact that
the Appellant is a 64 year old man, of Tamil origin, who has resided in the
UK since 28.12.99 ie for 17 and a half years and he suffers from a range of
physical illnesses, including kidney disease and a form of functional
dementia, which prevented him from being considered fit to provide
instructions and give evidence at his appeal hearing. Moreover, whilst the
risk of detention arising from a home visit on return and the risk of
suicide do not, on the evidence, reach the threshold so as to amount to an
Article 3 human rights breach, there is no doubt from the reports of Dr
Lawrence that removal of the Appellant to Sri Lanka would have a
detrimental effect on his physical and moral integrity and I duly take that
factor into account in my consideration of proportionality.

34. The public interest considerations I am obliged to consider are set out
at section 117B of the NIAA 2002. I note in particular:

"(1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.
(2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
who can speak English-
(a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
(b)are better able to integrate into society.
(3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter
or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
persons-
(a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and
(b)are better able to integrate into society.
(5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious."

35. Ms Harris submitted (in her grounds of appeal) that:

(i) the weight to be attached to effective immigration control is reduced
by virtue of the fact that the Appellant claimed asylum two weeks after his
arrival and the delay in deciding his claim was on the part of the
Respondent and it was accepted by the FtTJ that responsibility for the
delay lies more with the Respondent [56]. She submitted that the issue of
delay should also be considered in light of chapter 53 of the CIG where a
delay of more than 6 years by the Home Office in deciding an asylum
application may be considered exceptionally. This is a reference to the
legacy programme. There is no explanation as to why the Appellant did not
qualify for a form of leave to remain under the legacy programme on this
basis. Ms Harris also drew attention to EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 at [14]-
[16] in particular:

      "16. Delay may be relevant, thirdly, in reducing the weight otherwise
to be       accorded to the requirements of firm and fair immigration
control, if the delay  is shown to be the result of a dysfunctional system
which yields unpredictable,  inconsistent and unfair outcomes."

(ii) the ability to speak English was not a factor within the Appellant's
control due to his mental illness and will for the same reason have limited
integration into society, but these are not factors that should be held
against him in light of his medical condition and the fact that he resides
with his litigation friend Mr P and is supported by him and the Tamil
community;

(iii) the case of Kaur [2017] UKUT 00014 makes clear that the phrase
"little weight" in the context of a precarious private life, does not
denote an absolute measurement or concept and will vary according to the
particular context. In Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 Sales LJ held at [53]:

"53. Although a court or tribunal should have regard to the consideration
that little weight should be given to private life established in such
circumstances, it is possible without violence to the language to say that
such generalised normative guidance may be overridden in an exceptional
case by particularly strong features of the private life in question, where
it is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to attach only little weight to
private life. That is to say, for a case falling within section 117B(5)
little weight should be given to private life established in the
circumstances specified, but that approach may be overridden where the
private life in question has a special and compelling character. Such an
interpretation is also necessary to prevent section 117B(5) being applied
in a manner which would produce results in some cases which would be
incompatible with Article 8, i.e. is necessary to give proper effect to
Parliament's intention in Part 5A."

36. I have also taken into account the submissions of Mr Duffy, who
acknowledged inter alia that the Appellant's asylum claim should have been
considered under the legacy programme and the points taken by the First
tier Tribunal Judge at [57] viz there is no evidence to show that he is
financially independent cf. Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [63] ie
"someone who is financially independent of others"; he is dependent on the
NHS for treatment for his physical and mental health conditions, which
speaks in favour of his removal cf. Akhalu (Article 8: health claim) [2013]
UKUT 00400 at [46]. I have given careful consideration to whether a fair
balance has been struck between the rights of the individual and the
interests of the community.

37. I have concluded that, by a very narrow margin, it would not be
proportionate to remove the Appellant to Sri Lanka. My primary reasons for
so finding are due to the particular circumstances of this case and the
fact that, having claimed asylum at the beginning of 2000, having arrived
two weeks previously, the Appellant did not receive the letter from the
Home Office inviting him to his asylum interview, due to the fact that this
was sent to the wrong address and there then followed substantial delay in
processing his claim. The vast majority of cases affected by delay due to
the backlog at the Home Office were resolved by way of the legacy casework
programme. Mr Duffy, on behalf of the Respondent, accepted that this
Appellant's case should have fallen for consideration under the legacy and
it unclear why it was not.

38. Moreover, by the time that the Appellant was interviewed, on 4.11.15.
his mental state had deteriorated to the extent that he was unable to give
a consistent account of the basis of his claim, due to his memory and
cognitive problems, which were subsequently diagnosed as a form of
functional dementia. Thus the First tier Tribunal found and I accept that
the Appellant was unable to put forward a version of events which is said
to be the truth upon which he was able to make findings of fact [42].
Essentially it is now too late to properly determine his asylum claim and
whether or not he would be at risk of persecution if returned to Sri Lanka.

39. Whilst I have had due regard to the public interest considerations and
the other factors which tell against the Appellant set out at [35] above, I
have also borne in mind the judgment of Lord Justice Sales in Rhuppiah
[2016] EWCA Civ 803 Sales LJ at [53] and taking account of all the relevant
factors I find that a fair balance on the facts of this case favours the
Appellant.

Decision

40. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (article 8).

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

24 July 2017





