
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03016/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 16th January 2020                 |On 29th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               Mr Ihab Matouri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Abdullah, Solicitor, instructed by UK
                    International Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 5th April 1995.  He arrived
in the United Kingdom in September 2018 and claimed asylum.  His claim was
refused by the respondent in a decision of 13th March 2019.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal
came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hobson for hearing on 31st July 2019.

3.   The appellant indicated that he had turned away from Islam when he was
17 years old and had been introduced to Christianity by his friend.  He had
been attending a house church for some three months when on 3rd September
2018 that church was raided by the authorities.  He managed to escape but
left his wallet at the church and that led to the authorities coming to his
home searching for him.

4.   Since he has been in the United Kingdom he has been going to church
regularly.  Evidence was given before the Tribunal by the Reverend Sally
Smith and also by Mr Shadravani, who is an licenced parish outreach worker
and chaplain to the Iranian community.

5.   In the course of the determination the Judge accepted what had
happened to the appellant in Iran and also accepted the genuine nature of
his conversion to Christianity.

6.   In assessing the risk on return the Judge found that he was more
likely to be investigated and arrested by the authorities than other young
men in Iran but saw no reason, however, why he could not return to his
family home and continue to practise his religion in the same manner as
before.

7.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision, essentially on
the basis that the Judge had not applied the principles in HJ & HT v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 properly and had
failed to engage with what risk would be presented to the appellant were he
to return home and continue to worship as he had done before, if not more
so.

8.   The matter came before me to determine the issue and I found that
there was a material error of law in the assessment of risk on return.

9.   I set aside the decision, having preserved the findings of fact in
order that the Upper Tribunal could determine the nature of the risk which
the appellant would face upon return.  The matter thus came before me once
again on 16th January 2020 to determine that issue.

10.  The appellant indicated that at present he feels very much part of the
church family and would continue to follow his faith even were he to be
returned to Iran.  He is in contact with his family through WhatsApp.
Initially when he told them of his conversion they were not very pleased
but they are more receptive now because they can see that he is a happier
and a better person.  He would wish to express his faith in Iran if
returned.

11.  The Reverend Sally Smith updated her evidence by a further statement
of 12th January 2020. St Mark's Church is very much a community-based
church that has a large number of activities during the week for the wider
community, particularly for asylum seekers, the homeless and those on the
fringe of established community.

12.  On Monday evening the church would be open for worship practice.  On
Tuesday during the day people would gather together to cook food, engage in
baptism and preparation with worship at 6 o'clock, thereafter to share a
meal.

13.  On Wednesday the church is open for refugees to come to seek
assistance from other agencies such as nursing, Citizens Advice, midwifery,
food bank and so forth.  On the Wednesday before the hearing 134 people
from 37 countries came on that day.

14.  The church then is closed until Sunday, when it is open in the
afternoon for preparation for a Bible reading in the evening.

15.  The church has been very much seen as a focus for Iranian Christians
worshiping as a community of some 47 to 70 people.

16.  The appellant is fully engaged with all that the church has to offer.
He helps lead the singing and the services and also is very active in food
preparation and general assistance during the week.  He helps also with the
volunteer drop in centre on Wednesday called The Sanctus Group and also
with the foodbank support.  She has no doubt that he is both genuine and
involved in his faith and would be anxious to express it.

17.  Mr Shadravani also made a further statement of 12th January 2012.  He
himself came to the United Kingdom as an asylum seeker in 2015.  He also
found it difficult to convince the authorities that he was a genuine
Christian.  He fully understands the nature of the issues and has no doubt
at all that the appellant is genuine in his faith.  The appellant was
baptised on 15th August 2019.  He spoke of the appellant doing more than he
needed to do within the community to demonstrate his commitment.

18.  Mr McVeety had no questions of any of the witnesses in the
proceedings.

19.  I was invited to find that there was indeed a real risk to the
appellant on return.  He had expressed a commitment to his faith before he
left Iran and that had attracted the attention of the authorities towards
him.  He has as a mark of that faith a large tattoo put onto his arm and
that was done before he left for the United Kingdom.  Since that time, he
has grown in his understanding and commitment to the Christian faith and
would seek to live out that faith were he to return.  That would draw the
attention of the authorities to him, the additional factor being that he
was already somebody who was of interest to the authorities before he left.

20.  Mr McVeety most fairly conceded that he had no challenge to the
evidence that was presented and accepted that, on the face of the current
country guidance, the appellant with his Christian profile and a person who
it would not be reasonable or fair to expect to hide that faith, would be a
person at risk.

21.  In those circumstances, I find that were the appellant to be returned
to Iran he would be of interest to the authorities by reason of his
existing profile and would be readily apparent to the authorities by reason
of his public expression of his faith in a church setting.

22.  In all those circumstances therefore, I find that the appellant would
be at risk of persecution and/or serious harm upon return.  In those
circumstances, the appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed as to asylum and human rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P. D. King                                Date 27th January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

