
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03758/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 16 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     G M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, instructed by Templeton Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A
Khan promulgated on 5 June 2019 ("the Decision") dismissing the Appellant's
appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 9 April 2019, refusing the
Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

The Appellant is a national of Kenya.   He claimed asylum on the basis of
his sexuality.  The Judge did not accept that claim as credible.  He also
dismissed the Appellant's Article 8 claim for reasons which I will need to
come to in due course.

The Appellant appeals the Decision on three grounds.  First, he says that
the Judge has failed properly to consider his Article 8 case.  Second, he
says that the Judge should have permitted the Appellant an adjournment in
order to obtain an expert medical report.  Third, he says that the Judge
should not have based his findings on the Appellant's claim to have been
ill-treated on the evidence of a Rule 35 report.

Permission to appeal was granted on 4 July 2019 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Povey in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds allege that the Judge erred in his Article 8
         assessment and in his decision to refuse the Appellant's
         adjournment application.


         3.   The Judge's self-direction at [64] on the Appellant's private
         life clam was confused (between the provisions of the Rules and
         Article 8) and arguably erroneous (regarding the threshold to
         consider an appeal outside of the Rules).  The subsequent analysis
         appeared to consider the appeal outside of the Rules (referencing
         section 117B considerations at [65] to [68]) but failed to make a
         clear finding on whether Article 8 was engaged and, if it was,
         whether any interference was proportionate.  In refusing the
         Appellant's appeal under Article 8, the Judge's reasoning was
         unclear and constituted an arguable error of law.  In addition, in
         refusing the application to adjourn, the Judge made a material
         mistake of fact, referring to a speech expert's report (at [11]),
         when the Appellant was seeking to obtain an expert medical report.
         That error was material to the Judge's determination that it was
         just and fair to proceed with the hearing and similarly constituted
         an arguable error of law.


         4.   As the application for permission disclosed arguable errors of
         law, permission to appeal is granted.  All grounds may be argued."


The matter comes before me to assess whether the Decision does disclose an
error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to the First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Although it is evident that the Article 8 ground was considered by Judge
Povey to be the stronger, it is appropriate to begin my consideration with
the other two grounds which relate principally to the protection claim as
the findings in relation to that claim are relevant to the Article 8
ground.

I begin with the adjournment ground.  The Judge deals with this at [8] to
[11] of the Decision as follows:

         "[8] Mr Pipe of Counsel for the appellant made an application for
         an adjournment on the following ground:


             (a)  to obtain an expert report


             (b)  the appellant was not satisfied the way his previous
             legal representatives were dealing with his case so he
             instructed his current solicitors on 26/02/2019; they have not
             had sufficient time to prepare his case and also to instruct
             an expert.


         [9]  Mr Wain for the respondent opposes the adjournment application
         on the basis that this application has been previously refused on
         15/05/2019 on the grounds the appellant has not provided any
         evidence to show as to whether any steps have been taken to
         instruct an expert.


         [10] Mr Pipe made no reply to the respondent's opposition to the
         adjournment.


         [11] Upon hearing both parties, I refused to postpone the hearing
         on the basis that the appellant and his legal representatives have
         had more than sufficient time to instruct an expert; there is no
         evidence that any steps have been taken to instruct an expert.
         Speech expert's report would not be of assistance to the Tribunal.
         It is fair and just to proceed with the hearing."


I accept of course that there is an error in the reference to the report
being that of a speech expert.  That was not nor could it be relevant to
this case.  The issue here was whether the Appellant was to be believed in
his claim to be homosexual and to have been ill-treated on that account.
The reference to the wrong type of expert is, I suspect, a template or
typographical error. I do not accept Mr Pipi's submission that I must
conclude that this is what the Judge had in mind because that is what he
wrote.  It is obviously regrettable that the Judge has not read the
Decision adequately to pick up what I consider is likely to be a
transposition error. I also accept that the Judge has not, in those
paragraphs, made direct reference to the type of report that the Appellant
was seeking to obtain.  However, I do not accept that this error is
material.  The Judge was clearly aware of the earlier request for an
adjournment and the refusal of it.  That was in the following terms:

         "The application for a postponement of the hearing is refused on
         the information provided.  The appellant has not provided any
         documents to show that he has attended an appointment with
         Berkshire Talking Therapies.  He has not provided any evidence to
         show what steps he has taken to instruct an expert to provide a
         medical report or any other form of expert evidence."


It is also relevant to this ground and the third ground to look at the way
in which the application for an adjournment was made on that and a previous
occasion.   The Applicant's representatives first sought an adjournment by
letter dated 30 April 2019 in the following terms:

         "The appellant's background experience which include mental and
         psychological trauma, invite assessment of his mental state by an
         expert which is central for the appellant's appeal.


         We understand that our client has a number of appointments with his
         therapist and GP on 07/05/2019 and 15/05/2019 with respect to his
         medical circumstances.


         Under the above circumstances we should be grateful if you would
         allow our client time for a psychological report to be made
         available in support of his appeal.  Given the above reason we
         should be grateful if you would adjourn his appeal listed to be
         heard on 17/05/2019 and re-list his appeal in 2 months' time,
         possibly in July 2019 for a psychological report to be made
         available to allow the Tribunal to make conclusive findings in this
         case."


That request was refused at the pre-trial review hearing in the following
terms:

         "No evidence has been provided that the Appellant has upcoming
         appointments with his GP and therapists, and how this will assist
         the tribunal to justify adjourning the hearing for a further two
         months."


That prompted the further request made by e mail dated 13 May 2019 which
reads as follows:

         "We write further to receipt of our client's asylum appeal pre-
         hearing review form indicating that our request of adjournment was
         refused.  The basis of the refusal is that no evidence were
         provided confirming our client's appointment with his GP and
         therapist, for a medical report to be adduced in support of his
         appeal hearing.


         Under the above circumstances we renew the request for our client's
         upcoming appeal hearing of Friday 17 May 2019 to be adjourned for 1-
         2 months for a medical/psychological report to be made available by
         UK experts.


         We further draw your attention to enclosed Rule 35 of our client,
         where the Doctor has indicated that our client may have been the
         victim of torture in his country of origin and his case should be
         further investigated.  We further provide evidence that our client
         has attended a therapy session as previously indicated on
         09/05/2019.


         Under the above circumstances we should be grateful if you would
         adjourn our client's upcoming appeal of 17/05/2019 for a
         medical/psychological report be made available to us which is vital
         to allow the Tribunal to make a conclusive finding in this case."


In light of Judge Khan's reference to the earlier refusal of the
adjournment request, I cannot accept that he did not have in mind the
nature of the expert evidence which the Appellant wished to adduce.  The
request to which the 15 May 2019 decision responded very clearly identifies
the report which the Appellant wished to adduce as being a medical one, as
does the decision refusing that adjournment.  The reference to the report
being that of a speech expert is therefore a slip and not material.

Further and in any event the utility of the report is only one of a number
of reasons why the Judge refused the adjournment request.  He did so also
on the basis that the representatives had ample time between February and
May to obtain the report, that they had failed to explain why they could
not obtain one in that period and that they had produced no evidence to
show that a report had even been sought.

The earlier reasons for refusing the adjournment are also relevant as to
the issues which the Judges refusing the adjournment request on those
occasions saw as material.  Those included not simply the failure to
provide any evidence of having sought a report (or to show therefore when
one might be produced) but also that the applications failed to identify
what it was that the report was intended to prove.

I explored with Mr Pipi during his submissions why no report had been
produced even now and what it was that the Appellant sought to prove by
that evidence.  As I note below, the Rule 35 report which forms the subject
of the third ground identifies three scars.  Mr Pipi confirmed as was my
assumption that it was not the Applicant's physical injuries of claimed
torture that the Applicant sought to demonstrate via a medical report but
his mental state.  Mr Pipi submitted that it was essential to the
Applicant's case that he have such evidence because it would assist in
establishing the credibility of the Applicant's case.  As I observed at the
hearing, that puts the point too high.  Such a report may assist in
relation to credibility if, for example, the expert were to say that the
Appellant's memory was affected which might explain inconsistencies in his
evidence.  It may assist in providing reasons why the Appellant did not
make his claim earlier if he were suffering from post-traumatic stress.
However, all of that is speculation because, as I say, even now, there is
no evidence of a report.

In that regard, Mr Pipi sought to adduce at the hearing a letter from
Berkshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust dated 31 July 2019.  I refused to
have any regard to that, not simply because it could not assist in relation
to the asserted error of law (as it was not before the Judge) but also
because there was no application to adduce further evidence.  In any event,
I observe that even this letter only shows that the healthcare trust has
offered to arrange an appointment for the Appellant if he contacts them by
21 August.  It does not show that any appointment has taken place.  Apart
from the Rule 35 report (the content of which I deal with below) and the e
mail from Talking Therapies making the referral to the NHS Mental Health
Services, there was absolutely no evidence of any medical treatment.

That leads me on to Mr Pipi's further submission that the reason that no
report has yet been commissioned is because it could not be until the
Appellant had been treated.  However, that is to misunderstand the nature
of a report prepared for use in the Tribunal.  A medical practitioner
treating a person may be an appropriate expert if he or she is accustomed
to providing reports but will not do so in any event unless separately
requested to do so.  Similarly, the expert does not need to be the person
who is treating the appellant.  In many if not most cases, it will be an
entirely different person.  There is still no explanation why an expert
report has not yet been sought nor any indication when it is intended that
this be done.

Mr Pipi's other reason for those instructing him not to have sought a
report to date is because the Appellant has not yet been treated for his
mental health problems and therefore there would not be a strong evidential
foundation on which the expert could base his conclusions.  There are two
answers to that submission, neither favourable to the Appellant's case.
First, it is not the purpose of an adjournment to allow an appellant time
to evidentially strengthen a case which he cannot establish at the time in
the hope that the expert will provide support for his case.  In other
words, the Appellant ought to be able to show that he has mental health
problems - perhaps by medical notes or even his own evidence of his
problems - before seeking to justify deferring a hearing in order to obtain
expert evidence of those problems.  Allied to that point, the submission
underlines the lack of medical evidence which was before the Judge in this
case.  That lack of evidence has to be considered in the context of a case
where the Appellant did not claim asylum until some twelve years after
first arriving in the UK and about ten years after he claims to have been
tortured in Kenya.

Second, it is not necessarily the case that an expert must have regard to
other medical evidence.  It may be best practice to have regard to medical
notes, particularly if a person claims to have a long-standing medical
history in order to assess that account. However, experts often base
opinions on what they are told by the person being examined, coupled with
diagnosis based on objective tests and their own observations.  It is not
essential to the commissioning of a report that there be medical evidence
of treatment.  As I have already said, though, that the Appellant has not
had treatment in the ten years since he claims to have been tortured is
something to which an expert would need to have regard (as did the Judge).

As Mr Pipi submitted, and I accept, there is an overlap between the second
ground and the third ground concerning the Rule 35 report, not least
because that is the main evidence on which the Appellant relies as showing
that he is a potential victim of torture.  I therefore deal with this
ground first before reaching my conclusion on the second ground.

As I have already indicated at [11] above, the Rule 35 report was evidence
adduced by the Appellant.  It is annexed to the e mail dated 13 May 2019 to
which I there refer. It also appears at [49-56] of the Appellant's bundle.
 The report is written by Saeed Ahmad "CP" (which I assume indicates that
he is a clinical practitioner) on 3 April 2019.  At section 4 he sets out
the Appellant's account as follows:

         "This man says he is victim of torture in his country Kenya.


         He says he is homosexual but never declared it as it is illegal in
         his country and not accepted in society.  He says on 21st of April
         2009 he was walking along a street in Nairobi when he saw that a
         homosexual man was beaten up by another person.  He intervened and
         tried to stop him and when police arrived he was also arrested and
         detained in police station for one night and tortured by police by
         various means like punches, kicks and cigarette burns.  He was also
         kept with other criminals and they were told that he is homosexual
         and he was tortured and abused by other prisoners as well.  He has
         scars.  He was released after giving police some money.


         Now he is complaining of generalised anxiety, insomnia, panic
         attacks and flashbacks which are affecting him.  He is having
         medical treatment for his condition.  He is also expressing
         suicidal thoughts and has been referred to mental health team.  He
         is also complaining of aches and pains as a result of the torture."


Having indicated on a diagram that the Appellant has "2 fading scar marks R
thigh" and "one scar mark L thigh", Mr Ahmad provides his assessment at
section 6 as follows:

         "In my opinion the symptoms he is describing can be consistent with
         the clinical findings today.  I am raising my concerns that he may
         be victim of torture in his country and his case needs further
         investigated [sic]


         My opinion is that continued detention will be deleterious to his
         mental health due to history given and the nature of being detained
         with uncertain status."


The Judge dealt with this evidence as follows:

         "[49]    The appellant for the first time mentioned in his Section
         35 report that he had been burned with cigarettes, which has caused
         scars on various parts of his body.  When asked why he did not
         mention these cigarette burns in his asylum interview, he said that
         he forgot to mention this to the interviewing officer.  I do not
         find the appellant's evidence credible or consistent.  I find that
         the appellant simply added this evidence in order to bolster his
         asylum claim.


         [50] In section 35 report at page 53, the appellant told the doctor
         he saw a homosexual man being beaten by another man, he intervened
         to stop him and when the police arrived, he was arrested and
         detained in police station for one night and tortured by various
         means.  However, in his asylum interview and his oral evidence at
         the hearing, the appellant claimed that he told the doctor that he
         saw person or persons beating the gay man and did not say 'another
         man'.  I find that the appellant's evidence is contradictory and
         inconsistent as to whether he said persons; the doctor clearly
         reports that he said he saw 'another man' was beating a gay man.
         Again, as in his asylum interview and his oral evidence, the
         appellant said that the police were part of the 'mob' beating the
         gay man.  In his section 35 report he said that the police arrived
         at the scene and arrested him.  I find that the appellant has made
         up this part of his evidence and it is not credible or consistent.
         Had the event actually taken place as claimed by the appellant, he
         would be able to clearly state as to whether the police were there
         when he himself arrived on scene or they came later.  The
         appellant's evidence is not credible or consistent."


The Appellant's ground in this regard is that the Judge should not have
assessed the claim of having been tortured based only on the Rule 35 report
because it was not sufficient evidence on which to evaluate that claim. He
says therefore that it was a material error not to allow the Appellant to
provide a comprehensive medical report.  It is in that way that this ground
is tied in to the second ground.

As is evident from the assessment in the Rule 35 report, that is not a
comprehensive report, nor does it purport to be.  However, the basis on
which the Appellant says that he ought to have been granted an adjournment
in order to obtain a fuller report is because he says that such a report is
capable of supporting the credibility of his claim.  The Judge referred to
the Rule 35 report not for what it has to say about the Appellant's scars
(apart from the omission in that regard in interview) but to draw attention
to the inconsistencies between his account given at interview and at the
hearing compared with what he told Mr Ahmad.  Far from being unfair for the
Judge to rely on the Rule 35 report in that way, that is entirely
consistent with the guidance given in JL on which case the Appellant relies
in relation to his adjournment ground.  The Judge was entitled to rely on
what is said in the Rule 35 report in this way; the more so because it was
evidence on which the Appellant sought to rely.  The third ground is not
made out.

I observe that although the Rule 35 report indicates that the Appellant "is
having medical treatment for his condition" (referring it appears to his
mental health and not physical ailments), the Appellant did not produce any
other evidence to show that he had sought medical assistance apart from a
one page e-mail dated 9 May 2019 from "Talking Therapies" which is referred
to in the earlier adjournment refusal and which indicates only that the
Appellant had attended an assessment in May and that he was being referred
to Berkshire Traumatic Stress Service.  Even the Appellant's own witness
statement says only that "[he] was subjected to severe mental and physical
torture in Kenya to which I continue to carry the mental and physical
scars.  It has not been easy emotionally and mentally speaking that I was
referred to counselling by my GP".  There is no evidence from the
Appellant's GP in support of that assertion (in fact it appears that it was
Talking Therapies who have since referred him to the NHS Mental Health
Services).  Nor is there any evidence that the Appellant has been
prescribed medication for his mental health problems, which, I reiterate,
are said to stem from events about ten years ago.

When considering the second ground relating to the alleged unfairness of
refusing to adjourn, I bear in mind the guidance given in Nwaigwe
(adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request, such
         decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial considerations to intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases
         the question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it is important to recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

To the extent that the Judge referred to a speech expert, that was of
course an irrelevant consideration as that was not the nature of the report
sought.  I have already explained though why I consider that to be a slip
and not to reflect the nature of the report which the Judge thought that
the Appellant wished to adduce.  The other considerations set out at [11]
of the Decision are clearly relevant.  As the guidance makes clear though
the question is not whether the Judge's refusal was reasonable but whether
the Appellant was deprived of the right to a fair hearing.  This brings me
on to the way in which the Appellant relies on the need for expert medical
evidence.

The basis of the Appellant's ground in this regard is that a medical report
would be "an important consideration in the overall assessment of
credibility".  The Appellant relies in this regard on JL (Medical Reports -
credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC).  I do not need to cite the
passage referred to in the grounds save to note that it does not form part
of the guidance. The relevant part of the guidance for these purposes is at
[4] as follows:

         "For their part, judges should be aware that, whilst the overall
         assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports may well
         involve assessments of the compatibility of the appellant's account
         with physical marks or symptoms, or mental condition: (SA (Somalia)
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1302). If the position were otherwise, the central
         tenets of the Istanbul Protocol would be misconceived, whenever
         there was a dispute about claimed causation of scars, and judges
         could not apply its guidance, contrary to what they are enjoined to
         do by SA (Somalia). Even where medical experts rely heavily on the
         account given by the person concerned, that does not mean their
         reports lack or lose their status as independent evidence, although
         it may reduce very considerably the weight that can be attached to
         them."

                                                               [my emphasis]

As that passage makes clear, whilst a medical expert is entitled to opine
on an appellant's credibility (provided the other parts of the guidance
there given are followed), the ultimate determination of credibility is a
matter for the Judge on all the evidence.  The central question here is
whether the Appellant is homosexual.  The assistance which a medical expert
could provide on that central issue is more nuanced.  He could say that he
believed the Appellant's account of past experiences but ultimately that
would depend on the Appellant's own evidence which the Judge would have the
benefit of seeing tested under cross-examination.  The medical expert could
provide comment about an appellant's account of past experiences of ill-
treatment and the impact of return on an appellant's mental state.
However, that too could only form one part of the credibility assessment.
 Here, as I have already indicated, there is a paucity of medical evidence
on which an expert could rely other than the Appellant's own account.
Indeed, that the Appellant has not yet received treatment for his mental
health problems was one of the reasons why Mr Pipi urged me to conclude
that to refuse to adjourn was unfair because the evidence on which an
expert could base his report would not be strong.  I have already dealt
with that submission and rejected it as a good reason for adjourning.

For the reasons given by the Judge and the reasons set out above, the
refusal of the adjournment did not deprive the Appellant of a fair hearing.
 It is unlikely that a fuller medical report would have made any material
difference to the case, the Judge was entitled to assess credibility based
on all the evidence including the Rule 35 report and, if the Appellant
wished to obtain a fuller medical report, he had ample time prior to the
hearing (and since) to commission one.  He has not done so.  As Mr Walker
also pointed out, the Judge has given other reasons for rejecting the
Appellant's credibility at [48] to [55] of the Decision.  Other than those
based on the Rule 35 report (with which I have already dealt) none of those
are challenged.  The Judge was entitled to reject the Appellant's
protection claim as not credible for the reasons there given.

That then disposes of the second and third grounds.  I turn now to the
first ground concerning Article 8 ECHR.  In light of what I say above, the
context of the Article 8 consideration is that the Appellant is not gay and
is not at risk on that account on return to Kenya.  It is for that reason
that the Respondent, whilst conceding that the Judge's reasoning on this
part of the case, says that the error is not material. As I indicated to Mr
Pipi during the hearing, I am not entirely persuaded that the Respondent's
concession that the reasoning does contain an error of law is a correct
one.  I therefore turn to consider the way in which the Judge dealt with
this issue.

The first paragraph of the Judge's reasoning is to be found at [64] as
follows:

         "[64]    Under Article 8.1 of the ECHR, the appellant has the
         burden of showing that he has established a private or family life
         and that there is an interference with it.  The appellant entered
         the UK in 2007; he has no family in the UK.  At the date of the
         hearing, the appellant has lived in the UK for 12 years and not 20
         years to engage the consideration of his private life under Article
         8 of the ECHR.  The appellant has not put forward any compassionate
         circumstances for his claim to be considered outside the
         Immigration Rules.  The fact that he claims to be gay is not
         believed.  I find that he can reintegrate into Kenyan society on
         return."

As I pointed out to Mr Pipi in the course of his submissions, that
paragraph makes the following points:

      a) The Appellant cannot meet Appendix FM to the Rules on the basis of
         having a partner or child ("he has no family in the UK"): Mr Pipi
         accepted this was factually accurate.

      b) The Appellant cannot meet paragraph 276ADE of the Rules based on
         his length of residence (he entered in 2007 and "has lived in the
         UK for 12 years and not 20 years"): Mr Pipi accepted this was so.

      c) The Appellant's protection claim and sexuality having been
         rejected, the Appellant can reintegrate in Kenya on return: here Mr
         Pipi conceded that this might indicate consideration of paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) on the basis of there being no very significant
         obstacles to integration but submitted that the reasoning was
         inadequate.

Mr Pipi also submitted that if this was the way in which the Judge's
reasoning at [64] was to be read, it was unclear why the Judge made
reference to compassionate circumstances outside the Rules in that
paragraph.  I accept there is some merit to that point but that does not
necessarily undermine the remainder of the reasoning.  I also accept that
it would have been preferable if the Judge had referred to the relevant
provisions rather than by inference.  It might be said, for example, that
he has not had regard to the threshold which applies to obstacles on
return.  I also accept that the Judge has not developed his reasons for
finding that the Appellant could reintegrate into Kenyan society. To that
extent, I accept that there is some legal error in the Judge's
consideration in that paragraph.

Before I look at the materiality of the error based on the evidence,
though, it is necessary to consider the remainder of the Judge's
conclusions about Article 8.  Having set out sections 117A and 117B
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at [65], the Judge proceeds to
consider the Appellant's case outside the Rules as follows:

         "[66]    The appellant has lived in the UK since 2007, having
         entered the UK as a business visitor, claiming asylum February
         2019.  Under Section 117B(5) little weight is to be given to
         private life when the person's immigration status is precarious.
         The word precarious has been defined the Upper Tribunal in the case
         of AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).  Under heading 4 it is
         stated, 'Those who at any given date held a precarious immigration
         status must have held at that date an otherwise lawful grant of
         leave to enter or remain.  A person's immigration status is
         'precarious' if their continued presence in the UK will be
         dependent upon their obtaining a further grant of leave'. The
         appellant in this case had a limited leave to remain in the UK as a
         visitor.


         [67] This position is further, made clear by the Upper Tribunal at
         paragraph 23 of the above-mentioned case.  'Our starting point must
         therefore be that Parliament has now drawn a sharp distinction
         between any period of time during which a person has been in the UK
         'unlawfully', and any period of time during which that person's
         immigration status in the UK was merely 'precarious'.  We are
         satisfied that those who at any given date held precarious
         immigration status must have held at that date an otherwise lawful
         grant of leave to enter or remain.  They must have enjoyed some
         immigration status within the UK at the given date, because if that
         were not the case then their presence in the UK would have been
         unlawful at that date.  Thus we are satisfied that parliament
         envisaged that the immigration history of a particular individual
         might disclose periods when they were in the UK unlawfully because
         they had enjoyed none.  Some might enter unlawfully and never
         acquire a grant of leave.  Others might subsequently acquire a
         grant of leave.  Others might enter lawfully but then fail to
         obtain a variation of their leave.  Others might always have held a
         grant of leave.  We regard the immigration history of the
         individual whose Article 8 rights are under consideration as an
         integral part of the context in which any Article 8 decision is
         made, whether by the Respondent or the FtT".


         [68] The appellant's case is subject to consideration under Section
         117B (5).  The whole of the appellant's time spent in the UK is in
         the knowledge that he has no right to reside here."


I confess that I do not entirely understand why the Judge found it
necessary to refer quite so fully to the decision in AM (Malawi)
particularly since the points there made about weight of a person's private
life established unlawfully or precariously have received more
authoritative consideration since by the Supreme Court in Rhuppiah v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58.  I also accept
that the reasoning does not contain the sort of balance sheet approach
advocated by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.  However, it is possible to discern from
what is said at [66] to [68] and having regard to the references to Section
117B (albeit the wrong sub-section) the point that the Appellant's private
life is to be given little weight because he was here on a precarious basis
(in fact for the most part here unlawfully) and that the maintenance of
effective immigration control weighs in favour of the public interest for
the same reason.  Again, though, the Judge's reasoning is very short and
undeveloped.

I therefore turn to consider whether the errors disclosed by the Article 8
consideration are material ones.  As I have already indicated, Mr Pipi
accepted that the Appellant has no family in the UK.  In fact, as referred
to at [34] and [35] of the Decision, the Appellant has a wife (or possibly
an ex-wife) and two sons in Kenya albeit he claims to have lost contact
with them due to his sexuality (which it will be recalled is not accepted).
 The Appellant claimed in evidence to have had a relationship with a man in
the UK, but that relationship had broken down ([38]). He has some friends.
He has not worked in the UK ([40]).  There is no reference to his private
life in the UK in his statement ([AB/44-47].  The letters of support from
friends relate mainly to the protection claim.  One of the friends is
providing the Appellant with accommodation ([AB/58] and [AB/61]).

As the Respondent points out in her Rule 24 statement, the basis of the
Article 8 claim made to the Judge was based on obstacles to integration
into Kenyan society.  At [44] of the Decision, the following submission is
recorded:

         "... As a homosexual, the appellant would not be able to
         reintegrate into Kenyan society and therefore Article 8 of the ECHR
         is engaged in this case; and I should find that the appellant is a
         qualifying person under Section 117B of 2014 Act."

    Given the way in which that submission was put forward it is perhaps
    unsurprising that the Judge went about the Article 8 analysis in the
    way he did.  In any event, given that the only basis of the submission
    is based on sexuality (as also is the position in the Appellant's own
    statement), the brevity of the reasoning on this point at [64] is
    understandable.

Having regard to the evidence (or rather the lack of it) on the issue of
very significant obstacles to integration, any error of reasoning is not
material. The Appellant's grounds do not identify any evidence which the
Judge is said to have failed to consider.  Other than to submit that the
reasoning was inadequate, Mr Pipi did not draw my attention to any evidence
in submissions.  The Appellant has simply failed to provide sufficient
evidence of very significant obstacles meeting the high threshold implicit
in that test.  As the Judge rightly notes (at [64] of the Decision), the
Appellant bears the burden of establishing his Article 8 claim and has
failed to do so.

CONCLUSION

For the above reasons, the grounds do not disclose any material error of
law. I therefore uphold the Decision.



Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 5 June 2019.  I therefore
uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellant's appeal
remains dismissed.


Signed   [pic]             Date: 8 August 2019

 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
