
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04678/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2021 and 5 August 2021     |01 September 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    R O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R Wilcox, Counsel, instructed by Barnes, Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant's appeal on international protection and human rights
(articles 3 and 8) grounds was initially heard by the First-tier Tribunal
sitting at Taylor House and refused by a decision dated 18 June 2019. The
appellant was granted permission to appeal to this Tribunal and by means of
a decision sent to the parties on 15 November 2019 I set aside the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal with preserved findings of fact.

Anonymity

By means of my decision of November 2019, I confirmed the anonymity
direction issued by the First-tier Tribunal. Neither party sought for the
direction to be set aside, and so I confirm it at the conclusion of this
decision. I do so as it is presently in the interests of justice that the
appellant is not publicly recognised as someone seeking international
protection: paragraph 13 of 'Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber
Guidance Note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders'.

Facts

The appellant is an ethnic Kurd and a national of Iraq. He is presently
aged 23.

He entered this country clandestinely on 26 September 2017 and claimed
asylum on arrival. He asserted a fear of local militia, claiming that he
was suspected of having murdered a member of Hashd Al Shaabi.

He stated that whilst living in Kirkuk, he worked as a porter/security
officer in the city's Azadi General Hospital. On 6 July 2017, whilst
working at the hospital, a member of Hashd Al Shaabi called Abu Safia was
brought into the hospital by two bodyguards, having been shot. Two days
later a colleague of the appellant called 'DKM', who worked at the hospital
as a cleaner, went into Abu Safia's room and remained there for some twenty
minutes. After the appellant finished work, he accompanied DKM to a
restaurant. Whilst there, his colleague received a phone call and was
informed that Abu Safia had been strangled and was dead. The appellant
believed that DKM had committed the murder because his father had been
involved with the Peshmerga and had been killed by Hashd Al Shaabi.

The appellant fled Iraq as he believed that he was suspected of being
involved in the murder and would be targeted.

The respondent refused the application for international protection by a
decision dated 1 May 2019. The appellant appealed and his appeal came
before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aujla on 18 June 2019. The Judge
confirmed at [31] of his decision that he did not for a moment believe that
if the appellant were suspected of involvement in the murder case:

         '31. ... he would not readily mention that as the basis of his
             claim right at the beginning of the asylum process, when the
             screening form was completed. That fact alone fundamentally
             undermined the appellant's entire credibility. I reject his
             claim he was suspected of involvement in the murder case.'

As to credibility the Judge concluded at [34]:

         '34. Having considered the Appellant's account, I make the
             following findings. I find that the Appellant's credibility was
             wholly undermined. I find that the Appellant has simply
             fabricated his claim about the authorities looking for him in
             connection with the murder of Abu Safia. I do not find that
             account credible whatsoever. I find that that was a later
             addition to his claim designed solely to enhance the strength
             of his claim. I therefore reject his account in its entirety.'

In respect of the appellant's ability to return to Iraq the Judge found at
[37]:

         '37. I have considered whether the Appellant was in need of
             humanitarian protection or could safely return to his locality
             or another part of the IKR. The Appellant is from Kirkuk where
             his whole family lived. He spent 19 years of his life there and
             is now 21 years old. He is in possession of a valid Iraqi
             passport. He stated that he had [a] CSID which was with his
             family in Kirkuk. He would be returned to the capital Baghdad.
             He would be in possession of his passport when he arrived there
             and should have no difficulty entering the country. He should
             be able to make his way from the capital to Kirkuk, showing his
             passport to security personnel on the way as necessary.
             Alternatively, he could arrange to meet his family in the
             capital. I do not accept his account that he was not in contact
             with his family. Although Kirkuk may still be a contested area
             to a certain extent, I bear in mind the fact that ISIS had been
             ousted from the city. Furthermore, there were no individual
             characteristics relating to the Appellant that would make his
             return to the city unreasonable, especially as his whole family
             still lived there. Alternatively, the Appellant could relocate
             to Suleymania [sic].'

By means of the appellant's grounds of appeal no challenge was made to the
adverse credibility findings made by Judge Aujla. The only challenge
advanced by the grounds of appeal was to the findings concerned with
redocumentation and the ability to either return to Kirkuk or relocate
elsewhere within Iraq. The ground advanced was concisely identified at �4:

'Having found the Appellant not to be credible, the Tribunal fails entirely
to consider issues arising from redocumentation or internal relocation
which are held in established case law to impact all citizens of Iraq
irrespective of the inherent credibility of their claim for asylum.'

In considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I concluded in my
decision of November 2019, at para.18:

          '18.  I am satisfied that in finding that the appellant could
             travel with his passport alone to the IKR the Judge materially
             erred in law by failing to apply the guidance provided in AAH.
             I am further satisfied that in seeking not to apply the
             guidance in AA as to the appellant's ability to return to
             Kirkuk, the Judge failed to identify very strong grounds,
             supported by cogent evidence, for not following country
             guidance. This is also a material error of law.'

Hearing

Scope of resumed hearing

I detailed at para. 19 of my November 2019 decision:

         '19.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's  findings  as   to
             credibility, and consequently the limited findings of facts  to
             be remade are  those  erroneously  addressed  at  [37]  of  the
             Judge's decision, namely i) the ability, or otherwise,  of  the
             appellant to secure his CSID from his family in Kirkuk; ii)  to
             return to Kirkuk; iii) to relocate to the IKR;  and/or  iv)  to
             relocate to Baghdad.'

I confirmed at para. 21 that all findings of fact made by the First-tier
Tribunal were preserved, save for [37].

Rules 15(2A) application

By means of a rule 15(2A) application, the appellant relied upon a further
bundle running to 261 pages, the majority of which concerned objective
country material. Contained within it was a further witness statement from
the appellant, dated 1 February 2021, and a short witness statement from
Mr. Tarik Arif, dated 18 January 2021. Also included were photographs of
the appellant outside the Iraqi Embassy, London and email correspondence
between the appellant and the British Red Cross. I admitted the evidence.

Evidence

In his initial interview with the respondent held on 26 September 2017, the
appellant confirmed that his passport was issued by the authorities in Al
Sulaymaniyah, Iraqi Kurdistan Region ('IKR') and was in the respondent's
possession.

In his witness statement, dated 5 March 2019, the appellant confirmed at
�8:

         '8.    ... I left ... on 12 July 2017 with the agent and we
            travelled by plane to Aman [Sic] and then to Istanbul using my
            own passport ...'

The representatives confirmed before me that the respondent is in
possession of the appellant's Iraqi passport which is valid until 2024.

At an interview with the respondent held on 6 March 2019 the appellant
confirmed at Q7 that he had been issued with a Civil Status Identity
Document ('CSID') card and citizenship certificate, both of which remain
with his family in Iraq.

By means of his witness statement dated 1 February 2021 the appellant
sought to address the outstanding issues. He stated that he left his CSID
card at home in Iraq. As he does not have contact with his family in Iraq,
he is unable to obtain the necessary documents to obtain a replacement
CSID. He confirmed:

         'When I left Iraq on 12 July 2017, I left behind my parents and my
         brother in Kirkuk who I last spoke to when I was in Istanbul. I
         also have an uncle who lives in Chamchamal in the IKR who I have
         not spoken to since leave [sic] Iraq. I have not been able to speak
         to my family because I lost my mobile phone which had their contact
         details in Romania. On 18 January 2021 I attended the Iraqi Embassy
         in London with a copy of my passport to re-document myself. I was
         accompanied by a witness Mr. Tarak Arif who was instructed by my
         legal representatives to witness my visit. We both arrived at the
         Iraqi embassy and spoke to the embassy official but was advised
         that they would not be able to facilitate my request for a
         replacement CSID. I was advised that CSID documents were no longer
         valid and I would need to apply for a new biometric card known as
         an INID card in Iraq.

         As I am not from Baghdad and with the introduction of the new INID
         card, use of family by proxy is not viable as I need to go to my
         home area to register my biometrics. It is unclear as to the
         likelihood of the CSA office not having an INID terminal/ no longer
         holding records in Kirkuk as the area is highly likely to have been
         affected by dispute and possible damage following the previous
         conflict.'

The appellant further confirmed that he had approached the British Red
Cross to help trace his family. Despite stating that he had been unable to
contact his family following the loss of their contact details when he was
transiting Romania, the appellant provided details of his father's mobile
number. He informed the British Red Cross by an email dated 18 January
2021:

         'My last contact with my family was on 12 July 2017 when I left my
         country, since I arrived in the UK I have been trying to call their
         numbers and not not [sic] been successful.'

The appellant's assertion that he last had contact with his family when he
left Iraq is inconsistent with earlier evidence that he last spoke to them
when he was in Istanbul.

In answer to questions from Mr. Lindsay the appellant confirmed that he had
a Facebook account. He explained that he did not have an email account
whilst residing in Iraq but had used Facebook from 2014, when aged 16,
until 2017. He confirmed that his account was set up by a friend. Over the
course of three years he only linked up with two friends on Facebook, both
of whom worked with him at the hospital. He lost his phone on the way to
this country and consequently lost the password to his Facebook account. He
could not remember the password, and he was unaware as to how he could
request a new passport. He stated that he made 'many attempts' to reset the
password but provided no detail as to the nature of such attempts. He
explained that he could not remember the correct spelling of the password.

He set up a new account in this country but was unable to locate his family
through the use of social network. He was also unable to find the accounts
of his two friends from the hospital and presumed that there had given up
on using Facebook. He detailed that that he only had two friends because he
was busy at work.

The appellant explained that he was unable to locate family members on
Facebook. In addition to his parents, he only had a maternal uncle and his
brother who was aged 10 when he left Iraq. His parents were old and did not
use Facebook.

He informed me that he had searched for his parents through the British Red
Cross. He confirmed that he had provided the British Red Cross with correct
details in relation to his parents last known whereabouts.

He stated that he does not presently know where his CSID.

The appellant confirmed that he attended the Iraqi Embassy in London to
secure a new passport, but one could not be issued as he required documents
establishing his father's identity. He wanted to show the respondent that
he had made an attempt to secure documents that would aid him return home.
He was informed by Embassy staff that they were no longer issuing CSIDs.

Mr. Arif attended and gave evidence on behalf of the appellant. He is an
interpreter who was asked by the appellant's solicitors to attend the Iraqi
Embassy in London in the company of the appellant. He confirmed in his
statement, inter alia:

         'I met [the appellant] at 9.00 outside the Consulate of the Iraq
         Embassy at 3 Elvaston Pl, Kensington, London, SW7 5QH and were
         waiting in a queue outside the building to be seen. He spoke to the
         embassy official but he was advised that they would not be able to
         facilitate his request for a replacement CSID. He was advised that
         CSID documents were no longer valid and he would need to apply for
         a new biometric card known as an INID card in Iraq.

         I left Embassy of Iraq and [the appellant] took some photos as
         evidence.'

Mr. Arif confirmed to me that the appellant attended the Embassy at the
request of his solicitor to secure a replacement CSID. When informed that
the appellant's evidence at the hearing was that he attended to secure a
passport, Mr. Arif stated that the appellant required a CSID to secure a
passport. He confirmed that the appellant did not inform Embassy staff that
he had a valid passport that was presently in the possession of the
respondent.

Adjournment and resumed hearing

Consequent to the appellant and Mr. Arif giving evidence on 8 July 2021,
the hearing was adjourned to permit the appellant the opportunity to file
documents concerned with his efforts to search for family members through
the British Red Cross. A further bundle running to over 130 pages was filed
and served on 15 July 2021.

The hearing on 5 August 2021 proceeded by means of submissions only.

Decision

The appellant's case as advanced before me can be identified as follows: i)
he presently has no contact with his close or extended family in Iraq; ii)
he has proven unable, despite his best efforts, to locate family members
through friends, social media or the British Red Cross; iii) he has no
access to his CSID; iv) he would be returned to Iraq with his passport
alone and so unable to return to Kirkuk or travel to the IKR; and v) it
would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Baghdad.

In his careful and helpful submissions Mr. Wilcox accepted that the crux of
my decision was whether the appellant was in contact with his family, and
on this issue the appellant's evidence as to his inability to contact them
by phone or social media was key. If he was in contact with his family, and
they remain in possession of his CSID, Mr. Wilcox did not assert that
family members would be unable or unwilling to travel to Baghdad with the
document and meet the appellant on his return to Iraq. It was accepted by
Mr. Wilcox that the appellant would return with his valid Iraqi passport
which is presently in the respondent's possession.

An alternative submission in respect of article 8 and the appropriateness
of returning the appellant to Iraq during the present Covid-19 pandemic was
addressed by Mr. Wilcox in his skeleton argument, though not advanced
orally in submissions.

Contact with family

I observe that the appellant has been found to be wholly untruthful as to
his subjective fear of persecution. I note the judgment of the Supreme
Court in MA (Somalia) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]
UKSC 49, [2011] 2 All E.R. 65, at [31]-[33]. The significance of lies will
vary from case to case. In some cases, a judge may conclude that a lie is
of no great consequence. In other cases, where the appellant tells lies on
a central issue in the case, a judge may conclude that they are of great
significance.

In this matter I accept that though the appellant was wholly untruthful as
to his fear in relation to a purported murder, he has been accepted to be
truthful on certain elements of his history such as being a Kurd, having
resided in Kirkuk and having left his CSID with his family. I consider that
his lack of truthfulness as to his protection claim does not per se mean
that he is untruthful as to presently having no contact with his family:
Secretary of State for the Home Department v. Chiver [1997] I.N.L.R. 212.

I have considered with care the appellant's evidence as to his inability to
use social media to contact his family and being mindful of the relevant
standard of proof I find that he is not being truthful. I further find that
he is untruthful as to not being in telephone contact with his family. I
detail my reasons below.

As to his inability to access his original Facebook account, that a
password may have been stored on a phone, not re-entered over time and
subsequently forgotten is plausible. However, as Ouseley J observed in MM
(DRC - plausibility) Democratic Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT 00019,
[2005] Imm AR 198 while it is correct that the assessment of credibility
may involve an assessment of plausibility of what has been said, such
assessment is not a separate stage in the assessment of credibility. A
story can be implausible and yet be taken as credible, and vice versa. A
decision as to whether an appellant is credible should properly be founded
on the totality of the evidence, including consistency on essentials or
major inconsistencies, omissions and details, improbabilities or
reasonableness.

Having considered his evidence as to his two Facebook accounts, the first
opened whilst he resided in Iraq and the second following his entry into
this country, I find that the appellant is incapable of belief, even when
benefitting from the application of the lower standard of proof.

I find that the appellant has sought to hide his true level of education by
declaring that the highest level of education he received was the mandatory
6 years of primary education and thus leaving school in Year 6 (interview,
Q33). I take judicial note that mandatory primary education in Iraq
commences from the age of six. The mandatory years may then be followed by
3 years of intermediate school, then 3 years of secondary education.
However, in his witness statement dated 5 March 2019 he details that he
completed his mandatory 6 years at primary school between 2008 to 2014,
when on his declared age he would have been aged ten to sixteen. On his own
evidence, as detailed at para. 4 of his March 2019 statement after
'stopping attending school' he started to work. I do not accept that having
left school in Year 6, when aged 12, he commenced working on his evidence
as a hospital porter/security officer. There is clear and significant
inconsistency in his evidence as to his education. I find that it is much
more likely that he attended school until he was aged at least 16 and most
probably until he was aged 18. I am satisfied that the entire story as to
his having worked at a hospital is a fabrication. I find that he left Iraq
for economic reasons when aged 19 soon after concluding his education and
having obtained his passport in November 2016 when aged 18.

I am also satisfied that having studied until aged 18 he learned Arabic as
well as Kurdish, contrary to his denial of such fact.

Before me the appellant confirmed that he opened his initial Facebook
account in 2014. At this time, he would have been aged 16. I am satisfied
that the appellant is well aware that the best chance of winning his
appeal, consequent to the adverse credibility findings of Judge Aujla, is
to distance himself from an ability to secure his CSID through family
members upon his return to Iraq. Consequently, he has asserted that he has
lost telephone numbers, failed to access a social media account and is
incapable of contacting anyone he knows in Kirkuk, or in wider Iraq. He is
aware that a Facebook account is an immediate means of contacting a number
of friends and family. He has sought to explain that he has lost access to
his original Facebook account, had connection to only two friends on the
account and has been entirely unable to contact family or his only two
friends upon setting up a new account in this country. To support his
contention, he found himself required to establish that he did not have an
email account at any time whilst in Iraq and required a friend set up the
Facebook account. However, I find that in 2014 when he set up his account
he was in Year 10, was literate and was surrounded by friends of his own
age. I am therefore not satisfied that he required the help of a friend to
set up a social media account widely used in Iraq. The stages of setting up
the account would have been simple and straightforward for him either in
the English language or in the available Arabic language setting.

I am satisfied that the appellant is untruthful as to events. I find that
as a teenager in Iraq, living in a city and still in education, he
possessed a valid email account. His rudimentary efforts to distance
himself from his Facebook account have led to him asserting that in the
three years before he left Iraq, he only linked up with two friends, both
said to work at the hospital. Such assertion possesses no credibility.
Facebook is a means of connecting with friends and acquaintances. On the
appellant's evidence, he grew up in Kirkuk and I have found that he was at
school for most of the time he had his account in Iraq. Social media is a
mechanism designed for friends to stay in touch throughout the day, weeks
and months. The appellant's crude efforts to diminish his use of Facebook
can only properly be considered an ineffective effort to persuade the
Tribunal that he has no ongoing contact with friends and family.

I note that the substance of his asylum claim was rejected in its entirety.
He has therefore been found not to have possessed a well-founded fear of
Hashd Al Shaabi, or any other agent of persecution, at any time. It is
therefore reasonable to conclude that he travelled to this country for
economic betterment. Whilst there may be many complex reasons for his
having made such decision, there is no clear and apparent reason as to why
he would not continue to remain in contact with his family since leaving
Iraq in July 2017. I therefore conclude that the appellant is not truthful
as to not being in contact with his family from his time in Istanbul
onwards. He is untruthful as to having lost all relevant contact numbers
for his family whilst in Romania. I find that he continues to be in regular
contact with family and friends in Iraq through modern means of
communication, including telephone and social media. His efforts to deny
such contact are simply a crude means of trying to hide the clear ability
for members of his family to meet him on his arrival following his return
to Iraq and present him with his CSID.

I note the appellant's efforts to approach the British Red Cross to trace
his family, but as I have found that he knows where his family reside, and
indeed remains in regular contact with them, I find that he has provided
false information to the charity in an effort to pursue his falsehoods. It
is very unfortunate that the charity's valuable time and resources have
been wasted.

In the circumstances, the appellant's visit to the Iraqi Embassy in London
provides no support to his case. In any event, I am satisfied that Mr. Arif
was correct in his evidence that the appellant attended the Embassy at the
request of his legal representatives to secure a replacement CSID, and not
a passport as asserted by the appellant.

I observe Mr. Wilcox's acceptance on behalf of the appellant that in light
of present country guidance if, as I have found, the appellant can secure
his CSID through his family on his return to Baghdad he can use this
document and his passport to safely travel to Kirkuk and reside with his
family, or to travel to the IKR and join his uncle if he so wishes: SMO,
KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG UKUT 00400.

Covid-19

By means of his skeleton argument, dated 8 February 2021, Mr. Wilcox relied
upon pages 33 and 34 of 'EASO Country of Origin Information Report Iraq:
Key socio-economic indicators for Baghdad, Basra, Erbil' (November 2020).
The written submission is that while increased government expenditure is
likely to ameliorate some of the problems faced by those residing in Iraq,
it is extremely unlikely to mitigate the effects of the pandemic related
economic slump in respect of new arrivals. No oral submission was made in
relation to this issue at the hearing held in August 2021.

Mr. Wilcox was correct to not pursue this submission before me. The
document relied upon is of limited value, but in any event the appellant's
family continue to reside in Iraq and there is no evidence before me that
they are incapable of providing for the appellant on his return.



Notice of Decision

By means of a decision sent to the parties on 15 November 2019 this
Tribunal set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on
16 July 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007.

The decision is re-made and the appellant's appeal on international
protection, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds is dismissed.

Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the relevant Procedure Rules I make an anonymity
order in respect of the appellant:

         'Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no  report
         of these proceedings or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This  direction
         applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings.'

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 August 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid and so no consideration is given to a fee award.

Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 11 August 2021

