
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04723/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On October 8, 2018                           |On October 17, 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                    [C F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Pascoe, Counsel, instructed by Indra
Sebastian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on June 26, 2009 with
leave to remain until April 30, 2010.  Thereafter she was granted leave to
remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until August 23, 2015.

On August 22, 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain outside of the
Immigration Rules but this was rejected with an out of country appeal
provided to the appellant.

Further applications were lodged on March 4 and May 24, 2016 but both of
these applications were rejected with the latter being rejected without a
right of appeal on January 18, 2017.

On March 29, 2017 the appellant made a human rights application but this
was refused without a right of appeal by the respondent on August 18, 2017.


On September 25, 2017 the appellant lodged an application for asylum but
this was refused by the respondent on March 26, 2018 under paragraph 336 HC
395.  The appellant lodged a notice of appeal under Section 82 of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 9, 2018 and her
appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan on May 14,
2018 and in a decision promulgated on July 19, 2018 the Judge dismissed her
appeal.

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against this decision on August 1,
2018 and on August 17, 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-
Hutchison gave permission to appeal finding it arguable that the Judge had
erred by failing to adjourn for a medical report for which the appellant
had already been given an appointment.

The matter came before me on the above date and I took submissions from
both representatives.

submissions

MISS PASCOE RELIED ON THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND SUBMITTED THAT THEY
DISCLOSED AN ERROR IN LAW.  SHE CONFIRMED, AFTER TAKING INSTRUCTIONS FROM
HER INSTRUCTING SOLICITOR WHO WAS IN COURT, THAT INITIALLY THERE HAD BEEN A
REQUEST FOR A REPORT SUBMITTED TO AN EXPERT IN NOVEMBER 2017 BUT THE EXPERT
HAD SUBSEQUENTLY ADVISED THE SOLICITORS THAT HE WAS UNABLE TO PROVIDE THE
REPORT.  MISS PASCOE SUBMITTED THAT HER INSTRUCTING SOLICITORS HAD THEN
SOURCED ANOTHER EXPERT, DR LAWRENCE, AND HE ADVISED ON APRIL 6, 2018 THAT
HE COULD PREPARE A REPORT BUT THAT SUCH A REPORT WOULD NOT BE PROVIDED TO
THE TRIBUNAL UNTIL JUNE 2018 AS HE WOULD BE UNABLE TO SEE THE APPELLANT
UNTIL MAY 24, 2018.  SHE SUBMITTED THAT THE SOLICITORS HAD APPLIED DUE
DILIGENCE AND THAT IT WAS UNFAIR AND AGAINST THE INTERESTS OF JUSTICE NOT
TO ADJOURN THE APPEAL.

Mr Tarlow objected to the application and submitted that there had been
ample time for a report to have been prepared and there had been ample time
to make alternative arrangements when the original expert had stated he
could not provide a report.  The Judge had been within his remit to refuse
the adjournment.

FINDINGS

THE CHALLENGE TO THE JUDGE'S DECISION WAS A NARROW CHALLENGE AND CENTRED ON
HIS REFUSAL TO ADJOURN THE CASE FOR A REPORT.  IT IS IMPORTANT WHEN
CONSIDERING ADJOURNMENT REQUESTS TO HAVE REGARD TO NOT ONLY THE 2014
PROCEDURE RULES BUT ALSO THE GUIDANCE GIVEN IN THE CASE OF NWAIGWE
(ADJOURNMENT: FAIRNESS) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MADE
IT CLEAR THAT WHEN CONSIDERING AND ADJOURNMENT REQUEST CONSIDERATION HAD TO
BE GIVEN AS TO WHETHER A REFUSAL WOULD DEPRIVE THE AFFECTED PARTY OF HIS OR
HER RIGHT TO A FAIR HEARING.  THE KEY ISSUE IS THEREFORE FAIRNESS AND IF AN
ADJOURNMENT REFUSAL IS UNFAIR THIS COULD AMOUNT TO AN ERROR IN LAW.  THE
PRESIDENTIAL GUIDANCE NOTE NO 1 OF 2014 MADE IT CLEAR THAT APPLICATIONS TO
ADJOURN IMMIGRATION APPEALS SHOULD BE CONSIDERED ON THEIR OWN MERITS AND
ALL FACTORS BROUGHT TO THE TRIBUNAL'S ATTENTION MUST BE EXAMINED.

What became clear from the submissions presented by the representatives was
that the failure to provide a medical report was not the appellant's fault.
 I had some concerns over the conduct of the appellant's representatives as
no satisfactory timeline or evidence of them chasing up a report had been
submitted to the Tribunal.  I pointed out to Mr Tarlow that in
circumstances where the fault lay more at the representatives' door rather
than the appellant's it would be hard to find that the appellant had been
given a fair hearing.

On reflection, Mr Tarlow accepted that putting the case as I had presented
it to him he accepted it would be difficult to argue that the appellant had
had a fair hearing.  This was a case where the representatives were aware
there were mental health issues and steps had been taken to obtain a report
although it is arguable they did insufficient to chase the matter up.  The
appellant cannot be blamed for this and in such circumstances I concluded
that there had been an error in law.

Having identified there had been an error in law I raised with the
representatives where this case should best be concluded and the conclusion
was that this case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal under
Section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

I issued directions that a Sinhalese interpreter should be provided if one
was needed.  I noted there was a report from Dr Lawrence dated June 9, 2018
already on file and Miss Pascoe confirmed that the case was ready for a
rehearing.  She also indicated that in light of the content of the medical
report the appellant was unlikely to give oral evidence.

decision

I SET ASIDE THE ORIGINAL DECISION AND REMIT THE CASE BACK TO THE FIRST-TIER
TRIBUNAL UNDER SECTION 12(1) OF THE TRIBUNALS, COURTS AND ENFORCEMENT ACT
2007.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date     10/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date     10/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
