
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04787/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh George House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 January 2020                            |On 4 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     N K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Farrell, Peter G Farrell Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Rea, promulgated on 4 July 2019, dismissing her appeal
against the decision of the respondent to refuse her asylum and protection
claim.

I make an anonymity order in this case as I am satisfied that it is in the
interests of justice do so, given that the evidence provided was given to
the respondent on a confidential basis and due to the claims made.  This is
also a case in which the appellant has claimed protection.

The appellant is a citizen of Namibia. She grew up in a village with her
uncle, aunt and cousins, having been taken from her parents by her uncle
when she was very young. After leaving school, she had a relationship with
a man with whom she had a child born in 2009.  Her uncle was aware of the
relationship, did not approve of it; and, in 2013 forced her to marry a 61
year old man when she was only 30. He was abusive to her, physically and
mentally. In 2015 they went to Windhoek where the husband was to get
medical treatment. While there, she reported her husband to the police but
they did nothing, saying that they would not help as she was in a
traditional marriage. They did, however, give her a letter so that she
could go to hospital to get treatment for an injury to her eye which her
husband had inflicted on her.   Although the appellant reported what had
happened to the tribal authority, they did nothing.

On 31 August 2016 the appellant's husband died. In early 2017, her family
and her late husband's family decided that she should marry her late
husband's younger brother, in order to keep the property in the family. She
refused, and reported to the police in Gobabis that she was suffering
violence and abuse from him; and, was being forced to marry him.  They
refused to help as, according to tradition, it was something she had to do.
 The brother-in-law would come to her house when he was drunk and beat her
if she refused to sleep with him. Finally, in May 2018, having sold some
cattle, she travelled to Windhoek, obtained a passport and flew to the
United Kingdom, claiming asylum on arrival.

The Secretary of State accepted the appellant's account, and that she had a
subjective fear of persecution but concluded that there would be a
sufficiency of protection for her and/or that she could relocate internally
within Namibia to an area where she would not be at risk.

The judge accepted the appellant's account; he did not say that he doubted
her account that the police had not helped in the past.

The judge did, however, find that there was political will in Namibia to
address issues of gender-based violence and forced marriage [24 (iv)], and
that the police were under a duty to investigate and prosecute cases.   He
found that the appellant was not entitled to protection as the Namibian
authorities had taken reasonable steps to prevent persecution or suffering
of serious harm by operating an effective legal system for the detection,
prosecution and punishment of acts the appellant feared.  He also found
that the evidence fell far short of  demonstrating unwillingness or
inability of the Namibian authorities to provide protection but that
effective protection was more likely to be available in urban rather than
rural areas and that consequently it may be necessary for the appellant to
relocate.

The appellant has appealed to the Upper Tribunal on a number of grounds.
The first is that the judge failed properly to make findings about the
expert report when concluding that there would be a sufficiency of
protection for the appellant and/or that she would be able to relocate
internally were there a failure of protection in one area.

I consider that whilst the judge has set out the opinions of the expert and
has also set out the other material looked at, what the judge has not done
is explained why he preferred one part of the evidence to another.  The
report from Professor Burchill was detailed and set out the concerns over a
number of paragraphs with regard to the sufficiency of protection and
whether internal relocation would be a possibility and on that basis, I am
satisfied that there was an error of law which is material because of the
nature of the evidence.

Further, at paragraph 25 the judge appears not to be sure of the decision
that effective protection would be available for the appellant in her home
area because he says, "I accept that effective protection is more likely to
be available in urban than rural area", which then begs the question of
whether it would be available outside an urban area in the first place,
which feeds into the areas about the assessment of the objective evidence
and for these reasons, I consider that it would be necessary for the
decision to be remade on the issues of sufficiency of protection and/or
internal relocation.

Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision involved the making of an
error of law, and that it needs to be remade. I stated that at the hearing,
then heard further submissions, having asked the representatives to address
the case law that followed on from the test set out in Horvath [2000] UKHL
37.

Mr Farrell submitted that on a proper application of the law, it was
evident from the expert reports that there was not a sufficiency of
protection for this appellant. He drew attention in particular to the
response of the police in this case, and  the evidence that the uncle had
been looking for her.  He submitted that while there is legislation in
place, the polices had not assisted, and that the abuse shelters were
limited in what protection they could provide.  He submitted that the
respondent had erred in the refusal letter at [51] in that the appellant
had already gone to the police who had refused to help.

Mr Farrell also drew my attention to the difficulties in relocation that
the appellant would, as a single woman, face within Namibia.

Mr Govan accepted that it might be the case that, coming from a rural area,
the appellant might be subject to forced marriage and further abuse there.
He submitted that there was insufficient evidence to show that it would be
unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect her to relocate, there being no
suggestion that she could not work in the informal economy and obtain
shelter for herself.

    The law

It is for the appellant to show, to the lower standard of proof, that she
has a well-founded fear of persecution or that to remove her from the
United Kingdom would be in breach of this country's obligations pursuant to
the Human Rights Convention.

The Qualification Directive provides:

         Article 7 Actors of Protection

         1.   Protection can be provided by:

             (a) the state; or

             (b) parties or organisations, including international
             organisations, controlling the State or a substantial part of
             the territory of the State

         2.   Protection is generally provided when the actors mentioned in
         paragraph 1 take reasonable steps to prevent the persecution or
         suffering of serious harm, inter alia, by operating an effective
         legal system for the detection, prosecution and punishment of acts
         constituting persecution or serious harm, and the applicant has
         access to such protection.

The appellant in this case fears non-state actors, and thus regard must be
paid to article 7 (2) of the Qualification Directive and to the test set
out in Horvath, bearing in mind that was decided before the Qualification
Directive came into force. It is necessary to consider carefully the case
law that has come after Horvath and the entry into force of the Directive.

In AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31(IAC) the Upper
Tribunal reviewed the law, stating at [23]:

         "23.   However, in my view Horvath and the directive only provides
             a starting point.  As noted by the Tribunal in IM (Sufficiency
             of Protection) Malawi [2007] UKAIT 00071, in Bagdanavicius the
             House of Lords at [2005] UKHL 38 left undisturbed the
             proposition set out by Auld LJ on real risk and sufficiency of
             protection in the Court of Appeal [2005] EWCA Civ 1605.  These
             propositions are in the following terms:

                  "54. Summary of conclusions on real risk/sufficiency of
                  state protection.

                       The common threshold of risk

                  55. 1) The threshold of risk is the same in both
                  categories of claim;  the main reason for introducing
                  section 65 to the 1999 Act was not to provide an
                  alternative, lower threshold of risk and/or a higher level
                  of protection against such risk through the medium of
                  human rights claims, but to widen the reach of protection
                  regardless of the motive giving rise to the persecution.

                  Asylum claims

                  2) An asylum seeker who claims to be in fear of
                  persecution is entitled to asylum if he can show a well-
                  founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention
                  reason and that there would be insufficiency of state
                  protection to meet it;  Horvath [2001] 1 AC 489].

                  3) Fear of persecution is well-founded if there is a
                  'reasonable degree of likelihood' that it will
                  materialise; R v SSHD ex p. Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per
                  Lord Goff at 1000F-G.

                  4) Sufficiency of state protection, whether from state
                  agents or non-state actors, means a
                  willingness and ability on the part of the receiving state
                  to provide through its legal system a reasonable level of
                  protection from ill-treatment of which the claimant for
                  asylum has a well-founded fear;  Osman v UK [1999] 1 FLR
                  193], Horvath, Dhima [2002] EWHC 80 (Admin), [2002]
                  Immigration Judge AR 394].

                  5) The effectiveness of the system provided is to be
                  judged normally by its systemic ability to deter and/or to
                  prevent the form of persecution of which there is a risk,
                  not just punishment of it after the
                  event; Horvath; Banomova [2001] EWCA
                  Civ.807. McPherson [2001] EWCA Civ 1955
                  and Kinuthia [2001] EWCA Civ 2100.

                  6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state
                  protection in the receiving state a claimant may still
                  have a well-founded fear of persecution if he can show
                  that its authorities know or ought to know of
                  circumstances particular to his case giving rise to his
                  fear, but are unlikely to provide the additional
                  protection his particular circumstances reasonably
                  require;  Osman.

                  Article 3 claims

                  ...

         24.  Thus, while it will always be relevant to ask whether or not
             there is in general a sufficiency of protection in a country,
             the critical question will nevertheless remain in an asylum
             case as set out in the sixth proposition by Auld LJ and in an
             Article 3 case as set out in the fifteenth proposition.  Thus
             under either head a judge must look, notwithstanding a general
             sufficiency of protection in a country, to the individual
             circumstances of the appellant and ask himself the above
             questions."

I have considered carefully the background evidence referred to in the
refusal letter and the additional material provided by both parties in
reaching my decision.

It is not disputed that the law of Namibia prohibits domestic violence
including forced marriage. Nor is it disputed that it provides for the
issuing of protection orders. There is also a network of shelters for women
who are have been subjected to or are at risk of gender-based violence.
There is thus a system in place yet as the SSHD's Country Information
Request of 12 March 2018 notes ( quoting the US State Department Report for
2016) domestic violence is widespread [1.1.2], as is violence against women
[1.2.1] there being criticism of the government's failure to enforce the
country's progressive domestic violence laws.   It is also of noted that
domestic violence cases increased sharply in 2016/17 [1.2.3] according to
the Namibian police.  While these does indicate a willingness on the part
of the government, there is less evidence of the police being effective in
a culture in which large parts of the population believe that wife-beating
is justified [1.2.2].  There is, however, little evidence in the material
cited by the respondent as to the efficacy of any of the structures and
legislation put in place.

In the report entitled "The Voice of the Survivors" published by the Regain
Trust/Friedrich Ebert Stiftung in 2015, over 60% of those interviewed
considered the police unhelpful, assistance and investigation being slow
[5.1.1] thus endangering the lives of those in need. The satisfaction rate
of those who had had to contact the police was very poor, and it is noted
that 39% of survivors did not seek help from the police, being, it appears,
discouraged from doing so, protection being seen as not effective.
Further, the experience of women who were referred to Gender-Based violence
Investigation Unit ("GBVIU") that not much support was given tin the case
of wife-beating [5.1.2], the conclusion being that "the malfunction of both
institutions [the police] and the GBVIU, pushes the women back into their
abusive relationships."

The same report also identified a failure of the police to deliver service
and to give assistances [5.2.1] and that in most cases the police do not
arrest the perpetrator ort take evidence, there being evidence that in
reporting a crime to the police, a women is exposing herself to a high risk
if that person finds out.

I consider that I can place weight on this report which provides evidence
as to how the legislation is implemented by the Namibian authorities.

Turning next to the report of Professor Burchill, I am satisfied that he is
a competent expert able to comment on the position in Namibia for women who
are at risk of domestic violence.  His evidence that domestic violence is
common in Namibia is consistent with the sources referred to above. He
notes that while the government has signed up to ending forced marriage,
much of what has been signed has not been put into practices [30].

Professor Burchill describes gender-based violence in Namibia as being of
endemic proportions [74] which is again consistent, rape being the most
prevalent crime [75]. Much violence and rape is not reported and that
redress through a protagonist being brought to trial is not common [87].

So far as state protection is concerned the report refers mainly to
shelters rather than the police.  He does, however, at [99]ff confirm that
the GBVIU are not seen as effective  and that the shelters are in their
infancy, the number of women who can be assisted being quite low and in
effect limited to the capital [121].

Taking all of these strands together, while there would appear to be a
legal system in place to protect victims of domestic violence, it is
limited in its ability to protect women who are victims of domestic
violence and where, as here, there is a risk of further violence. This is
seen most clearly in the evidence that there is no proper protection
against the abuser for a woman who makes a complaint as the evidence is
that they are unlikely to be arrested thus aggravating the risk to a woman
whose partner learns of the complaint.

I accept that, as the appellant stated in her witness statement, that her
uncle has been looking everywhere for her, and had found out where her son
is living.  This is, I find, evidence of persistence, and it is of note
that the uncle is seeking to force the appellant to marry for a second
time.

I conclude in the light of the above, and applying the principles set out
at [18] above that there would not be an effective protection for the
appellant on return to Namibia in her home area.   Further, I am satisfied
that she would, on the evidence, not receive effective protection from the
police elsewhere, given that the evidence shows that the lack of effective
protection by the police (eg failing to arrest perpetrators or take
evidence) operates across Namibia.

In terms of relocation, I conclude that on the basis of the evidence in
Prof. Burchill's report that it would be very difficult for a single woman
to relocate or obtain employment without raising suspicion and in turn
putting herself at risk, given that she would be seen to have transgressed
against the norms of Namibian society - see first report at [page 37] and
second report at page 6. Broadly, she would be at risk of harassment from
men seeking her as a sexual partner. This, and the lack of ties in a new
area as well as being a stranger would make it difficult to obtain
employment and shelter for herself, let alone to support her and her child.
I have considered whether she could go to live with her family, but I not
that they have not protected her in the past, and that the uncle whom she
fears has been able to find her son.

As to whether the appellant would be able to access a shelter Prof.
Burchill notes, funding is a major issue and they tend to favour local
women over those who have migrated into the area. That would make it
difficult for the appellant to access any provision outside her own area.
Any stay would, as the evidence shows, be limited to three weeks (Prof.
Burchill, second report, page1) after which she would have to seek
alternative accommodation and a source of income. Given her limited skills
and given that she would be outside her own area, I consider that it is
very unlikely that she wold be able to do so, except in the informal
economy which would not be secure. She would be at risk of destitution or
harassment as a single woman, even in the capital.

Taking all of these factors into account, I conclude that the appellant is
at risk of gender-based violence at the hands of her uncle and family of
sufficient severity to constitute persecution and/or a breach of article 3.
 I am satisfied that given the lack of effectiveness of protection from the
state, that she would be at risk in her home area and that given her
particular circumstances, it would be unduly harsh to expect her to
relocate to another part of Namibia.

Accordingly, as it is accepted by the respondent that the appellant's fear
is for a convention reason, I find that the removal of the appellant from
the United Kingdom would be in breach of this country's obligations under
the Refugee Convention and article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  I
therefore allow the appeal on that basis.

As I have found that the appellant is a refugee, she is not entitled to
humanitarian protection.  It is also unnecessary for me to consider whether
her removal would be contrary to article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 March 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



