
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04923/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2020                       |On 20 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I
make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent (also "the
claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I
make this order because the case turns of the welfare of children, and
particularly one child who has special needs. Publicity is not in their
interests.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant" against a decision of the Secretary of State on 27 March 2018
refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds and indeed on asylum
grounds but that decision was not challenged.

By way of introduction, and at the risk of oversimplification, the claimant
is a foreign criminal subject to a deportation order but who has lived in
the United Kingdom for many years.  The appeal was allowed for the sake of
his children and particularly for one child who, the judge found, has
special difficulties.

Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted by
Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?.  In due course Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce gave
special directions suggesting a disposal without a hearing in view of the
well-known national "lockdown". Managing the consequences of lockdown has
placed great strain on the Tribunal's resources and "remote" or "socially
distanced" hearings require more resources than an ordinary oral hearing.
Where it is appropriate, determination without a hearing gives effect to
the obligation Under Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 to avoid delay.

In response to those directions both parties served further submissions.
In the case of the Secretary of State the submissions do little more than
emphasise an intention to rely on the existing grounds.  That is an
entirely appropriate response because the grounds were drawn carefully
drawn but the Secretary of State did, again appropriately, draw my
attention to the decision in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence:
seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC) and particularly paragraph 33 to
support the contention that good behaviour following release from prison is
unlikely to be of any assistance to a person seeking to avoid deportation.
According to the further submissions the First-tier Tribunal erred by being
impressed by the claimant's more recent good behaviour.

The submissions from the claimant have been considered.  I mean them no
disrespect when I say they follow predictable lines.  This is really a case
about whether the judge was entitled to conclude for the reasons given that
the effect of removal would be unduly harsh.

Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rule 2008 provides:

  Decision with or without a hearing

  34.(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Upper Tribunal may make any decision
  without a   hearing.

     (2) The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any  view  expressed  by  a
  party when      deciding whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to  consider  any
  matter, and the form of  any such     hearing.

The claimant has asked for an oral hearing but in the context of
anticipating further evidence being called. Neither party expressed a view
on the need for a hearing to decide if there had been an error of law.

In the all the circumstances I have decided that a determination without a
hearing is the just way forward.

This is a case where the claimant's criminal behaviour is serious.  He has
already been the subject of a deportation order for some years and an
attempt to remove him but he appealed successfully.

He was born in 1984 towards the end of the year and is a citizen of Sierra
Leone.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in 1993 when he was about 8 years
old and has remained in the United Kingdom since then.  He came to join his
parents, who were present in the United Kingdom, and on 7 December 1998 he
was given indefinite leave to remain.

I note that when Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce gave the special directions she
invited the Secretary of State "to clarify whether she regards the
vulnerabilities identified in respect of T to be rationally incapable of
amounting to factors that elevate his case above the 'commonplace'."

As far as I can see the Secretary of State had not taken advantage of the
opportunity to address specifically what Judge Bruce recognised may well be
the main point in the appeal.

The judge summarised the appellant's criminal record.  He has nine court
appearances for 23 convictions.  His criminal career appears to have begun
with an attempted robbery leading to four months detention.  He was later
sentenced to four years in detention for another robbery and then detained
for offences of burglary and driving offences.  Surprisingly, the Secretary
of State does not refer to the 4 years sentence in the decision of 27 March
2018 and the grounds do not criticise the First-tier Tribunal Judge for not
considering the provisions of section 117C(6). The outcome of the appeal
may have been different if she had but it is not my role to make the
primary decision or to draw the grounds of appeal. It may be that the is
some good reason for the decision to have been made without reference to
the 4 years sentence.

The claimant was in trouble most recently for an offence committed in May
2012.  This was just three months after his appeal against deportation had
succeeded.  Although it was not the Upper Tribunal Judge's reason for
allowing the appeal the judge did note then that he thought that the
appellant had learnt his lesson.  The most recent offences were involved
with possession with intent to supply of heroin and crack cocaine and he
was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

That said, there was nothing since then and the offences are now more than
eight years ago.

The judge looked at the claimant's present domestic circumstances.  He is
living in a family unit with his partner and children.  He started his
relationship with his present partner in 2012.  The claimant's partner said
how she was the biological mother of the claimant's two children and in
addition she had a son from a previous relationship, whom I identify as "T"
but the witness statement also referred to the claimant's partner and
claimant having "one biological child together".  The other child is
identified by name, she was born in July 2015.

The claimant's partner spoke in supportive and appreciative terms of the
role the claimant had in the lives of the children and also in his role in
the home enabling her to work.  She also explained how the child T, born in
2005, had suffered the trauma of his natural father dying.  T had never
lived with his natural father and mother in a family unit but his natural
father had been very much part of his life and the judge accepted evidence
that on the one occasion T's father had visited the family home he invited
the claimant to take care of T.

Although permission to appeal was given on the first ground identified as
"material misdirection of law on a material matter" I find no merit in it.
Basically the ground complains that, having identified the "unduly harsh"
test the judge failed to apply it properly and I find ground 1 adds nothing
to ground 2.

Ground 2 is headed "failure to provide adequate reasons on a material
matter".

The main reasons for allowing the appeal begin at paragraph 49.  The judge
found that T had never had a father figure living with him.  His father was
in touch with him and had visited once before his death.  His death caused
T to undergo "many breakdowns".  He suffered from anxiety and became very
close to the claimant, who came into his life when he was aged 6 years.  He
was adversely affected by the claimant's imprisonment.  He said that the
claimant had a "very reassuring effect" on T and that T was "currently
undergoing counselling" apparently because of the trauma of his father's
death in about March 2018.

The judge accepted evidence from the partner that the claimant and T "are
very close."  The child was anxious and scared that he was going to lose
his second father and T's mother was concerned for his mental health.

The judge explained at paragraph 53 that he had come to the conclusion that
the effect of deportation on T would be "unduly harsh".  He made it plain
that this was the result of a specific evaluative assessment and the facts
had achieved an elevated threshold.  He believed that in the event of the
claimant's deportation T "would, in all likelihood, find himself in a
downward spiral which would arise from the [claimant's] absence coupled
with the recent experiences endured and his resulting insecurity."

This explanation is thin.  It depends on two things, namely the judge
believing what he was told and applying his experience of life to the
likely consequence of removal on the already damaged child.

The judge was entitled to believe what he was told.  There has been no
reason advanced at any stage to challenge the credibility of the claimant's
mother and although the claimant has a criminal record for which he ought
to be ashamed it does not follow that he cannot be believed about anything.
 T has clearly had some very bad experiences in his life.  The
unsatisfactory but real relationship with his natural father was a poor
start.  Becoming fond of the claimant and the claimant going to prison
could not have helped.  His natural father dying led to counselling.  The
judge decided that taking away a father figure against this background was
just too much.

Of course it is, in a sense, a speculative finding.  It has to be because
the judge is predicting what the effect is going to be.

This is not a case where there is, for example, where there is social
worker evidence or evidence from a child psychologist.  It is a case where
a judge has listened to parents and formed a view.

No doubt Judge Bruce had similar thoughts in mind when she gave the
directions that she did.

I cannot say that this finding is perverse.  The directions of law are
right, the findings are sourced and are within a scope of decisions open to
a reasonable decision maker properly directed.

I would have preferred it if the judge had said more.  Perhaps there is not
very much more that could have been said.  Children are not laboratory
experiments that can be subjected to tests by trial and error and put right
if they go wrong afterwards.  The judge's analysis was open to him. He
distinguished between the consequence of removal to the other children, who
would not be happy, and to T who was already damaged by losing his natural
father.

For completeness I look back at the Secretary of State's additional
submissions.  I just do not agree that the claimant's keeping out of
trouble has really much to do with the reasoning of the First-tier
Tribunal's decision at all.  Paragraph 22 is concerned with the claimant
getting into trouble after the last appeal and then keeping out of trouble
since 2012.  These are no more than facts.  Paragraph 40 refers to the
claimant finding peace and happiness with his partner.  I cannot read any
of these things as a finding that shows that inappropriate weight was being
given to professions of good behaviour.  If a judge is going to allow an
appeal on deportation grounds, he (in this case) has to consider the
prospects of further convictions.  It may be that there is every reason to
believe the claimant would get into trouble again and it may not be right
to allow such an appeal.

In short, the decision is not perverse and I dismiss the Secretary of
State's appeal.  No error of law is found.  I uphold the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 July 2020                    |





