
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/04261/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Without a hearing                  |On 14th July 2020                  |
|On 26 June 2020                    |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     FFA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Begum of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal promulgated on 1 November 2019.  I granted permission to
      appeal on 8 January 2020. The hearing was listed for 8 April 2020.
      However, because of the Covid-19 pandemic, the hearing was postponed.


   2. Directions were issued giving the provisional view that it would be
      appropriate to determine the error of law issue in this appeal without
      a hearing. The parties were directed to make further submissions in
      writing and given an opportunity to express their view on whether a
      hearing would be necessary. Submissions have been received from both
      parties.


   3. The respondent did not raise any objection to the appeal being
      determined without a hearing. The appellant's submissions state that
      if the respondent does not concede there should be an oral hearing.
      However, they do not give any reasons to support this submission.
      Having considered the further submissions of both parties, as well as
      the documents that were before the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied
      that I am in a position to determine this appeal fairly and justly
      without a hearing.


   Background


   4. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq born on 3 February 1995
      from Jalawla (in the Diyala region of Iraq) who came to the UK and
      claimed asylum in 2015.


   5. The appellant claims that he left his village, with his family, in
      2014 because of the threat from ISIS, and that, after staying with his
      uncle for approximately a month, he travelled via several countries to
      the UK. The appellant has been living with his father since arriving
      in the UK.


   6. The appellant claims, inter alia, that he does not have a Civil Status
      Identification Card (CSID) and there is no one in the Iraqi Kurdish
      Region (IKR) or elsewhere in Iraq who would be able to assist him.


   7. The respondent holds a copy of the appellant's passport.


   8. Following the refusal of his asylum claim, the appellant appealed to
      the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard by a panel
      comprising of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan and Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal Currie ("the Panel"). The Panel dismissed the
      appeal. The appellant is now appealing against that decision.


   Decision of the Panel


   9. Having identified inconsistencies in the appellant's account and found
      aspects of it to be implausible and lacking in detail, the Panel
      concluded that even though the appellant's account relating to the
      time he left his village was consistent with objective information on
      the conflict in Iraq, it was not credible. On that basis, the Panel
      found that the appellant did not have a subjective fear of a risk of
      persecution and therefore could not succeed in his asylum appeal.


  10. The Panel then considered whether the appellant would be at risk in
      his home area from indiscriminate violence within the meaning of
      Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive. The Panel quoted at
      length from the respondent's Country Policy and Information Note on
      Iraq dated November 2018 ("the CPIN"). The CPIN notes that in AA
      (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) it was found, based on
      evidence up to May 2015, that the armed conflict in several parts of
      Iraq including Diyala engaged article 15(c) but that since the
      collapse of ISIS the situation had fundamentally changed such that
      there were strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to depart from
      AA. The Panel agreed with the CPIN and, after considering the
      individual circumstances of the appellant, concluded that he would not
      be at risk of indiscriminate harm engaging article 15(c).


  11. One of the individual circumstances considered by the Panel was
      whether the appellant would have a CSID. It was noted that the
      respondent has a copy of the appellant's passport, which had been used
      for a visa application in 2007. Relying on the CPIN, the Panel found
      that because he has a copy of his passport, the appellant should be
      able to obtain a replacement passport and a CSID from the Iraqi
      embassy in the UK. The Panel found that the appellant would be able to
      return to his home area without a real risk of suffering persecution.


  12. The Panel also considered whether removal of the appellant would
      breach article 8 ECHR. It found that there would not be very
      significant obstacles to integration into Iraq and that removal would
      not be disproportionate.


   The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions


  13. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal.


  14. The first ground of appeal submits that the Panel erred by not
      identifying the background material and/or country guidance relied
      upon to support the conclusion that the appellant would be able to
      obtain a CSID from the Iraqi embassy in the UK using a photocopy of
      his expired Iraqi passport.


  15. The second ground of appeal contains two distinct submissions. The
      first is that the Panel failed to give strong grounds supported by
      cogent evidence to justify departing from extant country guidance on
      the article 15(c) risk in the Diyala region (the appellant's home
      area). The second is that the judge failed to apply the extant country
      guidance on the difficulties the appellant would face obtaining a CSID
      upon return to Iraq and the challenges he would face travelling from
      Baghdad to Diyala without a CSID.


  16. The third ground of appeal submits that in the article 8 ECHR
      assessment the judge failed to provide adequate reasons as to why
      there would not be very significant obstacles to his integration into
      Iraq.


  17. The appellant's written submissions reiterate the points made in the
      grounds of appeal. In addition, they argue that the Panel made
      findings about the appellant's asylum claim without giving adequate
      reasons as to why he should not be entitled to protection in the light
      of his fear being linked to ISIS invading his village. The submissions
      also assert that anxious scrutiny was not given to the appellant's
      claim about what has happened to his family since he left Iraq. The
      submissions also refer to AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq
      CG UKUT in relation to the difficulties that will be faced at
      checkpoints by a person without a valid CSID.


  18. The respondent's submissions argue that there was no error in the
      approach taken to the ability of the appellant to obtain a replacement
      CSID. In respect of the credibility arguments raised in the
      submissions, the respondent argues that it is clear that the Panel
      found much of the appellant's evidence implausible and inconsistent
      (including the claim of the appellant's father in the UK that he had
      lost contact with his wife and other children just 5 months before the
      hearing despite regular contact over at least 4 years) and therefore
      it was open to the Panel to conclude that the appellant would have
      family support.


   Analysis


  19. On 23 December 2019 a new country guidance case on Iraq, replacing all
      existing country guidance, was published: SMO, KSP & IM (Article
      15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC). However,
      as the Panel's decision was promulgated in November 2019, it was
      required to follow, unless there were very strong grounds supported by
      cogent evidence to not do so, the country guidance case law applicable
      prior to SMO. This comprises of the following 3 cases: AA (Article
      15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) (as amended by the Court of
      appeal in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2017] EWCA Civ 944); BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18
      (IAC); and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT
      212 (IAC).


  20. The Panel's finding that the appellant (given the availability of a
      copy of his expired passport) would be able to obtain a CSID from the
      Iraqi embassy in the UK was consistent with AA, where at para. 177 it
      was found:


           In summary, we  conclude  that  it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
           national living in the UK to obtain a CSID through the  consular
           section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able
           to produce a current or expired passport  and/or  the  book  and
           page number for their family registration details.  For  persons
           without such a passport,  or  who  are  unable  to  produce  the
           relevant family registration details, a power of attorney can be
           provided to someone in Iraq who  can  thereafter  undertake  the
           process of obtaining the CSID for such  person  from  the  Civil
           Status Affairs Office in their  home  governorate.  For  reasons
           identified in the section that follows  below,  at  the  present
           time the process of obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely  to  be
           severely hampered if the person wishing to obtain  the  CSID  is
           from an area where Article  15(c)  serious  harm  is  occurring.
           [emphasis added]


      Accordingly, there is no merit to the first ground of appeal which
      challenges the Panel's finding that the appellant would be able to
      obtain a CSID in the UK using a copy of his expired Iraqi passport.


  21. At the time AA was decided Diyala (the appellant's home area) was
      controlled by ISIS. The panel in AA noted that life in the areas
      controlled by ISIS was characterised by systematic and widespread acts
      of violence and gross violations of international humanitarian law and
      abuses of human rights. At para. 106 of AA it was stated:


           Given the volatility of the situation in  the  contested  areas,
           the number  of  displaced  persons  therefrom,  the  tactics  of
           warfare used there by ISIL and the circumstances  in  the  areas
           controlled by ISIL, we  have  no  hesitation  in  endorsing  the
           Respondent's concession and conclude that  a  civilian  with  no
           distinguishing characteristics will, simply by virtue of his/her
           presence in a contested area, be at real risk of suffering  harm
           of the type identified in Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
           Directive.-+


  22. By the time this appeal was determined, the situation in Diyala had
      changed dramatically. ISIS had long since lost control of the region
      and the number of security incidents and fatalities had declined
      substantially. The very significant change in Diyala in the four years
      since AA was decided amounts to, in my view, very strong grounds,
      supported by cogent evidence, to depart from AA in respect of the risk
      of indiscriminate violence in that part of Iraq. The Panel therefore
      did not fall into error by failing to follow AA in respect of the
      article 15(c) risk in the appellant's home area.


  23. The appellant's argument that the Panel erred by failing to assess in
      the light of the Country Guidance cases AA and AAH whether he would be
      able to obtain a CSID upon return to Iraq (or would be able to travel
      from Baghdad to Diyala without a CSID) cannot succeed because it is
      premised on the assumption that the appellant would not be able to
      obtain a CSID in the UK prior to returning to Iraq. However, as
      explained above in paragraph 20, the Panel was entitled to find that
      the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID in the UK. The appellant
      therefore cannot succeed under his second ground of appeal.


  24. The third ground of appeal, which concerns the appellant's article 8
      claim, has no merit. The Panel gave several reasons to support the
      conclusion that the appellant would not face very significant
      obstacles integrating in Iraq, including his cultural and linguistic
      connection to his home area which he had only left 4 years earlier,
      that he had spent his formative years in Iraq and that he would have
      family to support him. There is no basis to the contention that this
      aspect of the decision is flawed because of inadequacy of reasons.


  25. As noted above in para. 19, had this appeal been decided a few months
      later, the extant country guidance on article 15(c) risk in Diyala and
      obtaining a CSID would have been SMO, not AA. Although this forms no
      part of my error of law decision, I note that had SMO been applied by
      the Panel the same outcome would have been reached.


  26. The further submissions raise two issues that are not in the grounds
      of appeal: whether the Panel adequately addressed whether the
      appellant should be entitled to protection given his fear was linked
      to ISIS invading his village; and whether the Panel properly
      considered the appellant's evidence about ceasing contact with his
      family. These submissions have no connection to the grounds of appeal
      and no application has been made to amend the grounds. There is
      therefore no basis for me to consider them. However, for completeness,
      I will address them briefly. There is no merit to the argument that
      the appellant should be entitled to protection given his fear is
      linked to ISIS invading his village because ISIS has not had control
      of his village for several years. With regard to the appellant's
      family, the Panel gave clear reasons to support the findings reached
      including, inter alia, the implausibility of his father's claim that
      he had been in regular contact with their family in Iraq for several
      years but had lost contact with his wife just five months before the
      hearing. The Panel was entitled to find, for the reasons it gave, that
      the appellant has not lost touch with his mother and siblings, or with
      the uncle he stayed with after leaving his village in 2014.


  27. The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law. The appeal is
      therefore dismissed.


   Decision


  28. The appeal is dismissed. The making of the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and the
      decision stands.






   Direction Regarding Anonymity


  29. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
      is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
      or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
      direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
      proceedings.





Signed:


D. Sheridan


Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     26 June 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email

