
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05394/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2020                            |On 31 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     D S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by Elaahi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Housego ("the judge"), promulgated on 24 September 2019, by which he
dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his
protection and human rights claims.  Both claims had in effect been based
upon the Appellant's assertion that he was bisexual, was in fear of family
members in Pakistan as a result of this, and could not live elsewhere in
that country.

The Appellant's appeal was first heard by the First-tier Tribunal in 2018.
That appeal was dismissed but later set aside by the Upper Tribunal and
remitted for a complete rehearing.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The remitted appeal came before the judge on 28 August 2019.  At [50]-[57]
the judge made the following relevant findings of fact:

      i) the Appellant was not bisexual;

     ii) he had never had a relationship with another man;

    iii) that the Appellant was in fact heterosexual;

     iv) that he suffered from mental health problems as set out in a report
         by Dr Rachel Thomas, Consultant Psychologist;

      v) that the Appellant had no partner or other family members in the
         United Kingdom;

     vi) that even if the Appellant was bisexual, he had lived his life both
         in Pakistan and the United Kingdom on an entirely discreet basis
         and that his sexuality was what is described as an "internal
         thought process, rather than a part of his lifestyle";

    vii) the Appellant was not at risk of committing suicide.

The reasons in support of the findings of fact are then set out at [58]-
[77].  The judge treated the Appellant as a vulnerable witness but
concluded that the vulnerability had not materially prejudiced his ability
to present his evidence at the hearing.  The judge accepted the diagnosis
of Dr Thomas (her report had gone unchallenged) that the Appellant suffered
from a mental health condition (a moderate depressive episode).  For
reasons set out at [65]-[68] and [74], the judge found there to be a number
of shortcomings in Dr Thomas's report and in all the circumstances, he
placed limited weight upon that evidence. The judge noted the absence of
any supporting evidence. He considered the contents of GP patient records
and the Appellant's screening interview.

At [75] and [77] the judge reached an alternative conclusion to the effect
that even if the Appellant was bisexual, his evidence indicated that he had
lived his life on an entirely private (or discreet) basis and would
continue to do so if returned to Pakistan.  On this basis, the Appellant
could not satisfy the third question in the structured approach set out in
HJ (Iran) [2010] 3 WLR 386 and his protection claim would fail in any
event.  Finally, the judge considered Article 8 but concluded that removal
would be proportionate in all the circumstances.



The grounds of appeal

The grounds of appeal are twofold.  First, in light of the judgment of the
CJEU in A, B and, C C-148/13 - C-150/13 it is said that the judge erred by
requiring corroborative evidence of the Appellant and by holding the delay
in making the protection claim against him.  Second, it is said that the
judge erred in his treatment of the medical report.  The judge was wrong to
have placed any weight on the fact that the author was a psychologist
rather than a psychiatrist and that he should not have made reference to
any matters apparently provided during "judicial training".

There has been no application to vary the grounds of appeal.



The hearing

At the hearing Ms Akinbolu relied on the grounds.  She submitted that the
judge had failed to adequately address the Appellant's own evidence as
contained in the witness statement, the asylum interview, and that given
orally at the hearing.  She submitted that whilst this point had not been
expressly articulated in the grounds, it flowed from the errors set out
therein.  In respect of ground 2, Ms Akinbolu submitted that the judge had
failed to address the relevance of the medical report to the assessment of
the Appellant's credibility as to traumatic past events.  The Appellant's
claim was that the past events related to his family's discovery of his
bisexuality and then their threats made against him.

Mr Bramble submitted that the first ground of appeal was narrowly drawn and
did not encompass an assertion that the judge had failed to consider other
aspects of the Appellant's evidence.  He submitted that the judge did not
take the timing of the protection claim against the Appellant, nor had he
held the lack of corroborative evidence against his overall credibility.
It was submitted that the judge had in fact considered other aspects of the
evidence beyond that contained in Dr Thomas's report, with reference to
[69]-[70] and [76].  In respect of the second ground of appeal he accepted
that the judge should not have apparently drawn a distinction between
evidence from a psychologist and that from a psychiatrist.  The judge was
also wrong to have taken any information acquired through judicial training
into account.  However, he submitted that these were not material because
the other findings were all open to the judge.  Mr Bramble noted that the
alternative finding on the discretion issue had not been challenged.

In reply, Ms Akinbolu referred me to the Country Policy Information Note on
Pakistan (contained in the Appellant's consolidated bundle) and submitted
that it might not be safe for the Appellant, as a bisexual man, to live
anywhere in Pakistan.  She emphasised the failure of the judge to have
considered all aspects of the Appellant's own evidence.




Decision on Error of Law

Having considered the judge's decision as a whole, I conclude that there
are no material errors of law such that the decision should be set aside
under section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

I agree with Mr Bramble that ground 1 has been drawn narrowly and only
asserts that the judge has erred in respect of the corroboration and delay
issues.  The ground does not encompass the wider assertion that the judge
failed to consider other aspects of the Appellant's evidence.  Therefore,
in the absence of any variation, it was not open to the Appellant to
contend for any alleged errors going beyond the proper ambit of the
grounds.

As to the corroboration point, it is not sufficiently clear to me that the
judge did in fact hold the absence of supporting evidence against the
Appellant, having regard to what is said in [73] of his decision. On a
reasonable reading of the paragraph, the judge is simply stating a fact,
namely that there was no such evidence despite what would appear to have
been the reasonable availability of such.  Alternatively, the judge was
entitled, in all the circumstances, to take account of the fact that
evidence that was, on the face of it, readily available had not been
adduced and without any explanation for this. As the judge made clear, the
absence of any supporting evidence left him with only the Appellant's
evidence, and that had been found wanting in material respects.

As to the issue of delay, [71] is in my view of neutral effect.  Although
the judge states that the delay was "relevant", he then immediately goes on
to suggest that there was an explanation for that delay. On balance, I
conclude that the delay was not materially held against the Appellant. Even
if it had been, the judge was entitled to have done so, providing that it
did not constitute the decisive factor against the Appellant's credibility
(which it did not).

For the sake of completeness, even if it could be said that ground 1 did
properly encompass a wider challenge to the judge's consideration of the
evidence, there are no material errors on his part.  Whilst there is a
focus upon the report of Dr Thomas, it is clear that the judge took account
of other sources of evidence, including what the Appellant had said in oral
evidence (with reference to [73]), what had been stated in writing (with
reference to [76]-[77]), what had been said to the Respondent (with
reference to [70]), and information contained within the GP patient records
(with reference to [69]). The findings made in respect of those other
sources were open to the judge.

I turn to ground 2.  Mr Bramble was right to accept that the judge has
erred in two respects.  He was wrong to have apparently drawn a relevant
distinction between evidence emanating from a psychologist and that from a
psychiatrist, at least in the circumstances of this case.  Dr Thomas was
quite clearly suitably qualified to express the opinions that she did.  The
judge was also wrong to have apparently taken account of what might have
been said during "judicial training" to the effect that "the more trusting
a profession the more likely that profession is to find someone credible."
Whatever that quite means, it was irrelevant.  However, in my judgment,
these errors, when the judge's decision is considered holistically, are not
material.

The essential criticism made by the Appellant of the judge's consideration
of Dr Thomas's report is that he failed to take it into account when
assessing the credibility of what the Appellant had said had caused his
current mental health problems, namely his family finding out about his
sexuality and then making threats against him. For the reasons set out
below, this argument is misconceived.

The judge accepted the diagnosis made by Dr Thomas, as he was probably
bound to do, given that it had gone unchallenged.  That diagnosis could not
of course have inevitably led to the conclusion that the Appellant had
given a truthful account of events.  The judge was correct to say that Dr
Thomas's report was based almost entirely on what had been said to her by
the Appellant.  That in and of itself is not a reason to reject the overall
analysis and conclusions reached by a suitably qualified expert.  Having
said that, and as the judge rightly stated, the ultimate assessment of an
appellant's credibility is for the fact-finding tribunal based upon the
evidence as a whole.  The judge did not reject the report out of hand and
place no weight upon it. Rather, he found it to be of "limited probative
value" (see [68]).  Weight was, first and foremost, a matter for the judge.
It was open to him to find that the report contained a number of
shortcomings, irrelevances and/or matters that did not necessarily support
the Appellant's account (these are set out in [65]-[67] of his decision).
The judge specifically considered other aspects of the evidence which
indicated that the Appellant had suffered from at least stress on account
of other reasons which predated the claimed discovery by his family of his
claimed sexuality: those other potential causes being immigration detention
and the breakdown of a relationship (with reference to [64] and [69]-[70]).
 Thus, there was an evidential basis for causes of the Appellant's health
problems other than that put forward by him.  Finally, the judge was
considering the evidence in the round.  As part of this he also took into
account aspects of the Appellant's own evidence which he found to be
inherently unlikely (see for example at [76]).

In light of the above, the two irrelevant matters referred to by the judge
in respect of the medical report do not materially undermine his otherwise
sustainable treatment of that evidence.

Even if the judge had materially erred in respect of his treatment of the
Appellant's own evidence and/or that of Dr Thomas, the alternative
conclusion reached by the judge in [75] and [77] has simply not been
challenged in any way. This presents an insuperable obstacle in the path of
the Appellant's appeal.

Adopting a belt and braces approach, I will nonetheless consider the
substance of judge's alternative conclusion. I approach conclusions of this
type with caution.  A judge purporting to take this step must be careful.
Having said that, in the present case the judge was entitled to conclude
that the Appellant had lived his life as a bisexual man (assuming that this
fact had been accepted) on an entirely private basis, both whilst he was in
Pakistan and during his eight-year residence in the United Kingdom.  I have
not been directed to any evidence to indicate that he wished to live openly
as a bisexual man in this country or if he were returned to Pakistan.  The
Country Policy Information Note to which I have been referred does not, on
a proper reading, indicate that bisexual people will necessarily be at risk
anywhere in Pakistan if they are not living an "open" lifestyle.  As the
judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant would not wish to be open
and that this decision was not based in any material way upon a fear of the
consequences from the general population and/or the authorities (at least
in any area away from his immediate family), he was also entitled to
conclude that the third question in the HJ (Iran) approach was not
satisfied.  There has never been any suggestion that the Appellant could
not have internally relocated for any other reasons. Therefore, the
protection claim would have failed in any event.

The judge's conclusions on Articles 3 and 8 have not been challenged.

It follows from the above that the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal
must be dismissed as there are no material errors in the judge's decision.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors of
law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 28 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
