
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05168/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th February 2019                  |On 15th March 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                Ms Karine [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Foulandvand, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a citizen of Armenia born on 24th March 1958.  The
Appellant had applied on 16th February 2017 for asylum and humanitarian
protection on the basis of her political opinion.  That application was
refused by Notice of Refusal dated 6th April 2018.

The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Blake, sitting at Taylor House, on 20th November 2018.  In a
Decision and Reasons promulgated on 31st December 2018 the Appellant's
appeal was dismissed on all grounds, i.e. asylum grounds, humanitarian
protection grounds and human rights grounds.

On 9th January 2019 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
On 21st January 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne granted permission
to appeal.  Judge Osborne noted that the grounds asserted that the judge
had

           . failed to consider material facts,

           . failed to consider material law,

           . failed to make findings in accordance with the evidence,

           . made irrational findings,

           . failed to consider Article 8 ECHR, which was pursued in the
             appeal.

Judge Osborne noted that in an otherwise careful and focused decision it
was nonetheless arguable that the judge had failed to adequately deal with
Article 8, which was raised in the Appellant's detailed skeleton argument
and pursued in the appeal, and that the judge had failed to mention the
well-established case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 or any of its principles.

It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or
not there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by her legal representative, Mr
Foulandvand.  Mr Foulandvand is very familiar with this matter.  He
appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of the Grounds
of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
Officer, Ms Jones.

Preliminary Discussion

I enquired with the parties as to the exact nature of the appeal.  The
reason for doing that was because it was suggested from the grant of
permission that this matter seemingly was concerned solely with an appeal
under Article 8.  I was referred to paragraph 59 of the First-tier Tribunal
Judge's decision where Judge Blake states:

"I further took into account that in the course of the hearing Mr
Foulandvand submitted that he was not seeking to press ahead with the
asylum claim.  He stated that he wished to accent the human rights part of
the appeal under Article 8 both inside and outside of the Immigration Rules
on the basis of exceptional circumstances.  I asked if he was going to
abandon the Appellant's asylum claim but he simply repeated that he was not
pressing it."

On discussion today, bearing in mind that Judge Osborne had indicated that
all issues raised in the grounds were arguable, Mr Foulandvand advises that
he again does not push an appeal based on asylum grounds but it is accepted
both by him and Ms Jones that the arguments are based on humanitarian
protection and on human rights grounds and I proceed to assess as to
whether there has been a material error of law on that basis.



Submissions/Discussion

Mr Foulandvand relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits that the judge
failed to go through the stages set out in Razgar and that on that basis,
along with the arguments that he sets out in the Grounds of Appeal, those
grounds disclose material errors of law which, he contends, should lead to
a finding that the case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal
for rehearing.

In response, Ms Jones, in a structured approach, examines the Grounds of
Appeal - which I have considered - and analyses them against the findings
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Grounds of Appeal initially, she
points out, contend that the determination is so unreasonable as to be
irrational.  She submits that that is a very high threshold and points out
that at no point had the Appellant's representatives shown what it is
contended is irrational nor had they produced any case law whatsoever in
support of such a contention.  Secondly, she comments that it was pointed
out in the Grounds of Appeal that there was no medical report before the
First-tier Tribunal Judge and she takes me to paragraphs 58 and 59 of the
decision, noting that the judge had taken into account the fact that the
Appellant's appeal had previously been adjourned in July for the purpose of
allowing the Appellant to obtain a psychiatric report and indeed that Mr
Foulandvand had at that stage indicated that he only required a three week
adjournment in order to obtain such a report.  The judge had noted that the
court had found that no psychiatric report had been provided and that this
was due to difficulties of finance.  This is something again that Mr
Foulandvand points out to me in his submissions.  She submits that the
suggestion that the judge had failed to give due consideration to the
medical condition consequently is one that is not sustainable and that the
judge had considered firstly the issue regarding the adjournment which had
been granted quite properly by the Tribunal back in July 2018 and secondly
the position with regard to all medical evidence that was before the
Tribunal when the matter came back before Judge Blake.

Ms Jones goes on to consider the submissions with regard to Article 8 and
points out that she does not see how there could have been a material
error, bearing in mind that there was no psychiatric evidence before the
court and that the judge had addressed all issues.  Further, she takes me
to paragraphs 44 to 46, which although specifically not referring to the
authority of Razgar - and she points out it this is not necessary to refer
to every authority - addresses, she submits, in full detail the Appellant's
human rights claim and that the judge had concluded that the threshold for
a breach of Article 3 had not been reached and had thereafter gone on to
consider the human rights claim with regard to Article 8.

Finally, she turns to the suggestion that there has been a procedural
irregularity, which is set out at paragraph (g) of the Grounds of Appeal.
She comments that she fails to actually understand what it is and invites
Mr Foulandvand to explain further to her.  Overall, she submits that these
grounds amount to no more than mere disagreement and that there is no
material error of law disclosed and she asked me to dismiss the appeal.  In
brief response, Mr Foulandvand submits that the grounds provided are
insufficient and then goes on to comment that he does not actually push the
irregularity ground any further.

The Law

Areas of legislative interpretation, failure to follow binding authority or
to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material considerations
by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching irrational
conclusions on fact or evaluation or to give legally inadequate reasons for
the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute errors of law.

It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is
alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
deal with every factual issue of argument.  Disagreement with an
Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of the evidence or
assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise to
an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's assessment of
proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no error of
law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to have regard
to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him to have taken
no account of evidence which was not before him.  Rationality is a very
high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational just because some
alternative explanation has been rejected or can be said to be possible.
Nor is it necessary to consider every possible alternative inference
consistent with truthfulness because an Immigration Judge concludes that
the story is untrue.  If a point of evidence of significance has been
ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take into account a material
consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

The submissions made by Mr Foulandvand both orally and in writing are, with
respect, vague.  They seek to persuade me that the decision is irrational.
I remind myself that the test of irrationality has a very high threshold
and if it is to be maintained it is necessary to show what irrationality
there is.  With the greatest respect to the Appellant's representatives,
that has not been done, there is no case law before me and there is no
basis whatsoever for maintaining the stance that he has taken.  In any
event, I am looking at the appeal as it is constructed.  This is a judge
who has looked in considerable detail at the Appellant's refugee status and
the qualifying Regulations, considered her evidence and then gone on when
the issue is raised to note the position with regard to the Appellant's
medical condition and the request for a psychiatric report.

The judge has at paragraph 59 made findings that he was perfectly entitled
to.  The judge considered the evidence that was before him and found that
the Appellant's evidence was vague and muddled.  He has taken into account
the submissions that Mr Foulandvand had acknowledged that the papers
provided were photocopies of documents and that he was unable to state
whether or not these were in fact the same documents that had been provided
by her husband in the course of a previous appeal.  All issues taken by the
Appellant's legal representative were considered.  At paragraphs 60 to 70
the judge went on to analyse the evidence that was before him and to reach
conclusions that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof.  To
submit therefore that the judge's decision was irrational amounts to no
more than an attempted disagreement.  Further, the judge has considered all
the facts that were available and had made findings that he was perfectly
entitled to.  The decision is well-reasoned and well-structured.  To merely
state, as Mr Foulandvand does at the end of his submissions, that the
reasons given are insufficient does not in any way persuade me that there
are any errors of law.  The fact that the judge has not specifically
referred to the authority of Razgar does not mean that the judge has failed
to give due consideration to the human rights position and indeed he has
done so in some detail at paragraphs 72 to 77.  There is no procedural
irregularity and ultimately, I conclude that the submissions made are
little more than an attempt to re-argue the position and amount to
disagreement with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  They in
no way approach a threshold that could disclose any form of material error
of law.

This is a well-reasoned and well-structured decision and for all the above
reasons I find that there is no material error of law in the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I dismiss the appeal and uphold the
decision made by the judge.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of law
and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
