
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05233/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                              |On 25 April 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [U F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bradford of Counsel, instructed by Central
                    England Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 September 1993.  Her
application for protection was refused by the respondent in a decision
dated 5 September 2017.  First-tier Tribunal Judge E M M Smith dismissed
the appellant's appeal in a decision dated 18 September 2018.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell
on 17 October 2018, stating that it is arguable that the judge's analysis
of paragraph 34 conflated the two limbs of the internal relocation
assessment for the appellant, which is (1) safety and (2) reasonableness of
return and relocation within Pakistan.  If these questions had been
addressed separately and material matters specific to the appellant had
been taken into account, it might have led to an arguably different
decision.

3.   Mr Tarlow very helpfully at the hearing accepted that the appellant's
personal circumstances and the objective evidence on relocation should be
considered in a fresh hearing.  I am also of the view that the First-tier
Tribunal Judge conflated the reasonableness of return and safety of return
test.  Given the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings that the appellant
has been credible in her claim about her family circumstances and the
presumption that she has betrayed her husband, it is imperative that
everything is considered very carefully.

4.   I therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E M M
Smith and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be placed before any judge
other than E M M Smith.

Decision

Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 21st day of April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

