
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05527/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 March 2021 and 18 May 2021              |On 22 July 2021               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     ASA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Sackville House London)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the respondent's
decision of 21 May 2019 deciding that he fell to be excluded from the
protection of the Refugee Convention under the Article 1F(a) on the basis
that there were serious reasons for considering that he was responsible for
committing a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity
as defined in the international instruments drawn up to make provision in
respect of such crimes, during the time he was resident in Iraq.

2.   In the decision letter the respondent summarised the appellant's
history as set out in his three asylum interviews and in the earlier
screening interview, two written statements and further submissions and
medical evidence.  He claimed to be at risk on return to Iraq on account of
fear of mistreatment due to his Sunni Muslim faith and his perceived
connection with and support for the Ba'ath Party as an academic.

3.   It was recorded that he joined the army in 1970 and ultimately reached
the rank of Brigadier General in around 1994.  He had also joined the
Ba'ath Party at this time as it was a condition of employment and also gave
him access to student funding.  There were no special duties as a Ba'ath
Party member and he did not reach a high level, remaining at the second
level of ferka for twenty years.

4.   With army funding he studied in the Soviet Union between 1973 and
1978, gaining a PhD in analytical chemistry and a High Diploma in chemical
engineering, attending the Military Academy of Chemical Protection based in
Moscow.  It was said that alternatively it was believed that he had
attended the Chemical Warfare Academy in Moscow and completed a PhD as a
weapons design expert.  (The appellant disputed that name and referred to
it as the Chemical Defence Protection Academy in Moscow and had a
certificate to prove this).  The Russian academy had about eighteen
faculties which specialised in such things as protection, reduction,
analysis and biological fields and there was only one faculty for Arab
students of which he was a member, called Faculty 3.  There were five other
Iraqis in this faculty with him, two from intelligence and three from the
army.  The other two members of the chemical section with him were Mohammed
Shaker Al Rawy and Imad Hussein Al Ani.  In total they were the only five
Iraqis in the academy at that time.  Iraq at this time ran a programme
regarding chemical wars and he was part of a group which was sent to the
USSR for this purpose and his specialism was in chemical analysis.  (He did
not, however, accept that there was a link in his work with protecting the
armed forces to the Chemical Corps who was founded under the Iraqi
Intelligence Service that was created in the 1960s which focussed initially
on defensive measures against chemical attacks.  He said that he had
nothing to do with the Intelligence Services).

5.   The Iraqi government started to consider the development of chemical
weapons in the mid-1970s and the Ministry of Defence became involved by the
end of the 1970s.

6.   On his return to Iraq in 1978 the appellant became a chemistry teacher
at the Ministry of Defence, teaching army students of different ranks and
from 1981 to 1988, during the Iran-Iraq War, he said he was forced to work
at the Al Muthana Establishment as head of research in the Department of
Protection, Limitation and Detection of Pollution with Chemical Agents.  He
said he was not involved in any fighting during the war.  Alternatively, he
had been moved to work in a laboratory called Baghdad Jadiva, which were
the original laboratories of the Mukhabarat and was producing small amounts
of chemical agents.  This facility was moved to Al Muthana in 1983 when
production became larger in scale.

7.   He agreed that the overarching purpose of Al Muthana was the
production and storage of chemical munitions.  At Al Muthana he reported to
the State Establishment of Technical Industry and his direct superior was
Nazar Abdel Salam, who was the head of the State Establishment of Technical
Industry (SOTI) and the director of Al Muthana.  Nazar came and visited his
department regularly and he would see him perhaps once or twice a week but
he only had a professional relationship with him.  Most of his time was
spent on practical matters and he was focussing more on the measurement of
the concentration of chemical agents in the soil and testing this.  The
department's research involved developing new methods of protection against
a chemical attack on the Iraqi Army, staff and civilians.  He also
identified polluted lands from chemical weapons and could determine where
and when they were used.  Whilst he was aware of how to decontaminate
ground where chemical weapons had been deployed, he was never involved in
the decontamination of land within Iraq after any chemical attacks.  His
work was preventative rather than reactionary.

8.   He was aware that alongside his unit there was another department in
Al Muthana that researched and produced chemical agents at laboratory level
and when it was produced in larger volumes for army purposes at what was
called a pilot plant.  He was aware that Al Muthana was the only producer
of chemical weapons in Iraq when he joined.  Al Muthana produced mustard
gas, sarin, tabun, CS and VX gas, using the original German, American and
Soviet literature as a guide.  Each unit did not work with the other.  At
the pilot plant they were able to check the conditions of the reactions of
the agents and eventually reach the level of mass-production but he did not
work in or have involvement in the production of chemical agents himself.
He specialised in analysing the effects of environmental pollution of these
agents and also in protecting people from the effects of chemical agents.
He was responsible for stockpiling and protecting agents in addition to
detection and exposure to agents.  He would take a sample of each gas and
test their concentration and stability and he would also measure how far
these gases would travel if they were put into a bomb and how the volume of
gas affected the size of the explosion.  He would measure the distance by
analysing the soil.  He would feed this type of information to Nazar.
There was a team of eight to ten civilians working under his control, a
mixture of graduate engineers and chemists but no other military figures.
He would gather the results of his team's analysis and forward this on to
his bosses.

9.   He was aware that the gases he was involved in testing were used
against the Iranians in the war and that Nazar would make a decision on how
to deploy these gases in weapons against the Iranian people during the war.
 It was not his decision against whom it would be used but he did know that
both Iran and Iraq had used chemical weapons and in his opinion Iran had
used those weapons first, deploying mustard gas in 1983.

10.  He disputed the claimed use of chemical weapons against the Kurds in
Halabja by the Iraqi forces in Iraq in 1988.  He was aware of suspicions
that the Iranians carried out these attacks and might have done so in order
to gain sympathy with the United Nations.

11.  There was a two stage test to producing chemical warheads.  His job
fell within the first test of chemical analysis and was carried out in the
lab.  The second test was where chemical samples produced by Iraq were
placed inside the containers/bombs and were launched by the Military
Tactics Department.  Samples would then be taken of these explosions to
determine/assess the concentration and pollution levels.

12.  He was referred to a report of the "Iraq Survey Group" which
investigated Iraq's Chemical Weapons (CW) Programme in the aftermath of the
second Gulf War (2003 onwards).  That report speculated that binary rounds
might either have been buried or moved to one of two bunkers in the mid-
1990s when the UN ordered the Al Muthana complex to relocate a large number
of chemical munitions.  The same report referred to the appellant by name
and as the manager of the binary sarin munitions project as frequently
storing munitions he was working on but had not tested in the basement of
his laboratory at Al Muthana, and this report also noted the existence of a
Salah al-Din Laboratory at the Al Muthana complex which was noted to have a
basement in which chemical rounds were stored and these included binary
sarin rounds which were stored there to check for leaks and chemical
degradation and in addition research into the production of nerve agents
was carried out in the Salah al-Din Research Department.  The appellant,
when this was put to him, accepted that his name might be referenced due to
the information he had given American forces but denied that this
referenced him personally as he did not have any role in developing any
nerve agent.  Alternatively, he believed that the Salah al-Din Research
Department was headed by Dr Mahmoud Al Samarrai, who was prosecuted and
imprisoned after the second allied invasion due to his work within that
department.  This had not been under his administration and he did not work
for or with Dr Al Samarrai.  As regards the reference to him in the report
being the manager of the sarin munitions project, whilst he maintained he
was not involved in the production of chemical weapons but did accept that
he managed the storage of chemical weapons.  The agents would be placed
inside a bomb in storage and he would take monthly samples of the agent to
ensure it was still usable.  One could only store these weapons for a
certain period of time and if held too long, weapons would have to be
decommissioned.  He did not recall how many weapons he held in storage but
they numbered in multiples of ten and he would update his bosses with the
results of his tests on the weapons.

13.  He accepted that his management of the storage and testing of chemical
weapons brought him within the second test stage of the production of
chemical weapons.  Although he was not involved in deploying the weapons
himself he understood that another department did this.

14.  He believed that his work at Al Muthana increased the risk of him
being targeted by the Iranian government if he were returned to Iraq.  He
regretted what had happened in the Iran-Iraq War and did not like the field
he specialised in and was against war and killing people.

15.  If he had not carried out his work during the war he would have
exposed himself and his family to harm and had not had a choice.  The
potential consequences of leaving stopped him from trying to do so earlier.

16.  After the Iran-Iraq War ended in 1988 he worked as head of development
in the planning department of the Baghdad industry factory which produced
medical drugs and chlorine for sterilisation and he later returned to
teaching and worked as an academic science teacher in universities and
colleges up to 2006.

17.  He first worked with coalition forces after the first Gulf War between
1991 and 1998, providing them with information about Al Muthana and his own
work.  The Iraqi government had provided them with his details.

18.  After the invasion in 2003 there came a new sectarian government.  He
was identified as a high-ranking Ba'ath Party figure and provided full
cooperation to the coalition forces and authorities on a weekly basis and
disclosed all information known to him about the Al Muthana Establishment.
He had wanted protection but there was also concern about this information
falling into the wrong hands.  Because of his previous work as a scientist
and his connection to the coalition forces his family were placed in danger
as Al-Qaeda groups operating in Baghdad became aware of his former work.
His concerns caused him health problems and he had to travel to Jordan in
March 2006 to undergo open heart surgery.  He subsequently received
threatening phone calls and letters, and having returned to Iraq, he
subsequently fled to Jordan and was there until July 2010 when he came to
the United Kingdom on a Tier 5 international exchange visa, having agreed
an overseas placement to work for the University of Liverpool as a senior
researcher.

19.  Having thus summarised the appellant's evidence, the decision-maker
went on to summarise evidence concerning chemical weapons, dividing these
into various categories and then went on to consider chemical weapons and
Iraq's development and use of chemical weapons, citing a number of sources
for this information.  In a CIA Report of 2004 the appellant was named as a
weapons design expert and toxicity research having received training at the
Russian Chemical Warfare Academy between 1973 and 1979.

20.  The decision letter goes on to describe how the outbreak of the Iran-
Iraq War in 1980 led to an increase in Iraq's CW research and production
under the name Project 922 (also known as the Samarra Chemical Weapons
Production and Storage Complex).  The project's aim was the production of
CW including mustard gas, sarin, tabun, VX and white phosphorus.  The
project was housed in the Al Muthana State Establishment based at Samarra
near Baghdad.  As a cover for the production of chemical weapons the
facility was referred to as the State Establishment for Pesticide
Production (SEPP).  The project was successful in producing mustard gas,
sarin, CS and tabun.

21.  As noted above, the report of the Iraq Survey Group identified the
appellant as the manager of the binary sarin munitions project or at least
named that person as having the same name as the appellant.  It also noted
the existence of a laboratory apparently bearing his name at the Al Muthana
complex which was noted to have a basement in which chemical rounds were
stored.  The appellant had stated that one of his friends and colleagues at
Al Muthana was Dr Ala Al Saeed.  The research showed that a Dr Alal Saeed
worked in the missile industry and was a member of Iraq's national National
Monitoring Directorate, which cooperated with UN weapons inspectors during
the 1990s.

22.  The decision letter goes on to address these weapons by the Iraqi
regime during the Iran-Iraq War and notes that in the course of that war
the Iraqi military was responsible for a range of war crimes and crimes
against humanity.  In 1985 the Secretary General of the United Nations
abhorred in particular the use of chemical weapons in this conflict and in
1987 the United Nations reported the repeated use of chemical weapons by
the Iraqis against the Iranian Army.  In the following year the United
Nations mission to investigate chemical weapons reported that the Iraqis
used chemical weapons on an intensive scale.  Such weapons had been used
against Iranian civilians in an area adjacent to an urban centre lacking
any protection against that kind of attack and even children had been
injured.  The UN concluded that Iraq had used both mustard gas and tabun
and that chemical weapons played a significant role in the conflict.  In
the aftermath of the Iran-Iraq War CW production was initially halted but
in 1990 production of sarin, VX and mustard gas restarted.

23.  In addition to the use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq War, Iraq
also deployed CW against uprisings within Iraq, resulting in significant
civilian casualties.  In 1983 it was reported that the Iraqis had tested
chemical weapons on live human subjects and Iraq deployed CW against the
Kurdish opposition and in northern Iraq in what were known as the "Anfal
Campaigns".  According to Human Rights Watch the deployment of CW had a
significant impact during operations in the 1980s during which time between
50,000 and 100,000 Kurds were killed by Iraqi forces.

24.  There was also a brief section noting the long history of legal
prohibitions on the use of chemical weapons dating from 1675 and more
recently the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the Chemical Weapons Convention or
CWC opened for signature with a ceremony in Paris on 13 January 1993.

25.  The respondent went on to refer to the CIA Report of September 2004
and it was stated that a person bearing the appellant's name was a weapons
design expert and toxicity research who had studied at the Russian Chemical
Warfare Academy alongside Dr Imad Hussein Abdullah Al Ani (research and
development) and Dr Hammad Shakir (weapons preparation expert) during the
period concerned.  This study was said to have been conducted under the
direction of the Al Hasan Ibn-al-Haytham Research Foundation in Iraq and
that the oversight of the Iraqi Intelligence Service is part of the
Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research.  The objective was
said to be to research the synthesising of chemical warfare agents
including mustard, sarin, tabun and CS as well as pesticides.

26.  In addition, further to being named as a weapons design expert,
research in the same report compiled by the CIA in 2004 noted a person with
the appellant's name as being the manager of the "sarin munitions project"
who frequently stored munitions or arms he was working on but had not
tested in the basement of his laboratory.  At interview the appellant had
accepted that he managed the storage of chemical weapons and monitored
their outgoing viability, but still denied being involved in their
production.  At interview he disputed that he was a doctor, that he was the
person named in the above report, that he studied within the Chemical
Warfare Academy and that his work was directly linked to the Al Hasan
Foundation.  He was aware of Al Hasan's work and that colleagues of his
were connected to it, but stated that this came under the separate
intelligence service (Mukhabarat) direction.  He said that from 1981 to
1983 he worked in a laboratory called Baghdad Javida, which were the
original laboratories of the Mukhabarat until such time as the Al Muthana
facility was ready to use in 1983.

27.  The respondent considered that there were serious reasons on the basis
of this evidence for considering that it was the appellant who had been
identified in the objective evidence and that the two Iraqi colleagues he
named as studying with him in Russia were also named in the report.  It was
concluded that there were serious reasons for considering that he did work
under the direction of the Al Hasan Foundation with oversight from the
Mukhabarat and that the overarching aims of these studies was to research
the synthesising of chemical warfare agents to be deployed in chemical
weapons.  It was further noted that after the 2003 invasion and following a
change of Iraqi government he was identified as a high-ranking Ba'ath Party
figure and provided full cooperation to the coalition forces and
authorities on a weekly basis and disclosed all information known to him
about the Al Muthana Establishment.  He wanted protection but was also
concerned about this information falling into the wrong hands.  It was
believed that other colleagues had done the same and that this had
contributed to the information contained within the CIA Report.  It was
considered by the respondent to be in the appellant's interest to provide
accurate and impartial information.  There were significant grounds for
believing that the objective evidence relied upon which he had disputed in
part had actually come from his own testimony to the coalition forces and
that this strengthened the belief that the information was correct.

28.  It was said that as such there were serious reasons for considering
that the information which named the appellant as a doctor and cited his
specialism as both a weapons design expert and toxicity research was
accurate and that he had made a significant individual contribution to the
production and storage of chemical weapons by the Iraqi regime as set out
earlier in the decision letter.  He had already accepted his role within
toxicity research and admitted that he was involved in the storage and
maintenance of chemical weapons at the Al Muthana facility.  He also
accepted from his own accounts that the overarching purpose of Al Muthana
was the production of chemical weapons.  It was concluded that there were
serious reasons for considering that he was a chemical weapons design
expert, had obtained a doctorate in studies at the Chemical Warfare Academy
in Moscow and had gone on to work in Baghdad Javida and Al Muthana with the
knowledge that the overarching purpose of his work and of the unit
holistically was the production of chemical weapons.  It was believed that
given his qualifications, allied to the value of his information to the
coalition forces and his subsequent problems caused by his connection to
this work that he had made a significant individual contribution to the
ability of the Iraqi regime to establish initially and successfully operate
its Chemical Weapons Programme.

29.  In light of the guidance in MT [2012] UKUT 00015 (IAC) in the context
of aiding and abetting, it was considered that there were serious reasons
for considering that the appellant had provided practical assistance to the
commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity by the Iraqi regime in
the war with Iran and the commission of crimes against humanity internally
within Iraq.  It was said that his specific role was fundamental to the
ability of the Iraqi regime to target its opponents effectively and that
there were serious reasons for considering that he worked as a leading
scientist within the Iraqi Chemical Weapons Programme in the field of
studying and researching the effects of chemical weapons, in addition to
the storage and maintenance of chemical weapons which had a substantial
effect on the perpetration of international crimes by the Iraqi regime.
Whilst he had stated that he had no involvement in the production of
chemical weapons himself, he had admitted at interview that his research
and storage of chemical munitions brought him within both aspects of the
two stage process required for producing chemical munitions.  He understood
that the overarching nature of the department's work was the production of
chemical weapons.  It was noted that he had tested the concentration,
stability and explosiveness of gases that were used in chemical weapons,
feeding the results of his team's research up to his boss, in the
understanding that he deployed these gases in chemical weapons.  Though he
had stated he had no involvement in decisions on how chemical weapons were
deployed by the Iraqi government, he understood that these weapons had been
deployed against Iran, stating that he believed that Iran had used these
weapons in the conflict first.  Reference was made to objective evidence
that had been cited which showed that chemical weapons were deployed
against Iranian civilians and the Iranian military on an intensive scale.

30.  It was noted that he disputed the use of chemical weapons against the
Kurds in Halabja by the Iraqi forces in Iraq in 1988.  He was aware of
suspicions that the Iranians carried out these attacks and might have done
so in order to gain sympathy with the United Nations.  Notwithstanding his
belief, it was considered that during 1983 to 1999 the use of chemical
munitions by the Iraqi government against civilians in different areas of
Iraq had been extensively documented in objective information as set out
above in the decision letter and had been reported on as fact by the United
Nations.  It was noted for instance that up to 100,000 Kurdish people, many
of whom were civilians, were thought to have been killed through the use of
chemical weapons in bombing campaigns in Iraq in the late 1980s.  It was
believed that the appellant had denied the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Iraq in the face of incontrovertible evidence in order to
attempt to distance himself from the crimes committed by the regime.  He
had demonstrated a high degree of knowledge of how chemical weapons were
used by the Iraqi government against its opponents and understood that the
intent was in order to maintain territorial integrity and retain control
within Iraq.  As such, it was said to be inconceivable that he was not
aware of their use inside Iraq and that there were serious reasons for
considering that he was aware of the commission of crimes against humanity
and made a significant individual contribution to them.

31.  With regard to joint criminal enterprise, it was considered that there
were also serious reasons for considering that the appellant had worked
alongside numerous senior and junior colleagues in the Iraqi Chemical
Weapons Programme who shared a common criminal purpose of maintaining
security in Iraq between 1981 and 1988 using any means possible, including
the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity.  His specific
role was said to be fundamental to the ability of the Iraqi regime to
target its opponents effectively and there were said to be serious reasons
for considering that following his period of study at the Chemical Warfare
Academy in Moscow he had worked as a leading scientist within the Iraqi
Chemical Weapons Programme leading a team in the study and research of the
effects of chemical weapons, in addition to the storage and maintenance of
chemical weapons.  It was considered that there were serious reasons for
considering that he made a significant individual contribution as part of a
plurality of persons both under his control and alongside his superiors to
the Iraqi government's commission of crimes against humanity in a
widespread and systematic manner.  These crimes were committed against
government opponents and civilians as part of the common plan of
maintaining security and territorial integrity in Iraq and as such he
formed part of a joint criminal enterprise.

32.  As regards any defence of duress, consideration was given to the
guidance in AB [2016] UKUT 00376 (IAC), and it was concluded that there was
no evidence to suggest that the appellant ever tried to disassociate
himself from employment with the Iraqi government over a prolonged period
which spanned his studies in Russia at the Chemical Warfare Academy until
his services were no longer required following the end of the Iran-Iraq
War.  There was no suggestion that he was ever threatened with harm should
he want to leave his employment during the course of his service in the
Chemical Weapons Programme and it was believed that he had the means to
leave Iraq permanently at a much earlier date if he had had the inclination
to do so.

33.  The respondent accepted that returning the appellant to Iraq at
present would be in breach of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human
Rights and that he therefore qualified for a grant of restricted leave to
remain in the United Kingdom in line with published guidance on asylum
cases where an Article 1F decision has been applied.  His claim under
Article 8 was considered and rejected, as was a claim that he was entitled
to Article 3 protection on the basis of his medical condition.

34.  The appellant has health problems and as a consequence was unable to
give evidence.  The only oral evidence at the hearing therefore was
provided by the expert Dr Alan George.

35.  Dr George has provided a detailed report, dated 30 October 2020.  He
has set out details of his experience and expertise, such that it is proper
to accept, as I believe was uncontested, that he is an acknowledged expert
in relation to the matters  addressed in his report.

36.  Dr George set out a good deal of background evidence with respect to
the recent history of Iraq and the current situation.  I will not attempt
to paraphrase that detailed exposition, but will refer to it where relevant
in the context of Dr George's evidence and the other evidence.

37.  Dr George has read the appellant's witness statements and interview
record.  He notes his history of having attended the Military Academy of
Chemical Protection in Moscow, gaining a PhD in analytical chemistry and on
his return to Baghdad working for the Defence Ministry teaching Ministry
personnel.  In 1981 the appellant started working for the State
Establishment for Pesticide Production at laboratories in Baghdad
specialising in the characteristics of various chemical agents and in 1983
he transferred to Iraq's key chemical weapons facility, the Muthana State
Establishment, located near Samarra, as head of research in the Department
of Protection, Limitation and Pollution Detection.  He had stated that he
played no role in the actual production of chemical weapons.  He was
promoted several times, attaining the rank of brigadier general.  After the
end of the Iran-Iraq War in 1988 the appellant was appointed head of
development in the medicines factory and was also involved with a plant
producing chlorine for sterilisation.

38.  The appellant had testified that following the 1990 to 1991 Kuwait
crisis he assisted UN inspectors tasked with unravelling Iraq's chemical
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction programmes.  After the 2003
invasion he cooperated fully with the U.S.-led coalition in its effort to
locate and neutralise Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and during this
period he was provided with personal protection by the coalition.

39.  Dr George sets out thereafter the appellant's remaining history while
in Iraq, his move to Jordan and his subsequent arrival in the United
Kingdom in July 2010, where he has since worked at Liverpool University.

40.  At paragraph 136 of his report Dr George says that lacking direct
first-hand knowledge of the events described by the appellant that affected
his family, he is not in a position to provide direct corroboration of his
testimony.  He states that as a general comment however he found his
testimony to be generally plausible in the sense that it accords broadly
with the historical record and with Dr George's understanding of conditions
in Iraq and the wider region at the relevant times.  Dr George made it
clear that he made a distinction between plausibility and credibility, the
latter being a matter for the Tribunal.

41.  The first issue that Dr George had been asked to consider was: "What
privileges and/or influence would the appellant have derived from his
Ba'ath Party membership?"  He emphasised that under Saddam Hussein's regime
Ba'ath Party membership was a prerequisite for government employment and
professional advancement.  He did not accept, however, what had been said
by the Home Office that students who refused to join the Ba'ath Party were
expelled from colleges and universities.  To the best of his knowledge and
belief, Ba'ath Party membership was not compulsory as such for students,
equally however, students were pressured to join the party as a means of
demonstrating their loyalty to the regime and he considered it plausible
that there might have been circumstances where students were expelled from
colleges/universities for refusing to join the party.  Membership of the
party in and of itself said nothing about a person's personal political
convictions or lack of them.  Party membership was widely seen and
understood to be a useful and often essential requirement if a person
wished to progress in their career and also a helpful safeguard against
suspicion of political dissent, a suspicion that could carry dire
consequences.

42.  The appellant had said that he had joined the Ba'ath Party in 1970 but
never advanced beyond the rank of "firka", which he defined as the second
level of membership from the bottom.  Dr George addressed the evidence in
this regard and accepted that the appellant's party membership level was
the second level of full membership, the lowest being "active member".  He
could not be reasonably described as being a high-ranking member of the
Iraqi government.  Certainly he held a significant and sensitive position
in Iraq's Chemical Weapons Programme, but Dr George asserted that that in
and of itself would not make him a high-ranking member of the Iraqi
government.  There were tens of thousands of people at his level in Iraq.
In the Iraqi government's revised post-2008 de-Ba'athification programme,
holders of the appellant's rank were not considered to have wielded
significant influence in the Ba'ath Party and were not subjected to any
sanctions.

43.  Dr George put to the appellant the point that as a former "adhu firqa"
in the Ba'ath Party he should have been excluded from public sector
employment and yet he had worked in the public sector at the time of the
U.S.-led invasion and from July 2004 as a teacher in a university, and he
said that teaching staff who were in the university and were part of the de-
Ba'athification programme were returned back to teaching in all Iraqi
universities.

44.  The next question to which Dr George was asked to provide a response
was: "In your opinion, how important was the appellant's involvement
in/contribution to Iraq's chemical weapons project?".

45.  Dr George emphasised that he is not a specialist in military or
chemical weapons projects and this needed to be borne in mind.  However, as
a journalist in the 1980s he had devoted considerable time and effort over
several years to elucidating Saddam Hussein's weapons of mass destruction
programmes, and his expertise had been acknowledged in the Scott Inquiry,
as referred to at paragraph 7 of his report.

46.  Dr George had found a reference to the appellant's involvement in
Iraq's Chemical Weapons Programme in a book by Kenneth Timmerman: "The
Death Lobby: How the West Armed Iraq".  There is a reference to a visit by
an Iraqi team led by the director of SEPP (State Establishment for
Pesticide Production) and an SEPP chemist, the appellant, which visited a
subsidiary of a chemicals firm in Germany.  The Baghdad representative of
the German company later telexed the head office in Frankfurt with
information on the Samarra "pesticides" project and advised the company not
to get involved, and on 4 May 1982 German customs documents showed the
travelling Iraqis to have visited the German company's Hanover office
claiming they represented the Baghdad Water Supply Administration and on
another trip SEPP's general manager claimed he was from the State
Establishment for the Oil-Refining and Gas Industry.

47.  This was put via his legal representatives to the appellant, who said
it was 41 years ago and he did not remember much but when they went to
visits there were different teams and his purpose was more of exhibition to
look for equipment more related to chemical analysis.  His reasons for the
trips were for equipment, not materials and he would not buy but would
advise buying for his work.  He said that SEPP was more agricultural and
the organisation had different departments, biological, chemical etc. and
he was in the chemical department.  After 1983 the name of SEPP was changed
to 922 Project and then after a long time changed to the Al Muthana State
Establishment.

48.  Dr George observes in his report at paragraph 162 that at that time
the appellant was an army officer who had studied to a high level in Moscow
in the field of protection from chemical weapons.  Under cover of
establishing a pesticides plant Iraq was in the process of establishing a
full-blown chemical weapons production facility.  In the company of central
figures in that project, i.e. Dr Emad Abdullah al-Ani, who had provided an
email in support of the appellant in this case, the appellant had toured
Europe with the aim of procuring equipment for the Al Muthana plant.  In Dr
George's opinion, while it may well be that the appellant's priority was to
identify laboratory and related equipment that he would need for his
research and analytical work, he did not consider it plausible that he
would not have been fully aware that SEPP was engaged in the development of
a chemical weapons project.  Dr George goes on to observe, at paragraph 163
of his report, that indeed the appellant's testimony confirms repeatedly
that he was well aware of the activities of the Al Muthana project but
states consistently that he was not personally involved in the production
or deployment of chemical weapons but rather as "head of research in the
Department of Protection, Limitation and Detection of Pollution with
Chemical Agents".  He was involved with developing new methods of
protection against a possible chemical attack, developing protective gear
for the respiratory system and skin protection and ways to limit the impact
of chemical attacks on Iraqi soil, water plants contamination, finding
methods of quick detection, containment and decontamination of any possible
form of chemical attack.  He had said in his evidence that his work at Al
Muthana included testing chemical weapons to determine the periods for
which they could be stored without degrading.

49.  At paragraph 165 of his report Dr George went on to say that the
appellant was knowingly engaged in Iraq's Chemical Weapons Programme at a
time when such weapons had been used to devastating effects both against
Iranian forces in the Iran-Iraq War and also against Kurdish civilians.  In
the sense that analysis and research were key elements in the programme, he
fulfilled a key function.  Dr George went on to say, however, that equally
he knew of no reliable evidential basis for an assertion that the appellant
initiated or directed the programme or that he was responsible for the
actual deployment of chemical weapons.  In his opinion the appellant was
certainly a senior and trusted figure in the programme, although not one
who was directly involved in the deployment of chemical weapons and not one
who appeared to have enjoyed wide autonomy.

50.  The next issue put to Dr George was a request to comment on the likely
reliability of information about the appellant contained in the
Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq's WMD
(Weapons of Mass Destruction) ("the CIA Report") dated 30 September 2004.

51.  Dr George says that after the 2003 invasion and occupation of Iraq the
U.S.-led coalition appointed an Iraq Survey Group (ISG) to investigate
Saddam Hussein's WMD projects.  Key organisational roles were played by the
Pentagon and the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the majority of
the ISG's 1,400 personnel were Americans.

52.  In Dr George's opinion the CIA Report offers by far the best available
overview of Iraq's WMD projects and is impressive, especially given the
secrecy within which the weapons projects were developed.  At the same
time, however, he considers that the report's information must be treated
with at least a degree of caution.  He sets out what is said in the report
itself in its "key findings" section, saying, among other things, that
while some detainees' statements were made to minimise their involvement or
culpability leading to potential prosecution, in some cases those who were
interviewed spoke relatively candidly and at length about the regime's
strategic intent.  The report went on to say that the interview process had
several shortcomings.  Detainees were very concerned about their fate and
therefore would not be willing to implicate themselves in sensitive matters
of interest such as WMD, in light of looming prosecutions.  Debriefers
noted the use of passive interrogation resistance techniques collectively
by a large number of detainees to avoid their involvement or knowledge of
sensitive issues; place blame or knowledge with individuals who were not in
a position to contradict the detainees' statements, such as deceased
individuals or individuals who were not in custody or who had fled the
country, and provide debriefers with previously known information.  It was
said that the quality of cooperation and assistance provided to ISG by
former senior Iraqi regime officials in custody varied widely.  Some
obstructed all attempts to elicit information on WMD and illicit activities
of the former regime, others, however, were keen to help clarify every
issue, sometimes to the point of self-incrimination.  It was said that
ISG's efforts to uncover information on CW-germane[sic] research,
development and infrastructure were complicated by uncooperative detainees,
threats to some sources and extensive looting and burning of documents and
facilities.

53.  Dr George remarked that it was evident from the CIA Report that it did
not claim to contain only irrefutable and complete information.  He quotes
from a subsection headed "Origin of the Binary Sarin Round Used on BIAP".
This cited no fewer than four inconclusive and partly or wholly conflicting
reports around the origin of a particular sarin shell.

54.  Dr George observes that the CIA Report includes information about the
appellant that he had insisted is inaccurate.  At page 61 it states that he
gained his PhD in Moscow from "the Chemical Warfare Academy".  He states
that in fact he studied at the Academy of Chemical Protection, and Dr
George noted that he had submitted copies of certificates from that academy
relating to him.

55.  The appellant also was described at page 61 of the report, volume 3 as
"weapons design expert and toxicity research".  He denies that he was ever
involved in weapons design and Dr George was unaware of any evidential
basis other than the CIA Report for the claim that he was so engaged.

56.  At page 100 of the report he was described as having been "the manager
of the binary sarin munitions project".  He denies that he held any such
position and again Dr George was unaware of any evidential basis other than
the CIA Report that he held such a position.

57.  As regards the reference to the Al Muthana chemical weapons complex
included a "Salah ad Din Research Department", and the fact that it was
averred by the Home Office in the appellant's third asylum interview that
this must have been named after him as that name reproduces part of his
name, the appellant denied that the department/laboratory was named
formally after him although he conceded that it might have been named after
him in the sense that it identified the laboratory in which he worked.  In
fact, as Dr George notes, Salah al-Din, known in the West as Saladin, was a
revered renowned 12th century Islamic military commander, and the Iraqi
governorate of which his hometown Tikrit was the capital was named Salah al-
Din Governorate.

58.  Dr George went on to conclude that to the best of his knowledge and
belief the conflict between the appellant's testimony and the items
concerning him in the CIA Report could not be resolved by reference to
independent sources as there were none covering the specific points at
issue.  The only exception perhaps was the name of the academy at which he
studied for his doctorate in Moscow.  The conflicting evidence was a matter
for the Tribunal.

59.  The next issue Dr George was asked to address was the significance, if
any, of the lack of punitive action against the appellant by the U.S.-led
coalition that invaded Iraq in 2003 and by post-invasion Iraqi governments.

60.  It appeared from the evidence that the appellant may not have been on
the coalition's pre-invasion blacklist, Dr George noted, although that was
uncertain.  Even if he was, no action was taken against him either by the
coalition or by the post-2003 Iraqi authorities despite his having been at
a level in the Ba'ath Party that until 2008 triggered penalties.  His
testimony, supported by a letter from the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad of 20
August 2003 was that he assisted the coalition's effort to unravel Saddam
Hussein's WM projects.  In Dr George's opinion a likely reason why no
action was taken against the appellant was simply that he was not
considered to have been of sufficient importance in the Chemical Weapons
Programme to have merited detention or other targeting.

61.  The next issue that Dr George was asked to comment on was the Home
Office's assertion that the appellant could have disassociated himself from
Iraq's chemical weapons project.  It had been put to him that there was no
suggestion that he was ever threatened with harm should he wish to leave
his employment and he was believed to have had the means to leave Iraq
permanently at a much earlier date if he had been inclined to do so.

62.  The appellant in his evidence stressed the exceeding brutality and
viciousness of the regime and this was supported by background evidence.
Dr George commented that the appellant would have been well aware of the
nature of the regime and of its human rights abuses.  In the political and
security context of the day, instructions from the regime including
employment placements could not generally be resisted by the individuals
affected by them except at great risk.  For an individual to have declined
to accept duties imposed on or even suggested to him/her by a regime
instruction could have resulted in imprisonment and torture and the
imprisonment and torture of the person's family.  This was perhaps
especially so for army officers such as the appellant for whom disobeying
direct orders would have prompted severe retribution.

63.  Dr George was then asked to comment on the Home Office's assertion in
the decision letter that the appellant's position that chemical weapons
were not used against Iraq's Kurdish civilians represented an attempt to
distance himself from the crimes committed by the regime.  Dr George noted
that the evidence that the regime repeatedly used chemical weapons against
Iranian forces in the 1980 to 1988 Iran-Iraq War and against Iraqi Kurdish
fighters and civilians was incontrovertible.  The appellant had expressed
the belief in his 2019 statement that the attack on the Kurdish town of
Halabja in March 1988 where up to 5,000 people were killed and many more
wounded, "may have been perpetrated by Iran".  He had also opined that Iran
had used chemical weapons before Iraq during the Iran-Iraq War.

64.  Dr George states that the established record is that it was Iraq that
initiated the use of chemical weapons in its war with Iran but equally
there was evidence that Iran had also used chemical weapons, albeit on
nothing like the same scale as Iraq.  He also notes that in Iraq as in the
wider Middle East there is now a tendency to confuse supposition with hard
fact.  Conspiracy theories are rife and agents or spies are routinely
blamed for all manners of misfortune.  This is the context in which the
appellant's position on the use of chemical weapons by the Saddam Hussein
regime required to be considered and it was a matter for the Tribunal to
determine if his position represented a genuine, albeit gravely misguided
belief or a calculated attempt to distance himself from the crimes
committed by the regime.

65.  In his oral evidence Dr George identified his signature at the end of
his report and adopted it as part of his evidence.  He agreed that as he
had said at paragraph 136 of the report, the appellant's testimony was
generally plausible.  What the appellant had said at paragraph 5 of his
statement at page 25 in the bundle was plausible and also at paragraph 47
about the appellant's role though not the programme itself.  As regards
paragraph 25, this was not necessarily the full story.  The regime was
involved in much more than protection from Iranian attacks.  It was
plausible that that was his role in the programme.  As regards the contrast
between the Home Office description of where the appellant had studied in
Moscow as the Chemical Warfare Academy as opposed to the Military Academy
of Chemical Protection, it seemed at best to be a mistranslation.  He was
unaware that the Soviet Union had a chemical warfare named establishment.
Such institutions were always described as involving defence and not war,
for example Porton Down had originally been called the Chemical Warfare
Experimental Station but recently the Chemical Defence Establishment and
the same would go for the Soviet Union.  Dr George emphasised that he was
not an expert on it but it was the sort of name he would expect for an
establishment of that sort.  If the CIA Report said that it was called the
Chemical Warfare Academy in the Soviet Union then it was wrong.

66.  He had said at paragraph 169 of his report that the CIA Report's
information must be treated at least with a degree of caution because as he
had said in the report, the information came largely from detainees who had
every motivation to avoid culpability themselves, so they put it onto
others.  It was the best report there was at the time but it had its
limitations.

67.  As regards the allegation the Secretary of State made of the appellant
being a weapons design expert, at page 317 of the Home Office bundle, Dr
George was not aware of any other evidence or source alleging that.
Likewise, he was not aware of any other source for the allegation made by
the Home Office that the appellant was the manager of a binary sarin
munitions project.

68.  He was referred to the sections of his report concerning the appellant
at paragraphs 159 to 162 and was asked whether if the appellant had trained
at a chemical warfare academy or was a weapons design expert or involved in
the manufacture of sarin, would he have expected to find some evidence for
that in his searches.  He said that he would.  These were covert operations
but as could be seen from paragraph 7 of his report, he had specialised in
the past in the researching of these matters and the appellant was the kind
of person he had been looking for.  He was asked whether if the appellant
had had the role the Home Office said it was likely he would have found it
somewhere and said that likely was a strong word and an overstatement as
these are all covert operations and so he was not sure.  As he had said at
paragraph 162 of the report, he did not consider it plausible that the
appellant would not have been fully aware that SEPP was engaged in the
development of a chemical weapons project.

69.  As regards the appellant's key functions and as set out at paragraph
163 of the report, he was asked whether he could say whether the
appellant's work would constitute a crime against humanity.  Dr George said
that went beyond his expertise.  It was clear in the Iraqi context that
decisions on the use of such weapons would have come from Saddam Hussein
and his circle.  The appellant would not have been in a position to deploy
such weapons.  It was correct as set out at paragraph 154 of the report
that his party rank was not high and there were tens of thousands like him
in Iraq.  He was asked how he would describe the appellant's status and
said he had a significant military rank but that did not mean much with
regard to the government, for example if a person were a close relative of
Saddam Hussein, then military rank would have been irrelevant.  He would
not have had the power to get near the deployment of the chemical weapons.
As the role of a firka was nominal: a mid-rank and not significant and
would be obtained just to get a job.  As he had said at paragraph 181 of
the report, the likely reason why no action was taken against the appellant
was simply because he was not considered to have been of sufficient
importance in the Chemical Weapons Programme to have merited detention or
other targeting.  He was asked whether there was any other evidence leading
him to the same view or relevant to the point and he said that was the key
point.  There was a blacklist before the invasion.  No operative action had
been taken against the appellant and that was indicative that he was not
seen as a bad person in comparison to others.  With regard to page 547 and
the Halabja issue, it could be relevant: it concerned the families of
victims and Dr George had noticed no reference to the appellant as a
defendant though his boss was and it seemed he was not a critical player.
He stood by what he said at paragraph 186 concerning the consequences of
disobedience.  What the appellant said at paragraphs 48, 66 and 67 about
threats of harm was an accurate statement of the reality.  Dr George gave
an example of a person who by mistake had placed a coffee cup on a
photograph of Saddam Hussein when Dr George had been in Baghdad in 1984 and
this person was never seen again.

70.  Dr George accepted that the circumstances in Iraq at the time
constituted an actual threat.  Even distant relatives could be targeted if
a person fled with their immediate family.  It was possible to flee but few
had done so.

71.  With regard to Iran, it was put to Dr George that the appellant had
said that he was charged with dealing with what would happen if Iraq was
attacked and involved in detection and countermeasures and he was asked
what the extent of Iran's culpability was at the time.  As regards the
position of Iran and the appellant saying that he was charged with dealing
with what would happen if Iraq were attacked, by means of detection and
countermeasures, he was asked about the extent of Iran's culpability at the
time.  Dr George said that the situation was very blurred.  There had been
intermittent reports of Iranian use of chemical weapons but nothing
compared to what Iraq was doing.  Iran was almost experimenting.  What he
had said at paragraph 189 of the report was what the Iranians were doing.
He was asked to what extent propaganda would have influenced the appellant,
bearing in mind his statements at interview concerning his belief in
respect of Iran's culpability, whether this was not consistent with the
objective evidence.  Dr George said it was entirely plausible what was
being said about Iran being engaged in chemical weapons.  There were
genuine Iraqi reports about Iranian use of chemical weapons, so it was
reasonable to assume that.  With regard to de-Ba'athification and the
evidence at page 355 he said yes, that was what he had referred to.  After
the 2003 invasion the U.S. had decided that the Ba'ath Party would be
dissolved and there would be no jobs for people who had been more serious
members but some years later this had been revised and they had changed the
levels of culpability as the earlier arrangement had been too all-
embracing.  This was confirmed by what he said at paragraph 156 of his
report.

72.  It was suggested to Dr George that if the appellant had been culpable
of what the CIA alleged was it likely he would have been rehabilitated in
this way but Dr George said that one could not really assume that and it
was questionable what would be done if the report were accurate.  There was
a lack of clear procedures and rules and a lot of what happened in Iraq was
arbitrary.  He accepted that the appellant had not been targeted and he had
been rehabilitated in the sense that they were talking about. He was asked
whether it was plausible that there was a lack of targeting if he was as
close to the regime as the Home Office contended.  Dr George referred again
to the lack of clarity and said if he had closely and personally been
involved in the regime he did not think he would be rehabilitated in that
way.  He made the point also that the appellant's former boss was living in
Northern Iraq and had sent an email about the case and as far as he was
aware this person had not been targeted by the Iraqi authorities and he was
senior to the appellant.  This was an email from Dr Emad at page 61 of the
bundle.

73.  When cross-examined by Ms Cunha Dr George agreed that he had read the
appellant's interview notes and statements.  He was aware of the Home
Office position that the appellant had been producing chlorine as he had
said in answer to question 15 at interview and that he had studied in
Russia.  He thought that in fact the institute at which the appellant had
studied was outside Moscow.  The certificate from the university in Russia
was in the bundle.  He accepted that it was plausible that the references
made were to the same institution.  What he had said at paragraph 129 of
his report concerning the appellant's background was based on the
appellant's evidence.  It was put to him that the appellant had been
offered an amnesty after the amnesty expired, when the coalition forces
left Iraq he had left for Jordan and Dr George said there was no reference
to an amnesty in his report but the appellant had referred to it and it was
while the coalition forces were in Iraq.

74.  He was asked whether that would have impacted on whether the coalition
would have decided to take action against the appellant and he said yes, it
was plausible that a senior chemical engineer with his history would
assist.  There were individuals who were detained and operational with
weapons of mass destruction but the appellant had not been detained.  It
was hard to know the significance of that.  It could be because he had
helped the coalition but some who had provided help had also been detained.

75.  He was asked whether it was fair and plausible that as a result of the
appellant's ability to work with the coalition his evidence to it would
have been stronger than those detained and he said that one could only
speculate and he would rather not do so.  There was a section in the CIA
Report on this.  It was a spectrum.  He was asked whether it was plausible
that the appellant could have been helpful to the point of self-
incrimination and said he could not answer that and if he had said such a
thing it was likely he would have been targeted, and he had not been.  He
had been able to teach at a military college in Baghdad despite party
members of his level not being allowed to work in the public sector.  It
was put to him that the appellant could still have been involved in the
perpetration of these acts and he said that he did not think the appellant
was personally involved in the deployment of chemical weapons.  It was put
to him that he had assisted in the mass production of chlorine which could
assist and Dr George said that chlorine could be used, for example, for
safe purposes.  As regards his involvement with sarin gas Dr George said
that given that chlorine had so many potential uses it was impossible for
him to say what the appellant had done or had not done.  The appellant had
been a key figure in the weapons project and as a journalist  Dr George
would say he was a whisker away from being culpable, pretty close but not
quite there.

76.  It was put to him that in his interview the appellant said in answer
to question 33 that the first department had researched chemical agents at
a laboratory level and they transmitted to a bigger volume. They called it
pilot plant. It was used for army purposes and the answers to questions 34,
35 and 39 were also relevant.  He stood by what he said in the final
sentence of paragraph 162 of his report that he did not consider it
plausible that the appellant would not have been fully aware that SEPP was
engaged in the development of a chemical weapons project.  No doubt the
appellant would have known he was engaged in a chemical weapons project.
It was put to him therefore that it was plausible that the appellant had
been aiding and abetting a department which was producing chemical weapons
to protect the army and he said aiding and abetting was a legal term.  The
appellant had been a key figure in a major chemical weapons project as head
of research.  He had checked the conditions of weapons in storage, so yes,
in a lay term but again, it was a spectrum.  He had clearly been involved
in a significant role in a chemical weapons project.

77.  Dr George agreed that in a general sense the appellant as a senior
scientist with his knowledge would be aware of the international
implications of producing such chemical weapons.  The Iraqi regime and the
appellant would very likely have been aware of the United Nations and
international protection but of course restrictions applied in general
including to the United Kingdom's nuclear weapons.  It was irrelevant what
the appellant had thought about international Conventions at the time.  It
was a question of the immediate situation he found himself in.

78.  Dr George was referred to page 146 in the CIA Report and he said that
in the Iran-Iraq Wars from 1980 onwards Iraq was much more active than Iran
with regard to chemical weapons.

79.  He was asked whether it was plausible that at the time when the
appellant returned to Iraq having completed his PhD in the USSR he would
have been aware of Iraq's motivation in seeking these potentially chemical
weapons.  Dr George said he did not know how underpaid Iraqis' knowledge of
these missile projects would have been.  As an army man it was plausible
that the appellant would have had some awareness.  He had no idea about the
appellant's awareness of missiles/chemical weapons connections.

80.  He was asked whether he accepted that a person who was part of the
military and went to the USSR to study chemical engineering would plausibly
be in the know about producing these weapons and he said it was implausible
that the appellant would not have known in the 1980s.  He could have
believed that he was learning defence techniques and a lot of countries
including the United Kingdom were aware of the risk provided by chemical
weapons.

81.  He was referred to the CIA Report at page 257 bearing in mind the
appellant's role in the chemical weapons side and whether it was plausible
that he would know of the restrictions of the UNSC Resolution and how much
he could be assisting the government.  Dr George said it was not clear.  He
did not know what the appellant knew about the UN Resolution and it was
quite irrelevant to the Iraq regime.  It was put to him that the appellant
would be aware of the limits on the amounts to be produced and he said he
could not know what the appellant would have known at the time.  It was put
to him that if inspectors had visited the institution they would have had
to know what they could do.  He said that the appellant had assisted UNSCOM
and accepted he had done or he would have been told to.  It was not a gold
star.  The Iraqis were playing a cat and mouse game with the UN officials
at the time.

82.  He was referred to the report also referring to the Iraqi intention to
make Iraq less reliant on other countries for its natural resources and
access to certain solvents and he was asked whether he would say that it
would be consistent with what the regime would have wanted to do.  He said
that there was a general drive to have a self-sufficient arms industry.  He
was not aware that the appellant was involved in the production of chemical
weapons.  Iraq had been obtaining precursor chemicals from Europe but it
was necessary to be specific about what chemicals.

83.  With regard to the appellant's role in the Ba'ath Party, which Dr
George had addressed at paragraph 144 and elsewhere in his report, he
disagreed with what the Home Office said about students refusing to join
the Ba'ath Party being expelled from colleges and universities.  He said
that in effect it was necessary to be a member of the party for working in
the public sector.  This was seen as showing loyalty to the regime.  The
appellant had become a firka when he returned from the USSR although he was
already a party member.  Everyone was promoting the party.  Someone had to
organise the students, bearing in mind his academic role with students.  He
was asked whether it was plausible, given the appellant's role as a
lecturer, he might have only spoken of and promoted the party's intentions
about the chemical warfare programme and he said no, it would have been a
military matter and he would have offered no more than general praise for
the regime with references to the wise leader protecting the nation.  That
was if he had done so but he did not know what the appellant would have
said.

84.  General Al Attar, to whom reference was made at paragraph 166 of Dr
George's report, was not the same person as Dr Emad, who had provided an
email at page 61 of the bundle.  General Al Attar was, as said there, the
appellant's direct superior, according to his evidence.  He was only aware
of the general in the context of this case.

85.  He was asked with regard to what he had said at paragraph 181 of his
report about the fact that it appeared the appellant might not have been on
the coalition's pre-invasion blacklist that it was plausible, given his low
rank, that he would not be on that list and he said yes, those who drew up
the list did not think he was important enough to target.  They must have
known of his existence as he had helped the UN in 1989 after the Kuwaiti
invasion.  As regards the alternative that they knew he was helpful and
could give the intelligence they needed he said one could only speculate.
He thought that there were people on the list, and one could see the CIA
Report with references to those who were targeted but had helped the
regime.  It was very unclear.

86.  He agreed that the appellant had moved to Jordan after the coalition
forces left Iraq.  He could not say what UNHCR's reasons were for refusing
the appellant refugee status.  He could not comment on plausibility of them
wanting to distance themselves from somebody like the appellant.

87.  On re-examination Dr George was asked about people who were on lists
and who were targeted and nevertheless cooperated and whether this was a
point he had dealt with at paragraph 169 of his report and he said that it
was.

88.  That concluded Dr George's evidence.

89.  In her submissions Ms Cunha developed the points made in the skeleton
argument that she had provided.  In essence, it is argued that given the
fact that the appellant was a ferka working for the Ba'athist military
until 2003, paid to study analytical chemistry including completing a PhD
in the Soviet Union, where it was known by him that that country was a key
leader in the production of chemical weapons, and that he subsequently on
his return took a position as a lead researcher in the Al Muthana
Establishment in 1988, it was more likely than not, given his level of
command and seniority, that he would have known that his research would
have facilitated the increased production of chemical weapons including
chlorine, which was a base ingredient used in the production of sarin and
mustard gas.  It was argued that with him being charged with the research
of expanding such production the appellant would inevitably have provided a
means for the creation and use of chemical weapons commissioned by the
regime during the Iran-Iraq War.  It was argued that although the appellant
claimed he was solely involved in the production of chemical detectors
capable of assisting the military in their defence by way of detection of
chemical weapons ,nevertheless it was more likely than not that he knew
that in the ordinary course of events their scientific contribution would
be used in Project 922 (also known as the Samarra Chemical Weapons) and
would successfully aid and/or assist the regime in its objective to obtain
such weapons and use them in defence and against their own civilians.

90.  It was argued that also given his clear understanding of how the
regime functioned, having been a member of it for more than twenty years,
he would have known how brutal and persecutory it was in its mechanisms of
defence and control of its population.  He had admitted that he knew what
the Ba'athists' wider intentions were and these had been identified clearly
in the CIA Report as including recreating WMD capability and thus would
have known that his research into the mass production of chemicals in Al
Muthana was more likely than not to further the regime's aim in increasing
its capability of those weapons.  Ms Cunha referred in detail to the
contents of the CIA Report and what was said about the regime's intentions
and the use of chemical weapons at the relevant time including the use of
chlorine.  There had been no mention at the time of Iran being involved in
procuring chemical weapons and there was no evidence of this.  It was
common knowledge that the facility at which the appellant worked received a
lot of funding.  The appellant might have had responsibility for methods of
detecting agents in the soil but also with regard to avoiding detection by
international agencies and seeing how the weapons could be transported as a
solvent, facilitating their use as military weapons.  He had been careful
in his wording in answering questions at interview, having for example said
he had no direct involvement but he did not deny involvement in the mass
production of solvents which went into the nerve agents nor that part of
his research would inevitably support the government's position and what
their objectives were.  The respondent had to show that his actions would
be enough to demonstrate serious reasons for considering on the balance of
probabilities that he was involved in crimes against humanity and it was
argued that the research that he did provided a means of creating the
weapons and as a result he had aided and abetted the regime.

91.  As regards duress, if this were part of his claim, then the evidence
of how the regime worked did not mean that he could not avoid harm.  For
example, there was evidence at page 282 of the bundle of Saddam Hussein
ignoring advisers.  It was said that there would not be severe implications
if for example he had sold information but the evidence showed that he was
not that involved and he could have come out of the situation and had
chosen not to.  It was a choice he had decided to make, so duress was not
made out.  He had the background and the knowledge necessary to assist the
regime in getting what it wanted.  He had known what was happening and he
was involved in the production of a solvent which was used in the
production of these weapons.

92.  In his submissions Mr Jacobs relied on and developed the points set
out in his skeleton argument.  With regard to Dr George's evidence, he had
assessed the appellant's account as being plausible in the sense that it
accorded broadly with the historical record and his understanding of the
position in the regime at the relevant time.  Ba'ath Party membership at
the time was a prerequisite to government employment and professional
advancement and the appellant's party rank of ferka could not have made him
a high-ranking member of the Iraqi government.

93.  The appellant's evidence was that the Al Muthana Establishment was
divided into departments and that although he was aware of the production
of chemical weapons there he did not contribute towards the development of
those weapons but that his work in the Iraqi military was confined to
detection and countermeasures in relation to chemical weapons.  He had been
the head of research in the Department of Protection, Limitation and
Detection of Pollution with Chemical Agents.  His evidence had been
consistent throughout the asylum process.  His contribution had been to
reduce the impact of the chemical weapons, protection of the army and
civilians in Iraq and to specify the pollution from the chemical wars, from
the chemical weapons and identify the polluted lands from the chemical
weapons and determine the chemical weapons that had been used.  The work he
had conducted was in anticipation of a threatened chemical attack by Iran.
The work undertaken by his department was for the purpose of conducting
tests to protect against chemical agents.  The work was done in
anticipation of a threatened chemical attack by Iran.  He had provided
detailed responses to the 2018 interview transcript.

94.  Dr George concluded that the appellant played a key role in the
Chemical Weapons Programme in the sense that analysis and research were key
elements of the programme.  He had pointed out that the appellant was not
directly involved in the deployment of chemical weapons and did not enjoy a
wide autonomy.  It was argued on the appellant's behalf that the detection
and countermeasures based role that he had played fell significantly short
of the requisite tests of facilitating the commission of a war crime in a
significant way.

95.  It was argued with regard to the September 2004 CIA Report, that
though Dr George considered it offered the best available overview of
Iraq's WMD projects, the information contained within it required to be
treated with a degree of caution.  There were concerns as to the
reliability of sources, in particular people who had been detained giving
information using passive interrogation resistance techniques which
included placing blame or knowledge with individuals who were not in a
position to contradict the detainees' statements.  There were also
inconclusive and partly or wholly conflicting reports within the CIA
Report.  There were no independent sources to resolve the conflict between
the appellant's evidence and the items concerning him in the CIA Report.
The only aspect of the CIA claims that were capable of resolution according
to Dr George had been resolved by the appellant through production of the
relevant documents confirming his account over the assertion from the CIA
sources.

96.  It was also relevant that there had been no punitive action against
the appellant by the coalition forces and post-invasion Iraqi governments.
He had assisted UNSCOM teams by providing data and information about
previous work in Al Muthana between 1991 and 1998 and further assisted the
coalition forces in 2003, again providing information on Al Muthana.  He
was clearly known to the international forces and the military coalition,
who did not view him as responsible for the commission of any crimes
against humanity.  He cited the case of Dr Mahmud Al Samarrai at question
125 of his 2018 interview as a person who was in charge of five of the
laboratories at Al Muthana and who was arrested by the American forces.
The appellant's position on this issue was supported by evidence from the
U.S. Embassy in Baghdad of August 2003.  It was noted that the Secretary of
State, on whom the burden lay in this case, had made no attempts to
establish the appellant's standing with the coalition forces.  Dr George
considered that a likely reason why no action was taken against the
appellant was simply because he was not considered to have been of
sufficient importance in the Chemical Weapons Programme to have merited
detention or other targeting.  This was a significant finding.

97.  The defence of duress was available to the appellant.  This was in the
alternative, given that he averred that his work concerned the question of
how Iraq was to respond to chemical attack.  It was argued on the
appellant's behalf that the nature of the Saddam Hussein regime was such
that had he tried to disassociate himself from the Iraqi government or
requested a transfer this would have placed him and his family in grave
danger.  There would have been dire repercussions for his family and
extended family had he refused to work for the regime.  There was support
for what he said from Dr George's report.

98.  As regards the extent to which the appellant was influenced by
propaganda, at interview he had indicated that he believed that the attack
on Halabja may have been perpetrated by Iran.  Dr George had noted that the
Iraqi authorities were reporting internally that Iran had used chemical
weapons, and cited a number of articles confirming this position and this
supported the appellant's view, albeit that it was misguided.

99.  In essence, the Secretary of State's case on Article 1F(a) rested on a
CIA Report which was unsupported, unsourced and to a significant extent
unreliable.  The Secretary of State had not established that there was
sufficient clear, credible or strong evidence to establish that the
appellant's contribution through research and analysis in detection and
countermeasures facilitated the commission of crimes against humanity in a
significant way.  The appeal should be allowed.

100. I reserved my decision.

The Law

101. Article 1F(a) of the Refugee Convention states materially as follows:

"The provisions of this Convention shall not apply to any person with
respect to whom there are serious reasons for considering that:

(a)  he has committed a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime
against humanity, as defined in the international instruments drawn up to
make provision in respect of such crimes;

..."

102. Article 1F has been incorporated into domestic law through Article
12(2)(a) to (c) and Article 17(1)(a) to (d) of the Qualification Directive,
and through paragraphs 339(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules.

103. The applicable test is as set out in Al-Sirri [2013] 1 AC 745 at
paragraph 75.

"We are, it is clear, attempting to discern the autonomous meaning of the
words 'serious reasons for considering.'  We do so in the light of the
UNHCR view, with which we agree, that the exclusion clauses in the Refugee
Convention must be restrictively interpreted and cautiously applied.  This
leads us to draw the following conclusions:

(1)  'Serious reasons' is stronger than 'reasonable grounds';

(2)  the evidence from which those reasons are derived must be 'clear and
credible' or 'strong';

(3)  'considering' is stronger than 'suspecting'.  In our view it is also
stronger than 'believing'.  It requires the considered judgment of the
decision-maker;

(4)  the decision-maker need not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt or to
the standard required in criminal law;

(5)  it is unnecessary to import our domestic standards of proof into the
question.  ..."

104. In JS (Sri Lanka) [2011] 1 AC 184 the Supreme Court held that in
Article 1F cases a close and careful examination of the individual facts
will always be required.  At paragraph 54 Lord Kerr listed six non-
exhaustive factors that may be relevant to exclusion: the nature of the
organisation; the method of recruitment to it; the opportunity to leave it;
the position and rank enjoyed by the individual concerned; the length of
time that he had spent in the organisation; and his knowledge of the
organisation's atrocities.

105. The leading case on aiding and abetting in relation to Article 1F(a)
is MT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKUT 15 (IAC).  The following guidance is set out
there:

"Commission of a crime against humanity or other excludable act can take
the form of commission as an aider and abettor, as a subsidiary (or non-
principal) form of participation.  Drawing on international criminal law
jurisprudence (as enjoined by R (JS) (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 15),
aiding and abetting in this context encompasses any assistance, physical or
psychological, that has a substantial effect on the commission of the
crime, i.e. the contribution should facilitate the commission of a crime in
some significant way."

106. As regards duress, the five requirements to establish duress are set
out in AB [2016] UKUT 00376 (IAC):

"i.  There must be a threat of imminent death or of continuing or imminent
serious bodily harm;

ii.  such threat requires to be made by other persons or constituted by
other circumstances beyond the control of the person claiming the defence;

iii. the threat must be directed against the person claiming the defence or
some other person;

iv.  the person claiming the defence must act necessarily and reasonably to
avoid this threat;

v.   in so acting the person claiming the defence does not intend to cause
a greater harm than the one sought to be avoided."

Discussion

107. In essence, the appellant claims that although he was aware that there
was  production of chemical weapons at the Al Muthana Establishment he did
not contribute towards the development of chemical weapons in Iraq and  his
consistent evidence has been that his work in the Iraqi military was
confined to detection and countermeasures in relation to chemical weapons.
The essential basis for the respondent disagreeing with this is contained
in the references to the appellant in the CIA Report.  Other than the
appellant's own evidence the main evidence put in on his behalf has been
that of Dr George, whose report and oral evidence I have found to be
knowledgeable, informative, balanced and objective.  In this CIA Report it
is stated at its page 61 in volume iii that the appellant gained his PhD in
Moscow from the "Chemical Warfare Academy".  The appellant states that in
fact he studied at the Academy of Chemical Protection, and has provided
copies of certificates from that academy relating to him.  At the same page
the report describes the appellant as "weapons design expert and toxicity
research".  He denies that he was ever involved in weapons design.  At page
100 he is described as having been "the manager of the binary sarin
munitions project" and denies that he ever held such position.  At page 90
of that report it is noted that the Muthana chemical weapons complex
included a "Salah al-Din Research Department".  This is referred to several
times as the "Salah al-Din Laboratory".  The appellant at interview denied
that the department/laboratory was named formally after him personally
although he conceded that it might have been named after him in the sense
that it identified the laboratory in which he worked.

108. Dr George commented that to the best of his knowledge and belief the
conflict between the appellant's testimony and the items concerning him in
the CIA Report cannot be resolved by reference to independent sources as
there were none covering the specific points at issue.  The only exception
perhaps was the name of the academy at which the appellant studied for his
doctorate in Moscow.

109. Dr George at paragraph 169 of his report described the CIA Report as
offering by far the best available overview of Iraq's WMD projects and as
being impressive, especially given the secrecy within which the weapons
projects were developed.  However, he considered that the report's
information required to be treated with at least a degree of caution.

110. He noted that while some detainees' statements were made to minimise
their involvement or culpability leading to potential prosecution, in some
cases those who were interviewed spoke relatively candidly and at length
about the regime's strategic intent.  It was said also within that section
of the report that the interview process had several shortcomings.
Detainees were very concerned about their fate and therefore would not be
willing to implicate themselves in sensitive matters of interest such as
WMD, in light of looming prosecutions.  Debriefers noted the use of passive
interrogation resistance techniques collectively by a large number of
detainees to avoid their involvement or knowledge of sensitive issues;
place blame or knowledge with individuals who were not in a position to
contradict the detainees' statements, such as deceased individuals or
individuals who were not in custody or who had fled the country, and
provide debriefers with previously known information.

111. It was also said that the quality of cooperation and assistance
provided to ISG by former senior Iraqi regime officials in custody varied
widely.  Some obstructed all attempts to elicit information on WMD and
illicit activities of the former regime but others were keen to help
clarify every issue, sometimes to the point of self-incrimination.  It was
also said that overall ISG's efforts to uncover information on chemical
weapons, germ research, development and infrastructure were complicated by
uncooperative detainees, threats to some sources and extensive looting and
burning of documents and facilities.

112. Dr George also commented that it was evident from the report that it
did not claim to contain only irrefutable and complete information,
referring to the section of the report concerning origin of the binary
sarin round used on BIAP.  This cited what he regarded as being no less
than four inconclusive and partly or wholly conflicting reports around the
origin of a particular sarin shell.  As regards the issue of a link between
the appellant and the Salah al-Din Laboratory, Dr George notes that Salah
al-Din Yusuf al-Ayyub known as Saladin in the West was of Kurdish
ethnicity, born in Tikrit, and the Iraqi governorate of which Tikrit is the
capital and which contains the town of Samarra and formally the Muthana
chemical weapons complex was named Salah al-Din Governorate.

113. I bear in mind these caveats of Dr George about the CIA Report.  In
many ways it is a question of the appellant's word against the matters that
go contrary to his account and the CIA Report.  I shall return to this when
I come to consider overall the weight to be attached to the CIA Report and
other evidence in light of the appellant's evidence and the situation
overall.

114. It is relevant to note and bear in mind the lack of punitive action
against the appellant by the U.S.-led coalition that invaded Iraq in 2003.
Dr George considers that it is uncertain whether or not the appellant was
on the coalition's pre-invasion blacklist but even if he was, no action was
taken against him either by the coalition or by the post-2003 Iraqi
authorities despite him having been at a level in the Ba'ath Party that
until 2008 triggered penalties.  In Dr George's opinion the likely reason
why no action was taken against the appellant was simply that he was not
considered to have been of sufficient importance in the Chemical Weapons
Programme to have merited detention or other targeting.  He made the point
that one could not really assume that if the appellant was guilty of what
the CIA alleged he would have been rehabilitated. He referred to the lack
of clear procedures at the time and the fact that a lot of what happened in
Iraq was arbitrary.

115. This opinion must of course be given proper weight.  Equally, it might
be argued that the reason why no action was taken against the appellant was
because the degree of assistance he provided was such as to make it
appropriate to decide to leave him unprosecuted.  The position is unclear
but the absence of prosecution or other adverse action against him is a
matter to be placed into the balance.  It is also relevant to bear in mind
that Dr George said he was not  sure that he would have found evidence of
the appellant having had the role the respondent said he had, that it was
not plausible that the appellant would not have been aware that SEPP was
engaged in the development of a chemical weapons project, that the
appellant had been a key figure in a major chemical weapons project as head
of research and that as  journalist Dr George would say that he was a
whisker away from being culpable.
116. Bringing these matters together, I consider that there is a sufficient
degree of specificity in the CIA Report despite the protestations of the
appellant to the contrary and the defects within that report and bearing in
 mind Dr George's evidence, to be such as to show that the respondent has
made out her case in this regard.  The report itself expressed the concerns
I have set out above about the shortcomings of the interview process and
contains, as I have noted, the inconclusive and partly or wholly
conflicting reports about the origins of a particular sarin shell.  It
appears to have been wrong in the name it gave to the institution where the
appellant obtained his PhD in Moscow, but I consider that to be a
relatively minor point since the statement is in my view essentially
descriptive rather than purporting to provide the specific name of the
institution at which the appellant studied.  But it is relevant to note
that there were no caveats attached to the particular parts of the report
in respect of which the appellant was identified as a weapons design expert
and toxicity research and to have been the manager of the binary sarin
munitions project.  Also relevant in this regard is the naming of the Salah
al-Din Research Department within the chemical weapons complex at Muthana,
referred to several times in the CIA Report as the Salah al-Din Laboratory,
which the appellant, though he denied it was named formally after him,
accepted that it might have been named after him in the sense that it
identified the laboratory in which he worked.

117. In coming to a conclusion in this regard I bear in mind of course the
guidance in the authorities that it is necessary to remember that serious
reasons are stronger than reasonable grounds, that those reasons must be
clear and credible, that considering is stronger than suspecting and
stronger than believing, in concluding that the evidence is such despite
the appellant's consistent denials, that the respondent has shown that the
appellant is guilty of aiding and abetting the commission of crimes against
peace, war crimes or crimes against humanity in the sense that he provided
assistance which had a substantial effect on the commission of such crimes
in that his contribution facilitated the commission of a crime in some
significant way, given the role that I accept on the evidence from the CIA
Report he had in the Al Muthana complex during the relevant years.  He
clearly had a position and rank of significance, he spent a good deal of
time there, he was clearly aware of the organisation's atrocities, the
nature of the organisation was as set out above and he was recruited to it
as a consequence of the training he had received in Moscow.  The
opportunity to leave it may have been limited and I bear that in mind as a
point in relation to duress.

118. Having found as I have that the appellant was properly regarded by the
respondent as a person who has aided and abetted the commission of crimes
against peace, war crimes or crimes against humanity, there is the question
of duress.  I have set out above the guidance from AB (Iran) as to what is
required to establish duress.

119. I do not consider that there is a requirement of there having been a
specific threat made against the appellant in this case.  I accept the
evidence from Dr George and the general evidence that has been provided ,
for example from the USSD report of March 2003 and the Amnesty
International Report of 2003 as to the nature of the regime and the risks
of non-cooperation with it. As Dr George said in his report at paragraph
186, for an individual to have declined to accept duties imposed on, or
even suggested to him/her by a regime instruction could have resulted in
imprisonment and torture and the imprisonment and torture of the person's
family, particularly so perhaps for army officers such as the appellant,
for whom disobeying direct orders would have prompted severe retribution
(and, one might add, especially so as a key scientist involved in a central
project whose relevant education abroad had been funded by the state).
There was in my view a real and constant and ongoing threat to the
appellant that if he did not continue the work that he carried out for the
regime at Al Muthana that he and his family would face a real risk of
significant ill-harm at the hands of the regime.  Accordingly, I find that
the duress defence is made out in this case.

120. This appeal is accordingly allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 21 July 2021


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

