
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05028/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2020 by Video         |On 16 February 2021                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                     COB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr S Chelvan, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


This decision is the remaking of the appellant's appeal brought on Article
3 ECHR grounds against the respondent's decision of 15 May 2019.

The remaking of the appeal is required following a decision of 3 February
2020 in which the Upper Tribunal found an error of law in the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal issued on 18 September 2019 on the appellant's
Article 3 ECHR claim. The Upper Tribunal decision upheld all other aspects
of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Background

The appellant is a national of Jamaica. He was born in 1974.

The appellant came to the UK on 4 May 2000 on a visit visa.  He obtained
further leave to remain as a student until 2001.  He was arrested in 2002
and, whilst on remand, on 18 November 2002 he claimed asylum. That claim
was refused on 28 November 2002. An appeal against the refusal was heard in
his absence and dismissed on 27 July 2004.

On 12 January 2004 the appellant was convicted of possessing a class A
controlled drug with intent to supply - heroin.  On 9 February 2004 he was
sentenced to three years and nine months' imprisonment and recommended for
deportation.  An appeal against deportation on asylum and human rights
grounds was refused by the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal on 24 November
2006 and COB became appeal rights exhausted on 9 March 2007.

Of relevance to this appeal, in those proceedings the appellant was found
to be gay.  This finding was made in paragraphs 50 to 56 of the decision of
24 November 2006.  It is common ground that this finding is extant. It is
this aspect of his profile that forms the basis of the appellant's current
Article 3 ECHR claim.

A deportation order was signed against the appellant on 9 August 2007 and
served on him on 19 November 2007.  The appellant applied to revoke the
deportation order and when this application was refused, appealed on asylum
and human rights grounds. In a decision dated 7 April 2008, an AIT panel
reached the same conclusions as the earlier Tribunal. The decision of 7
April 2008 was successfully reviewed, however, and the appeal re-heard and
again dismissed by an AIT panel in a decision dated 4 September 2009. The
appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 23 September 2009.  The
appellant then absconded for an extended period of time.

On 6 January 2016 the appellant was convicted of possessing with intent to
supply a controlled drug class A - crack cocaine, three counts of being
concerned with supplying class A controlled drug - cocaine and two counts
of being concerned in supplying class A controlled drug - heroin.  On 3
February 2016 he was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.

The respondent then recommenced deportation action against the appellant.
The appellant set out his protection claim in a Preliminary Information
Questionnaire dated 17 December 2018 and legal representatives made further
submissions dated 25 February 2019.

 In a decision dated 15 May 2019 the respondent applied Section 72 of the
Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 (the 2002 Act), finding that the
appellant had been convicted of a particularly serious crime and
constituted a danger to the community of the UK with the consequence that
he did not qualify for asylum or humanitarian protection. His Article 3 and
8 ECHR claims were also refused.

The appellant appealed against all aspects of the respondent's decision.
His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton on 16
September 2019.  In a decision issued on 18 September 2019, the s.72
certificate was upheld and the appellant's Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR
claims dismissed.

The appellant appealed against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
on 1 October 2019 was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

As before, in a decision dated 3 February 2020, the Upper Tribunal found an
error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal only as regards the
Article 3 ECHR claim based on the appellant's sexuality.  The error of law
decision specified in paragraph 23 that the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal was set aside to be remade "only concerning the appellant's claim
under Article 3 ECHR made on the basis that he is gay". Thus, the appeal
now requires remaking on that important but limited basis.

Preliminary Issue - Additional Grounds

As set out in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the Upper Tribunal decision issued on
3 February 2020, at the error of law hearing the appellant applied to vary
the grounds on which permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal had been
sought. The application to vary the grounds was contained in paragraphs 21
to 31 of the appellant's skeleton argument dated 17 November 2019.

The Upper Tribunal refused the application to vary the grounds:

"17.     Mr Chelvan sought to argue at the hearing that the remaining
grounds of challenge should be varied to include legal argument on whether
s.72 was incompatible with the 2004 Minimum Standards Directive. As I
understood it, his argument was that the primacy of EU law required that
the Tribunal assess first whether the appellant was a refugee and only then
assess whether a s.72 certificate should be applied to exclude him from the
protection of the Refugee Convention.

18.  This was not an argument raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-
tier Tribunal, at the hearing in front of the First-tier Tribunal or in the
grounds of challenge to the Upper Tribunal.  It was not brought to the
attention of the Tribunal or the respondent until the day of the hearing,
the amended grounds being submitted electronically on the weekend prior to
the hearing.  The application to amend the grounds stated that it should be
granted as there was an important point of principle not yet determined by
the Upper Tribunal or the High Court.  Dr Chelvan relied on paragraph 41 of
MA (Cart JR: effect on UT processes) Pakistan [2019] UKUT 000353 (IAC)
which shows that in the case of the Upper Tribunal granted him permission
to vary his grounds where, the case having come back to the Upper Tribunal
following a 'Cart' judicial review, there was no opposition from the
respondent to that course of action.  The procedural facts in MA (Pakistan)
were notably different from this appeal.  The position of the appellant in
that appeal, after a 'Cart' judicial review, had 'materially changed from
what it was when the Upper Tribunal received the application for permission
to appeal'; see paragraph 34 of MA (Pakistan).  There has been no 'Cart'
judicial review here or material change of circumstances for this appellant
since the original grounds were drafted or since permission was granted.
The only thing that has changed is that Dr Chelvan was instructed after
permission was granted.  He was not able to provide any good reason for the
point not being argued earlier.  The respondent objects to the application
to amend the grounds.  In all the circumstances, I saw nothing in Rule 2 or
5 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that indicated that
the application to amend the grounds in these circumstances had merit.  I
refused to admit the amended grounds."

Notwithstanding that decision, at the hearing for the remaking of the
appeal, Dr Chelvan again sought to persuade the Upper Tribunal to admit the
same ground.  This aspect of his submission was set out in paragraphs 30 to
45 of his skeleton argument dated 4 November 2020.

The core of this submission was the proposition that the application of
s.72 of the 2002 Act to the appellant's asylum claim before considering
whether he was a refugee was not compatible with EU law. The respondent and
First-tier Tribunal had erred in deciding the s.72 question before deciding
if the appellant was a refugee. In order to comply with EU law, therefore,
when remaking the appeal the Upper Tribunal was required to decide whether
the appellant was a refugee and only then proceed to decide if s.72
applied. In support of this proposition, Dr Chelvan relied on the joined
cases of C-391/16, C-77/17 and C-78/17 M v Ministerstvo vnitra and X and X
v Commissaire g�n�ral aux r�fugi�s et aux apatrides (X & X), decided by the
Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) on 14 May 2019.

Mr Clarke, for the respondent, maintained that the application to amend the
grounds did not have any legal basis. What the appellant was really seeking
to do was to find another route for going behind the findings of the First-
tier Tribunal on the s.72 certificate and behind the decision of the Upper
Tribunal not to vary the grounds of appeal challenging the First-tier
Tribunal decision and, ultimately, reopening the question of refugee
status. That was not permissible where those matters were settled.

I did not find that the application to widen the scope of the remaking of
the appeal should be granted for a number of reasons. Firstly, the
application had to fail where the case of X & X does not support the
proposition that deciding the s.72 certificate before making a substantive
decision on the asylum claim is incompatible with EU law. The question
before the CJEU in X & X was whether Articles 14(4) to 14 (6) of Directive
2011/95 complied with the provisions of the Geneva Convention on exclusion
from refugee status or a refusal to grant refugee status; see, for example,
paragraphs 1 and 58-59. The CJEU concluded that Directive 2011/95 did
comply with the Geneva Convention as it provided protection from refoulment
if refugee status was revoked or refused and, in that event, guaranteed the
rights required by the Geneva Convention; see paragraph 110.

The case of X & X does not address provisions at the national level for
revoking or refusing refugee status to the appellants in the cases under
consideration, one of whom (Case C-77/17), like the appellant here, was
refused asylum as a result of his criminal history. The case, therefore,
does not say anything on the compatibility of the s.72 process with EU law
(or the Geneva Convention). The appellant relied heavily on paragraph 110
of the decision in X & X in support of his argument but I do not read that
paragraph as setting down a requirement for a positive finding on refugee
status before revoking or refusing that status. If s.72 is applied an
individual is refused asylum but is still be able to access protection from
refoulment and a minimum level of rights. That is entirely in line with the
ratio of X & X in paragraph 110 and with the rest of the decision. As the
new ground did not have any arguable merit, that alone was sufficient to
indicate that the scope of the remaking of the appeal should not be
widened.

Secondly, it was argued for the appellant that if the ground was admitted
there was a serious possibility that the outcome of the s.72 assessment
would be different and that this added weight to the application to vary
the grounds. I did not agree. Nothing was provided for the appellant
capable of showing that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the s.72
certificate was in error or that the appellant could succeed on any basis
in rebutting the presumption that he was a danger to the community. The new
ground could not, therefore, lead to a different outcome. Dr Chelvan
maintained that the respondent's conduct in a judicial review
(CO/4600/2019) concerning the lawfulness of the appellant's detention
indicated that she had resiled from her position on the question of the
appellant being a danger to the community. The only document before the
Upper Tribunal was a consent order dated 28 October 2020. The consent order
said nothing on the respondent's view of whether the appellant was a
danger. Nothing could be inferred from it or from the settlement of the
judicial review by consent that had any materiality in this appeal.

Thirdly, the appellant also sought to argue that the new ground concerned
asylum and that this showed it to be "compelling" or "exceptional". This
was sufficient for the ground to be admitted even at this late stage in the
proceedings and where the remaking expressly concerned only Article 3 ECHR.
I did not accept those arguments had merit or that the extensive case law
referred to by both sides took the arguments for admitting or excluding the
new grounds beyond basic principles. As before, the point has not been
shown to have any legal merit. Nothing in the materials indicates that even
if applied there could be a different outcome for the appellant here. There
was no suggestion that this ground could not have been argued before the
First-tier Tribunal or included in the original grounds of appeal to the
Upper Tribunal on which permission was granted. No reason, let alone a good
reason, explained why that was so. There was no suggestion that the new
ground was Robinson obvious. It is therefore not the case that the new
ground can be said to be "compelling" or "exceptional" such that it should
be admitted now. It was not appropriate to admit the new ground and re-open
matters lawfully decided by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal
where that was so.

For all of these reasons, it was my conclusion that the appeal could be
determined fairly and justly without admitting the new ground.

Article 3 ECHR claim

The appellant's claim that he faces a risk on return to Jamaica on the
basis of his sexuality must be assessed in line with the test set by the
Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31. The
Supreme Court set out how the assessment that should be conducted in
paragraph 82:

         "The approach to be followed by tribunals

         82. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he would be treated as gay by potential persecutors in
         his country of nationality. If so, the tribunal must then ask
         itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence that gay
         people who lived openly would be liable to persecution in the
         applicant's country of nationality. If so, the tribunal must go on
         to consider what the individual applicant would do if he were
         returned to that country. If the applicant would in fact live
         openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of persecution, then
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid
         the risk by living "discreetly". If, on the other hand, the
         tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
         and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would
         do so. If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to
         live discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish
         to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to
         distress his parents or embarrass his friends, then his application
         should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do not amount to
         persecution and the Convention does not offer protection against
         them. Such a person has no well-founded fear of persecution
         because, for reasons that have nothing to do with any fear of
         persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which means
         that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.
         If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a material
         reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a
         fear of the persecution which would follow if he were to live
         openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal, his
         application should be accepted. Such a person has a well-founded
         fear of persecution. To reject his application on the ground that
         he could avoid the persecution by living discreetly would be to
         defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect - his
         right to live freely and openly as a gay man without fear of
         persecution. By admitting him to asylum and allowing him to live
         freely and openly as a gay man without fear of persecution, the
         receiving state gives effect to that right by affording the
         applicant a surrogate for the protection from persecution which his
         country of nationality should have afforded him."

The respondent in this case concedes that the appellant is gay and that he
would face a risk of mistreatment if he were to live openly as a gay man in
Jamaica, answering the first two questions of the HJ (Iran) test in the
appellant's favour. The questions that remain to be answered are,
therefore, what the appellant would do if he returns to Jamaica and, if he
would act discretely, why he would do so. Assessing whether someone would
act discretely and the mental state leading to that behaviour requires
careful consideration, particularly in the context of what the respondent
concedes are difficult circumstances for gay men in Jamaica. Although it
has become a somewhat overused phrase, the potential for serious harm for a
gay man in Jamaica shown in the country evidence calls for all aspects of
the assessment to be conducted with anxious scrutiny.

I have also referred to the guidance in Devaseelan (Second Appeals, ECHR,
Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702 as there are
previous Tribunal decisions which address the appellant's claim. Those
decisions are the starting point for my assessment.

In the decision dated 18 October 2006, the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
found as follows in paragraph 55:

         "55. I conclude from all the evidence  available  to  me  that  the
             Appellant may have  suffered  some  difficulties  due  to  his
             sexuality but that this has not in any way  amounted  to  ill-
             treatment to amount to persecution and I conclude from all the
             evidence that the Appellant has stated about his being able to
             travel around areas in Jamaica, albeit  that  it  is  a  small
             country, he can do so as  he  has  done  so  in  the  past,  I
             therefore cannot conclude that there is a real risk  that  the
             Appellant would suffer ill-treatment to amount to  persecution
             were he to be returned. I therefore cannot conclude that there
             is a real risk that the Appellant would  suffer  ill-treatment
             to amount to persecution were he to be returned.  I  set  that
             against the background evidence to which I have been  referred
             and the case of DW. Whilst the Appellant may attempt to assert
             that he would be readily identifiable as a  gay  man,  clearly
             that was not the case as he was able to  maintain  employment,
             as referred to above, and move around the country although  in
             the latter connection it is acknowledged that he states he was
             quantified as being gay whilst on one journey.  The  level  of
             risk did not reach the  relevant  threshold  for  persecution,
             notwithstanding the objective evidence.   Too,  the  Appellant
             left Jamaica to travel for a holiday to the USA,  this  is  in
             1999 and he stated that he hoped that sometime away  from  the
             situation might make things easier for him. At the end of  the
             holiday he returned to Jamaica, he states that had he met some
             gay friends he might have tried to stay in the USA but he  was
             staying in a hotel by himself and did  not  meet  anyone.  The
             Appellant is an  intelligent  man,  he  is  studying  an  Open
             University degree in mathematics, by 1999,  according  to  his
             own evidence he had been made very well aware of the situation
             in Jamaica, I do not accept that if he were as concerned about
             his situation in Jamaica as he  claimed  that  he  would  have
             returned to Jamaica after his US holiday.  I do  not  consider
             that his  explanation  that  he  had  not  met  anyone  was  a
             reasonable  one  to  explain  his   return   to   his   stated
             difficulties."

The appellant's asylum claim was refused again in a decision of the AIT
dated 4 September 2009. The panel made the following findings:

         "15. The appellant's evidence both  from  his  statement  and  oral
             evidence given to the Tribunal in October 2006 was accepted to
             the extent that he is a homosexual man, and that at  least  on
             one occasion in 1996 he was deliberately cut across the  face,
             as well as having been threatened on occasions.  The appellant
             became a practising homosexual man in Jamaica.  He was able to
             find  employment  in  Jamaica,  and  kept  the  issue  of  his
             sexuality private at work, as did his  partner  Patrick.   The
             appellant suffered some difficulties due to his  sexuality  in
             Jamaica, although he was able to travel  within  Jamaica,  and
             the difficulties he did suffer were  not  considered  to  have
             amounted to persecution.  The discrimination or harassment the
             appellant encountered in Jamaica did not develop into  serious
             violence.  The appellant gave brief evidence  in  March  2008.
             He said he had continued having  homosexual  relationships  in
             the UK, and has also had sex for money.  He said  [sic]  would
             not modify his sexual behaviour if he was returned to Jamaica,
             because he could not change.  At that time he  was  not  in  a
             long term relationship,  and  he  told  the  Tribunal  he  had
             previous sexual relationships  in  Jamaica.   We  accept  that
             evidence on the whole, subject to our  findings  below  as  to
             whether the appellant would modify his behaviour on return  to
             Jamaica, and  the  findings  made  by  previous  Tribunals  in
             relation to the appellant's evidence".

The AIT went on to find in paragraphs 18 to 20:

         "18. ... We find the appellant was not open about his sexuality  in
             Jamaica, and met his friends in  private.   However  when  the
             appellant was a young man, before he left school, he  was  cut
             across the face by a bus conductor because the  appellant  was
             perceived to be gay, and the conductor did not want a gay  man
             travelling on his bus.  We were  shown  a  photograph  of  the
             scar, and we accept this incident did take place.  In 1998 the
             appellant was kicked  and  threatened,  and  in  1999  he  was
             threatened with a gun together with his partner Patrick.   The
             appellant was  usually  careful  in  meeting  his  friends  in
             private and not disclosing his homosexuality,  even  at  work.
             The appellant is an educated intelligent man.  However,  since
             he has been in the United Kingdom,  albeit  he  has  served  a
             prison sentence, the appellant has become more open about  his
             sexuality,  and  has  engaged  in  short  term  casual  sexual
             relationships, as well as having sex for money.  The appellant
             has asserted he cannot change his behaviour,  although  we  do
             not accept he would put himself at risk on return to  Jamaica,
             particularly given he was so careful before he left  in  2000.
             We are not concerned with the appellant's demeanour,  although
             we have been shown no evidence to suggest his behaviour is out
             of the ordinary or remarkable.  The real issue in this  appeal
             is whether the appellant would now be identified  as  being  a
             homosexual man on return to Jamaica,  and  whether  indeed  he
             would behave  as  he  has  asserted.   We  bear  in  mind  the
             appellant left Jamaica nine years ago.

         19.  The appellant has asserted he would not modify  his  behaviour
             on return to  Jamaica.   We  do  not  accept  that  assertion;
             particularly  given  our  concerns  as  to   the   appellant's
             credibility on this crucial issue  which  we  must  take  into
             account  pursuant  to  Section  8   Asylum   and   Immigration
             (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004.  We take into account  that
             the appellant did not make a claim for asylum when he came  to
             the United Kingdom as a visitor; although we are  quite  clear
             he had no intention to return to Jamaica at that  stage.   The
             appellant only made an asylum claim after he had been arrested
             and was detained.   In  addition  the  appellant  contested  a
             serious allegation that he was in possession  of  heroin  with
             intent to supply for financial gain.  The appellant was  found
             guilty after a trial.  The appellant's behaviour in contesting
             such a serious allegation and being found guilty was likely to
             mislead and was dishonest.   We  have  noted  that  the  Judge
             sentencing the appellant remarked that the appellant had  been
             driving without a licence or insured, his speed has been about
             90 miles an hour, and his driving had been erratic.   We  find
             that, contrary to his assertions, the appellant would be  very
             careful to maintain a private and discreet life in relation to
             his homosexuality on return to Jamaica.  We base  our  finding
             not only on the fact that we do not accept the appellant would
             continue to behave in the way he has done since he has been in
             the United Kingdom, but also  given  the  appellant  was  very
             careful not to disclose his homosexuality  when  he  lived  in
             Jamaica prior to 2000 when he came to the United Kingdom."

The appellant submits that his accepted history and the country evidence
shows that he will face inhuman and degrading treatment on return to
Jamaica. It was common ground that three particular incidents of
mistreatment had occurred whilst he was living in Jamaica, as found by the
AIT panels in 2006 and 2009. In 1996 he was cut across his face by a bus
conductor who identified him as a gay man. In December 1998 he was kicked
when collecting water. In May 1999, he and his partner were threatened with
a gun. There were other instances of verbal harassment and stone-throwing.
The appellant maintains that he would be likely to face similar, if not
worse, mistreatment on return. The country evidence continued to show that
societal hostility towards gay men in Jamaica remained high, that the
authorities did not offer sufficient protection and that government
initiatives to change attitudes and increase protection had not been
successful. The appellant did not want to have to be discrete and did not
consider that it would be possible to be discrete so as to avoid harm as
this had not proved possible in the past. Even if he did act discretely,
this would be out of fear of serious harm. He therefore met the test set by
HJ (Iran).

There are a number of reasons why I do not find the appellant's claim is
made out. Firstly, the findings of both of the previous Tribunals were that
when he lived in Jamaica he conformed sufficiently to social norms so as to
avoid serious harm whilst still being able to have gay relationships and
friends. His discretion was such that he was able to continue living with
his family who knew he was gay and working even after choosing to tell one
colleague about his sexuality. The panel in 2006 concluded that his claim
to be "readily identifiable" as a gay man was not credible. The panel in
2009 was very clear that he would modify his behaviour on return as he had
done in the past; see paragraph 19 of that decision, set out above.
Considering those findings against the materials as a whole and in light of
the matters set out below, in my judgment the evidence does not provide a
basis for distinguishing those findings.

Secondly, and again as found by the earlier Tribunals, the appellant's
decision to return after having had the opportunity to apply for asylum in
the USA in 1999 does not indicate that he had a subjective fear of harm or
of being unable to live a life he found tolerable in Jamaica or that he
left Jamaica for the UK for reasons arising from his sexuality. The
decision to claim asylum in the UK only after failing to obtain further
leave and after being arrested and detained also supports the conclusion
that he was able to live a discrete life which he found tolerable in the
past and did not leave Jamaica because he was gay and could not live the
life he wanted or was afraid of serious harm. As before, his evidence
before the AIT was that he had told members of his family about his
sexuality and had been able to carry on living with them, that he had been
able to relocate to live with an uncle in a more affluent area and that he
had been able to work.

Thirdly, nothing in the appellant's evidence from 2009 onwards suggests
that he has sought to live a gay life in the UK or expressed his sexuality
in a way that might lead to him being identified as gay on return to
Jamaica. It was not submitted on his behalf that anything prevented him
from behaving as he wished in the UK. This added to his profile of someone
who had behaved discretely in the past and could be expected to do so again
in the future.

Fourthly, the appellant's case was seriously undermined where he has shown
himself to be a profoundly untruthful witness concerning his history in
Jamaica, his unwillingness to be discrete on return now and the he gave
reasons for that. As set out above, in the appellant's evidence in the
appeals in 2006 and 2009 he referred to having relationships, meeting up
with gay friends, telling family members about his sexuality, continuing to
live with relatives and being able to work.  That account is very
significantly at odds with his evidence in a witness statement dated 1 July
2019 prepared for the most recent proceedings before the First-tier
Tribunal which gave a wholly different account of his time in Jamaica:

         "10. When I  lived  in  Jamaica  before,  I  hated  my  life  there
             completely.  I was not free to express my sexuality.  I  could
             not form relationships nor associate myself with people of  my
             same sex identity.  I lived in constant fear of my  life  from
             the State and Jamaican people.

         11.  I could not turn to my close family and friends  because  they
             support violence against homosexuality.  I hated to be  around
             my   family   and   friends   because   their   hostility   to
             homosexuality.  I always felt  demeaned  at  their  views  and
             comments about homosexuality.  As a result, I could  not  talk
             to them or anyone about my sexuality.   I  lived  my  life  in
             complete isolation and secrecy of my identity."

    The witness statement set out similar statements in paragraphs 12 to 21
    to the effect that the appellant had completely hidden  his  sexuality,
    had not had relationships  and  that  his  life  in  Jamaica  had  been
    intolerable as a result and that he had left  the  country  because  he
    could no longer tolerate living discretely.

The difference between this witness statement and the evidence in the
earlier appeals before the AIT is stark. There was no explanation in the
witness statement as to why the appellant's evidence before the AIT was
entirely different. My conclusion is that the witness statement dated 1
July 2019 contains a deliberate and false attempt to come within the ratio
of HJ (Iran) by asserting that because of a fear of harm the appellant was
forced to live an entirely discrete life in Jamaica and had come to the UK
to escape what he found to be an intolerable life in Jamaica. The appellant
has thereby shown himself willing to lie in order to try to avoid
deportation and to have acted in a profoundly cynical manner in these
proceedings. This significantly undermines his claim to be unwilling or
unable to live discretely on return now

Fifthly, I am supported in the conclusion that the appellant is an
untruthful and unreliable witness by other aspects of the witness statement
dated 1 July 2019.  In paragraphs 23 to 34 of the statement the appellant
maintained, for the first time, that he was a victim of modern slavery in
the UK, having been exploited and controlled by drug gangs and submitted
that he was at risk of further harm on that basis in the UK and in Jamaica.
Again, other than referring to having been able to "seek advice" by that
time, there is no explanation as to why the appellant raised such a
significant matter for the first time in this witness statement and made no
mention of it even in the Preliminary Information Questionnaire dated 17
December 2018 and further submissions dated 25 February 2019, the latter
drafted by legal representatives. The claim to have been a victim of drug
gangs is wholly at odds with the appellant's two convictions for serious
drugs offences. The sentencing remarks from his conviction in 2004 are
summarised in paragraph 30 of the decision of the AIT dated 18 October
2006.  The appellant was found to be "close to the top of the chain of
distribution". The sentencing remarks from 2016 indicate he "played a
leading role". He has been found by the criminal courts to be the opposite
of someone exploited and controlled by drug gangs. The National Referral
Mechanism (NRM) found, unsurprisingly, in a decision dated 29 August 2019
that the appellant was not a victim of modern slavery.  First-tier Tribunal
Judge Swinnerton addressed this new claim in paragraph 19 of her decision
dated 18 September 2019. She noted, correctly, that the appellant did not
refer to being a victim of drug gangs at any time prior to July 2019. She
concluded that the appellant's evidence on this matter was not credible and
represented "a last-ditch attempt to avoid deportation". I agree with that
conclusion and find that this aspect of the appellant's evidence increases
his profile as an untruthful and cynical witness.

My conclusion is, therefore, that the appellant has not shown that he will
face inhuman and degrading treatment on return to Jamaica. His profile is
that of someone who chose to live a discrete gay life in Jamaica previously
and that he did so in a manner that he found tolerable. He was able to
remain living with relatives, his evidence identifying the home of his
uncle as somewhere more settled that he could go to if he wished. He has
not shown that his decision to leave Jamaica was connected with his profile
as a gay man. Nothing in the evidence indicates that his behaviour in the
UK over the last ten years has been such that he would need to alter his
behaviour on return in order to avoid identification as a gay man. His
claim to be unable to act discretely or unwilling to do so out of a fear of
harm rather than because, following HJ (Iran) "that was how he himself
would wish to live" is not credible.

For completeness sake, I will deal with the submission made for the
appellant that the respondent made a concession on page 7 of the refusal
letter dated 15 May 2019 to the effect that it was accepted that the
appellant would live as an openly gay man on return to Jamaica. It was not
my view that this part of the refusal letter amounted to a concession, or
that, even if it did, that the respondent was bound by it before me. None
of the appellant's accounts refer to him intending to live as an openly gay
man on return to Jamaica. The statement on page 7 of the refusal letter
appears, therefore, to be misconceived rather than a concession with legal
force. In any event, the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal, quite
properly, clearly did not proceed on that basis and could not have done so
given that the appellant's claim whether past or present was otherwise, his
most recent claim being that in the witness statement of 1 July 2019.

For all of these reasons I did not find that the appellant showed that he
would be at a real risk of serious harm on return to Jamaica on the basis
of his sexuality.

Notice of Decision

The appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds is refused.


Signed: S Pitt                                        Date: 9 February  2021


Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





