
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05980/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2020                       |On 19 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     BB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    M. Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On 29 April 2020 Directions were sent to the parties giving my
       provisional view that because of the present need to take precautions
       against the spread of Covid-19 the appeal should be adjourned until
       such time as a hearing in person could practically take place. The
       parties were invited to express a view on this.

    2. On 11 May the appellant notified the Tribunal that her preference was
       for a decision to be made without a hearing.

    3. On 21 May 2020 the respondent submitted a brief skeleton argument in
       which she accepted that the judge materially erred. In the light of
       this concession, I have proceeded to make a decision without a
       hearing.

    4. The appellant is appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Safer ("the judge") promulgated on 29 November 2019
       dismissing her protection and human rights claim.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
       that the judge failed to conduct an adequate assessment of the best
       interests of the appellant's children and failed to deal with her
       potential suicide risk.

    6. As noted above, on 21 May 2020 the respondent submitted a brief
       skeleton argument in which she accepted that the judge materially
       erred. The respondent did not specify the error or errors that she
       accepted were contained within the decision.

    7. In the light of the respondent's broad concession, I set aside the
       decision, with no finding preserved, on the basis that both parties
       are in agreement that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       involved the making of an error on a point of law and that the error
       was material to the outcome.

    8. The remaking of the decision will require, in particular, careful
       consideration of the position of the appellant's children (the eldest
       of whom has now been in the UK for over 7 years) as well as the
       appellant's mental health. Having regard to the nature and extent of
       judicial fact finding that will be necessary for the decision to be
       remade, I have decided, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior
       President's Practice Statement, that the appeal will be remitted to
       the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

  Decision

    9. The respondent conceded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       involved the making of a material error on a point of law. The
       decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier
       Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different judge.

  Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
  Tribunal) Rules 2008

   10. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
       is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
       or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
       direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings.

|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Daniel Sheridan                     |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated:  5 June 2020                 |






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
