
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/05109/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 December 2018                      |On 30th January 2019               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   MR D O
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iran and is a Sunni Kurd, born on
11.2.99. He arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 2.3.16.
This application was refused in a decision dated 4.4.18 and his appeal
against this decision came before First tier Tribunal Fox for hearing on
23.7.18. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 19.9.18, he dismissed the
appeal.
2. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time, on the basis that the Judge erred materially in law: (i) in his
erroneous approach to expert evidence; (ii) in having regard to
irrelevancies; (iii) in failing to have regard to relevancies and give
reasons; (iv) in unlawfully relying on plausibility and making findings
based on no evidence and (v) in having regard to irrelevancies.

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First tier
Tribunal Robertson in a decision dated 31.10.18 on the basis that:

    "There is some arguable merit in ground 2, para 11 because it is not
    identified by the judge when the Appellant's previous account was
    given. There is also some arguable merit in ground 3 because the Judge
    does not in fact give any reasons for rejecting the explanations
    offered by the Appellant for gaps in his knowledge; it may well be
    because although the Appellant was a minor, he was not a young child
    and therefore could have been expected to know more. However, no
    reasons were given by the Judge. There is also some arguable merit in
    the grounds at para 4 because the context of the arrest does not appear
    to have been considered.


    However, there is little arguable merit in the other grounds
    ...However, as permission has been granted, all grounds are arguable."

Hearing

4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Fitszimons submitted in
respect of Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal, that the Appellant is a
former unaccompanied asylum seeking child, whose father was a Kurdish
smuggler. At [50] the Judge found that the expert report did not engage
with whether the investigation into smuggling was legitimate, but this is
not the point, but rather if a person is investigated as a suspected
smuggler, the issue is that they are perceived to be opposed to the regime,
given that these are predominantly Kurdish separatists: AB 12 and AB 16
refers, which is the expert evidence from Dr Kakhki. The expert also deals
with this as part of imputed political opinion. In finding at [54] that the
Appellant's account conflicts with a previous account, the Judge does not
state where this previous account is from and this is erroneous when the
Appellant has always given the same account: see asylum interview at Q's 77-
79. The Appellant's account is that his uncle has told him that his father
had been arrested. Thus [54] is without foundation and it is unclear what
previous account the Judge is referring to there and thus the Judge has had
regard to material irrelevancies.

5. In respect of Ground 3, it is material that the Appellant was a child
witness at the time of his interview, however, the Judge does not accept
gaps in his knowledge: see [53] and [66]. The Appellant's account is set
out in his witness statement at [3] page 2 where he explained he did not
ask his father about the specifics because they had a very formal
relationship and it would be contrary to cultural norms. The Judge was
directed to UNHCR and the policy on interviewing children. The Judge does
not give any reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account and in light of
AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123
and the guidance in respect of children, it was incumbent upon him to at
least engage with this given the Appellant was at the material time, a
child.

6. In respect of Ground 4 of the grounds of appeal, the Judge unlawfully
relied on plausibility and made his findings without any evidential basis.
At [49] the Judge makes a finding that the Appellant's maternal uncle would
not be arrested, however, this was not a point taken by the Respondent in
the refusal decision. Thus the expert cannot reasonably be expected to deal
with it: the expert did deal with the family arrest policy but not the
maternal uncle (check expert evidence on this). The Appellant left very
soon thereafter and is no longer in touch with his family. There is no
suggestion of an intelligence led operation, contrary to caselaw cf HK
[2006] EWCA Civ 1037.
It was submitted that it was not reasonably open to the Judge to make
findings as to what was in the mind of the Iranian authorities at the time.

7. In respect of Grounds 1 and 5 of the grounds of appeal, no express
permission has been granted. However, for the sake of completeness, Ms
Fitzsimons submitted that Ground 1 is a challenge to the fact that at [47]
JL China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC) was applied in relation to Dr Kahkhi's
report dated 25.3.18, but it is not clear what the Judge means by this. At
[49] the expert report is criticized, however, the purpose of the report
was to give an objective context to the evidence, particularly given that
the Appellant is a child. She submitted that the Judge has approached this
from the wrong angle, in that expert reports are not supposed to comment on
credibility. Dr Kakhki was the expert in SSH CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). In
respect of Ground 5, the document before the Judge was a transcription of
the interview by the Appellant's solicitors. The point is that it was not
the Appellant who gave the date in the Gregorian calendar but the
interpreter as the Appellant can only give approximate dates.

8. In her submissions, Ms Pal asked for a finding that the Judge made
adequate findings of fact and gave adequate reasons. At [66] he properly
applied the correct burden of proof. She submitted that the Judge properly
engaged with the expert's report and took into account the Appellant's own
evidence in respect of circumstances regarding his father being a smuggler:
see [53] through to [56]. She submitted that the Judge had properly
assessed the core of the Appellant's claim taking into account Dr Kakhki's
expert evidence. The Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant is not
credible, for the reasons given in his decision. Ms Pal submitted that
there was no material error of law in the decision and the findings of the
Judge should stand.

9. In reply, Ms Fitzsimons submitted that the Appellant's account is that
his uncle told him his father had been arrested. At the time of events the
Appellant was 15 or 16 and reliant on adults around him to give him a
context. She submitted that the expert report is important for this reason.
Ms Fitzsimons submitted that the Judge should have done more as per grounds
2-4 and that the findings at [54]-[56] were vitiated by error.

10. I reserved my decision in order to read the expert report of Dr Kakhki.

Findings and reasons

11. It is asserted in Grounds 2-4 of the grounds of appeal that the Judge
made a number of factual errors in his decision and reasons; failed to take
account of material considerations; failed to give proper or adequate
reasons and made findings absent any evidential basis viz

    (i) at [50] in concluding that there is no suggestion that the
    Appellant or his father would be the subject of false allegations by
    the Iranian authorities, when the expert evidence states that smugglers
    and their family members are at risk of false allegations by the
    Iranian authorities, including false allegations of involvement with
    Kurdish political group and are at risk of serious harm;


    (ii) at [54] in concluding that [8] of the Appellant's witness
    statement conflicts with a previous account made by the Appellant, when
    no previous account is identified and the Appellant's witness statement
    was submitted with his SEF and thus there is no previous account as
    such;


    (iii) at [53] and [56] in relying upon gaps in the Appellant's
    knowledge as undermining his credibility without having regard to or
    engaging with the Appellant's explanations, which was clearly material
    to any assessment of credibility particularly given that the Appellant
    was a minor;


    (iv) at [49] in suggesting that it is implausible that the Appellant's
    uncle was not also arrested and criticizing the expert for not
    addressing this in his report, the Judge failed to have regard to the
    expert's evidence and the fact that the Appellant left Iran very
    shortly after the relevant events and has had no contact with his
    maternal uncle since, such that he does not know whether or not he
    remains at liberty;


    (v) in finding at [55]-[56] that it was not plausible that the
    authorities would pursue a suspected smuggler at an unknown location
    but make no attempt to inspect his retail premises, the Judge assumed
    without evidence that his arrest resulted from an intelligence led
    operation rather than an encounter on the border during a smuggling
    operation and assumes without evidence that, having arrested the
    Appellant's father and visited his home it was an operational priority
    to search his business premises at the same time.

12.Whilst permission was neither granted nor refused in respect of Ground 1
 - erroneous approach to the expert evidence and Ground 5 - erroneously
having regard to irrelevancies (the incorrect conversion of the Gregorian
calendar rather than the quality of interpretation) I consider that these
arguments are of a part with grounds 2 to 4.

13.  I have concluded that the grounds of appeal do raise errors of law in
the decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge with the effect that, when
considered cumulatively, the decision is unsafe. Whilst the issues raised
in Grounds 2-4 are relatively minor points, when considered alongside the
challenge to the safety of the Judge's approach to the expert evidence of
Dr Kakhi, at [48] criticising him for not entering into an assessment of
the Appellant's credibility, I have concluded that the Judge's approach to
the case as a whole contained material errors of law, particularly bearing
in mind that the Appellant was a minor when he arrived in the UK and
claimed asylum.

14. I am also mindful of the fact that since the promulgation of the
Judge's decision and reasons, the Upper Tribunal have issued further
country guidance viz HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC),
promulgated on 20.12.18, where the Upper Tribunal found, inter alia that
Kurdish ethnicity was Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor
which, when combined with other factors, may create a real risk of
persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. The Appellant's claim will
therefore need to be assessed in light of this decision.

Decision

15. I find material errors of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal
Judge Fox. I set that decision aside and remit the appeal for a hearing de
novo before a different Judge of the First tier Tribunal.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

17 January 2019

