
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05722/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Under Rule 34                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2020                           |On 21 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This is a paper  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was P (paper determination that is  not
provisional). A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
practicable, and all issues could be determined on paper.

The documents that I was referred to are in the  bundles  of  the  appellant
and respondent from before the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds  of  appeal,
and the respondent's written submissions dated 3 August 2020,  the  contents
of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. On 12 October 2020, I promulgated a "tentative"  decision,  within  the
    framework established by  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  Pilot
    Practice Direction: Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal dated 19 March 2020.  The tentative decision may
    be found in the Annex to this decision.

 2. The tentative decision set out my provisional views that a decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jepson  promulgated  on  7  February  2020
    dismissing an appeal brought by OA against a decision of the respondent
    dated 24 February 2019 to refuse his fresh claim  for  asylum  involved
    the making of an error of law, that the decision should be  set  aside,
    and that the decision should be remitted to the first-tier Tribunal  to
    be heard by a different judge with no findings of fact preserved.

 3. For the reasons set out in my tentative decision, I gave the parties 14
    days to make  submissions  concerning  the  above  proposed  course  of
    action.

 4. By 14 December 2020, neither party had responded.

 5. In considering whether to finalise  my  provisional  view  as  set  out
    above, I have considered the judgment of Fordham J in Joint Council for
    the  Welfare  of  Immigrants  v  President  of   the   Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin).   I  do  not
    consider any of the findings of the High Court in those proceedings  to
    militate in favour of a different approach.  Both parties have had  the
    opportunity to make submissions as to whether remitting the case to the
    First-tier Tribunal would be  inappropriate.   Neither  has  chosen  to
    avail  themselves  of  that  opportunity.   By  resolving  these  Upper
    Tribunal proceedings in the manner proposed, the appellant will enjoy a
    full, substantive re-hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  A hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal would be unnecessary and inject further delay  to
    the proceedings,  which  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  overriding
    objective.

Discussion

 6. For the reasons set out in my tentative decision, I find that that  the
    decision of Judge Jepson involved the making of an  error  of  law  and
    must be set aside with no findings of  fact  preserved.   As  extensive
    findings of fact are required, I remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard by a different judge, with no findings  of  fact
    preserved.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Jepson involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside.

The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge, with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Stephen H Smith             Date 14 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
ANNEX - PROVISIONAL DECISION


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05722/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Provisionally determined under rule 34        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2020                             |12 October 2020               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (T)

This is a paper  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.   The  form  of  paper  determination  was  T  (triage  provisional
decision). A  face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
practicable, and all issues could be determined on paper.

The documents that I was referred to are in the  bundles  of  the  appellant
and respondent from before the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds  of  appeal,
and the respondent's written submissions dated 3 August 2020,  the  contents
of which I have recorded.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


 7. The parties in this matter were originally invited to make  submissions
    on whether it would be appropriate to conduct a remote hearing in order
    to determine whether the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law and, if so,  whether  it  should  be  set
    aside. In light of what appears to be a concession by the respondent in
    her submissions made in response to those directions that the  decision
    did involve the making of an error of law, and that the  matter  should
    so be remitted, I have decided that it would  be  consistent  with  the
    overriding objective to set out my preliminary  view  as  to  how  this
    matter should be resolved without the need for a hearing in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 8. The parties will have 14 days upon being sent this decision  to  object
    to the appeal being allowed and the matter remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   In  the  event  there  are  no  further  submissions,  this
    provisional decision shall stand, with the effect that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal will be set aside  with  no  findings  of  fact
    preserved, and the matter shall be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard afresh.

The decision under appeal

 9. In a decision promulgated on 7 February 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Jepson dismissed an appeal brought by  the  appellant,  OA,  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 24 May 2019 to refuse his fresh  claim
    for asylum. The Secretary of State's decision was taken in response  to
    further submissions made by the appellant on 3 April 2019 and  8  April
    2019, following the dismissal of his appeal against an earlier decision
    to refuse his asylum claim, by Judge Meyler, in a decision  promulgated
    on 20 March 2017.  OA now appeals against the decision of Judge Jepson.

10. OA claims to be a citizen of Eritrea. The respondent  does  not  accept
    his claimed Eritrean nationality, and his  nationality  was  a  central
    issue in the appeal before Judge Jepson. The further  submissions  made
    by the appellant featured a range of materials upon  which  he  invited
    the Secretary of State to take a  fresh  decision  in  his  favour.  In
    accepting his appeal to be a  fresh  claim,  the  Secretary  of  State,
    applying paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules,  must  have  accepted
    that the new materials provided by the  appellant  were  "significantly
    different" from those previously considered  by  her,  such  that  they
    could be said to provide a  realistic  prospect  of  success  before  a
    different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In dismissing the appeal, Judge Jepson considered the reasons given  by
    Judge Meyler for dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  in  2017.  Judge
    Jepson considered the guidance contained in Devaseelan (Second  Appeals
    - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri  Lanka  *  [2002]  UKIAT  00702,
    addressing the extent to which materials and evidence personal  to  the
    appellant could and should have been made available  to  Judge  Meyler.
    He noted  the  "circumspection"  with  which  judges  are  to  approach
    evidence concerning facts  personal  to  an  appellant  that  were  not
    brought to the attention of the previous judge, finding that there were
    no good reasons for the appellant not to have relied on many of the new
    materials before Judge Meyler.

12. For example, following the appeal before Judge Meyler, it appears  that
    the appellant managed to make contact with his mother, who is  said  to
    be in Eritrea, in order to obtain further details from  her  concerning
    his claimed Eritrean nationality. This was in  the  form  of  a  formal
    teleconference with her which appears to have been facilitated  by  the
    Red Cross, on 12 December 2018.  The  teleconference  revealed  to  the
    appellant, for the first time, that he was born in Eritrea; until then,
    he thought he had been born in Sudan.  The  judge  was  concerned  that
    making enquiries, "would have  been  an  obvious  evidential  route  to
    explore." At [50], the judge noted that an identity card  "relating  to
    the mother" was  issued  in  2014,  and  would,  therefore,  have  been
    available for the proceedings  before  Judge  Meyler.  A  Mr  Abdullah,
    chairperson  of  the  Eritrean  Community  Centre  in  Leicester,  gave
    evidence on behalf of the appellant, stating that he considered him  to
    be Eritrean. Judge Jepson was concerned  that  Mr  Abdullah's  evidence
    should have been made available to Judge Meyler at the hearing in 2017,
    given Mr Abdullah's statement recorded that he and  the  appellant  had
    met in 2015. Similarly, at [51], an expert report by a Dr Bekalo  could
    and should have been made available at the earlier hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, found the judge.

13. This led the  judge  to  make  the  following  findings,  which  it  is
    necessary to quote at length:

           "[53] All of this means that the appeal here simply does not get
           past the first step. I am bound as a matter of law to accept the
           findings of IJ Meyler as the underlying factual matrix  in  this
           case. The learned judge simply did not find  the  appellant  has
           [sic]  established,  even  to  the  lower  standard,  that   the
           appellant is Eritrean.

           [54] Given I have found there is nothing here of substance which
           could not have been put before Judge Meyler,  this  appeal  must
           necessarily fail.

           [55] That means all aspects  of  the  appeal  are  unsuccessful.
           Because I have ruled there is nothing here that can properly  be
           considered new evidence  via  the  guidance  in  Devaseelan,  it
           logically follows [that] both the protection  and  human  rights
           aspects of the case fail at the very first hurdle.

           [56] As a final point, even had I found some (or  even  all)  of
           that submitted to be new evidence which could be  considered,  I
           am  firmly  of  the  view  that  there  would  be   insufficient
           [evidence] here to  establish  a  successful  protection  claim.
           Without rehearsing matters in too much detail, there are  simply
           too many discrepancies. Examples include  Mr  [E]  thinking  the
           appellant was married in 2012 (and then partially  recanting  in
           his later statement)  and  the  bizarre  situation  whereby  the
           mother (who is said to have sent one of the ID cards)  does  not
           seem to know the sender (a person described by the appellant  as
           his  cousin.)  Given  the  factual  background  for   both   the
           asylum/humanitarian and human rights aspects is the  same,  this
           means the latter must also necessarily fail.

           [57] I could go on at length, but the  reality  is  even  I  had
           [sic] been persuaded there was new  evidence  in  this  case,  I
           simply do not believe that which has [sic] put  before  me.  All
           that fatally undercuts the objective evidence from Dr Bekalo  to
           the extent that any positive impact it  could  conceivably  have
           had on the appellant's case is largely washed away.

           [58] Due to my overall finding, I have not turned my mind in any
           great detail to the question of whether the  documents  produced
           (such as the identification card) are genuine or not. I will say
           in passing [that] there seem to be  a  number  of  discrepancies
           when comparing names put forward at various junctures."

14. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    the basis that it was arguable that, while Judge Jepson was entitled to
    take Judge Meyler's approach as his  starting  point,  he  should  have
    considered the additional evidence, and that his failure to do  so  was
    an arguable error of law but for which the outcome of the appeal  might
    have been different.

Form of consideration

15. On 20 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith  gave  directions  in  this
    matter stating that it was  her  provisional  view  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine whether the decision of Judge Jepson  involved
    the making of an error of law and, if so,  whether  it  should  be  set
    aside, by means of a remote hearing. Judge Smith gave directions for an
    exchange of submissions  on  those  points.  At  paragraph  6(ii),  the
    parties were encouraged to discuss the case with  a  view  to  reaching
    agreement as to whether the decision of the judge involved  the  making
    of an error of law.

16. In the spirit of paragraph 6(ii), on 3 August 2020, a Senior Presenting
    Officer of the respondent's Specialist Appeals Team made the  following
    observations:

           "In response to the specific grounds of appeal,  the  respondent
           submits that it would appear that these have been  made  out  in
           that the FTT judge did not fully assess the additional  evidence
           included  with  the  further  representations  and  concentrated
           largely on the timing of its production."

           "With regard to disposal [,] the respondent submits that this is
           a case where credibility  findings  on  the  appellant  and  his
           witness(es) are required and that it would be a suitable case to
           be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing."

17. The respondent did not object to a remote hearing in any event.

18. On 18 September 2020, those representing the  appellant  wrote  to  the
    tribunal in these terms:

           "We note that the respondent's  position,  as  set  out  in  the
           correspondence dated 3 August 2020, appears to accept  that  the
           first-tier Tribunal decision contains an error of law, and  that
           the case should be remitted for a rehearing  to  the  first-tier
           Tribunal.

           We are writing to ask whether, in the  circumstances,  the  case
           will proceed to an [error  of  law]  hearing?  And  whether  you
           require us to provide a skeleton argument?"

19. It is against that background that the matter was placed before me  for
    consideration of whether a remote hearing would be required, or whether
    the matter could be determined on the papers.





Discussion

20. What follows is my  provisional  view  in  light  of  the  respondent's
    concession.  Given the  parties  were  only  invited  to  make  written
    submissions concerning  the  appropriateness  of  conducting  a  remote
    hearing, rather than having the matter  determined  on  the  papers,  I
    consider that it is necessary specifically to  afford  the  parties  to
    address the Tribunal on this point.  Accordingly, as I set  out  below,
    this decision will be circulated to the parties for further submissions
    on my provisional conclusions, within 14 days.  In the  event  that  14
    days pass with no submissions to  the  contrary,  the  appeal  will  be
    allowed, and this tentative decision will stand as the Upper Tribunal's
    final decision, with a  corresponding  modification  to  Judge  Smith's
    directions to the effect that the appellant no longer  need  provide  a
    skeleton argument.

21. Turning to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, while the judge did
    conduct detailed analysis of some of the  new  materials,  he  did  not
    consider the entirety of the evidence relied upon by the appellant,  in
    the round. While the judge was right to recognise that  Judge  Meyler's
    decision was his starting point, it was not, by definition, capable  of
    amounting to his finishing point. Still less was it appropriate for the
    judge to decline  to  engage  with  the  new  evidence  that  had  been
    submitted. It is necessary for judges to analyse the  entirety  of  the
    evidence in a case, in the round. While it may have followed  that  the
    judge was entitled to approach some  of  the  new  evidence  with  "the
    greatest of circumspection" (to adopt the  terminology  of  the  fourth
    Devaseelan guideline), the fact  that  some  evidence  fell  into  that
    category  did  not  abrogate  the  judge  from  the  responsibility  of
    considering the entirety of the  evidence  in  the  case.  It  follows,
    therefore, that the respondent was correct to concede  that  the  judge
    failed to engage with the entirety of the new  evidence  in  the  case.
    Although the judge purported to do so at [56] and [57], his conclusions
    at that stage of his analysis were a makeweight, and expressed in broad
    brush terms, with insufficient reasons.

22. The observations of Judge Keane  when  granting  permission  to  appeal
    accord with my provisional view, namely  that  the  judge  irrationally
    failed  to  take  into  account  relevant  considerations,  namely  the
    entirety of the further submissions.  While the judge  did  purport  to
    have considered all evidence in any event,  there  is  no  analysis  or
    reasoning concerning the remainder  of  the  evidence,  and  the  judge
    accordingly failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  for  his  concluding
    findings at [57] and [58].

23. The above analysis  is  consistent  with  the  approach  taken  by  the
    respondent in her written submissions of 3 August 2020.

24. My provisional view is that the effect of  the  judge's  non-engagement
    with the  entirety  of  the  evidence  was  to  taint  his  credibility
    assessment such that the decision must be set aside. Due to the  extent
    of the fact-finding required, it will be appropriate for this matter to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing  before
    a different judge.  The parties have  14  days  upon  being  sent  this
    decision to object to this proposed course of action.

25. In order to preserve the status quo, I grant the appellant anonymity.

Notice of Decision

My provisional view is that  the  decision  of  Judge  Jepson  involved  the
making of an error of law, that the decision  must  be  set  aside  with  no
findings of fact preserved, and that the matter  should  be  remitted  to  a
different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

The parties have 14 days from being sent this decision to  make  submissions
concerning the above approach, should they wish to object to it.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed      Stephen H Smith             Date 5 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




