
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05684/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 13, 2019                              |On May 17, 2019               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  Mr K A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant originally entered the United Kingdom on March 16, 2008.  He
claimed asylum on the basis he was from Iran.  That claim was rejected by
the respondent and following an appeal that went before both the First-tier
Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal his appeal was dismissed with a finding he
was not an Iranian national.  The appellant subsequently lodged additional
grounds of appeal on the basis that he was an Iraqi national from the Erbil
region of Kurdistan.  The respondent considered those further submissions
but refused his application in a decision dated May 26, 2017.

The appellant appealed this decision on June 13, 2017 under Section 82(1)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and his appeal came
before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese on March 26, 2018, who in
a decision promulgated on April 27, 2018 dismissed the appeal on all
grounds.

Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission to appeal and the matter
initially came before me on December 21, 2018 for an error of law argument
and subsequently came before me on March 25, 2019, when the appeal was
adjourned further to enable a psychiatric report to be obtained.

In finding there had been an error of law on December 21, 2018 I noted that
the Judge accepted the appellant came from Erbil but had approached
assessment of risk on the basis he came from a different area.  The Judge
found that the appellant had previously lied in his earlier appeal and
subsequently concluded that he would be able to travel from Baghdad to the
IKR without difficulty.  This finding amounted to an error in law based on
the findings of the Upper Tribunal in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212.  I adjourned the matter on December 21,
2018 for up-to-date evidence because the First-tier Judge had considered
the appeal prior to the decision in AAH.

The matter came back before me on March 25, 2019, when I anticipated the
case could be concluded.  It became apparent that a psychiatric report was
necessary, and the case was therefore stood down for a report to be
obtained.

When the matter came back before the Tribunal on the above date, I had the
benefit of a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Balasubramaniam dated April
26, 2019.  This was in addition to an updated expert report from Dr Laizer
dated February 22, 2019, letter from Chloe Robinson, a social worker at
Praxis Community Projects, dated February 13, 2019 and an updated statement
provided by the appellant dated May 2, 2019.

Both Mr Tarlow and Mr Spurling had had opportunity to discuss this case
before coming into court and their positions can be summarised as follows:

      a) Mr Spurling submitted that this was not a case that would engage
         Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive because the appellant
         was from the IKR.  However, he submitted that the appellant was not
         returnable due to documentation issues and even if he could travel
         to Baghdad he was likely to have to remain there whilst additional
         documentation was obtained to enable him to travel to Erbil.
         Without a CSID he could simply not travel any further.  He referred
         the Tribunal to the respondent's recently issued guidance entitled
         "Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and returns" dated
         February 2019.

      b) Mr Spurling referred the Tribunal to paragraph 2.6.22 of the
         guidance, which was under the subheading of "Where a person is
         unable to obtain a CSID".  He submitted that the respondent should
         consider applying the Discretionary Leave policy and to grant him
         leave in accordance with this policy pending future reviews of his
         ability to feasibly return to Iraq.  This was a case where the
         appellant had cooperated with the Iraqi authorities in trying to
         obtain paperwork and he had also cooperated with the Red Cross in
         trying to contact his family.  There was evidence to support his
         cooperation.

      c) Mr Tarlow referred the Tribunal to the recently obtained
         psychiatric report and acknowledged that it was unlikely that the
         appellant would be able to survive in Baghdad.  As there was
         evidence he had cooperated with the authorities and that the
         process had not been completed, through no fault of the appellant,
         he submitted that the Tribunal had to consider the appellant's
         position as at today's date.  He accepted that the appellant had
         been unable to obtain a passport or a laissez passer for the
         reasons set out in the statements contained on the Tribunal file,
         had been unable to obtain a CSID for the same reason and due to his
         medical condition was at real risk of destitution based on that
         lack of documentation.  As it was accepted, by Mr Spurling, that
         the appellant could not establish a need for protection because he
         came from the IKR he accepted the respondent should consider
         whether the appellant should be granted discretionary under the
         Discretionary Leave policy.  He invited the Tribunal to grant the
         appellant leave to remain on human rights grounds in accordance
         with this policy, which in practice meant the appellant would be
         given 30 months' leave.

      d) Mr Spurling confirmed that he was agreeable to this approach being
         adopted and would not be pursuing the appeal on any other basis if
         the Tribunal saw fit to grant leave on this basis.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

findings

THIS IS A LONG-RUNNING APPEAL WHICH BEGAN IN 2008 WHEN THE APPELLANT
CLAIMED HE WAS AN IRANIAN NATIONAL.  THAT CLAIM WAS QUITE PROPERLY REJECTED
AND ULTIMATELY, HE LODGED FURTHER SUBMISSIONS WHICH LED TO A FURTHER APPEAL
BEFORE THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL IN MARCH LAST YEAR.  I PREVIOUSLY FOUND THAT
THERE HAD BEEN AN ERROR OF LAW.

Mr Spurling accepted that because the appellant came from the IKR he could
not establish a protection claim.  He also accepted that the medical
evidence on its own did not support an Article 3 ECHR claim.

This left an outstanding appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8
ECHR.  I previously adjourned the case for an independent psychiatric
report to be obtained and this was filed with the Tribunal on May 7, 2019.
The doctor's conclusion was that the appellant suffered from a generalised
anxiety disorder and he would benefit from further psychological
counselling with a review in approximately twelve months.  The type of
treatment which would benefit him would be cognitive behavioural therapy
which would address his fear of return to Iraq.

At today's hearing Mr Tarlow took a pragmatic view and accepted that the
Tribunal was dealing with an appellant who had cooperated in trying to
obtain documentation but was faced with a situation whereby he had no
documents and his attempts to contact his family had thus far failed.

Whilst, in theory, he could be returned to Baghdad Mr Tarlow accepted that
there was a real risk of destitution once he arrived in Baghdad and he
accepted that the appellant's appeal should succeed on Article 8 private
life grounds.

I do not have the power to grant the appellant leave to remain based on the
respondent's Discretionary Leave policy but it is open to me to find that
he should be granted discretionary leave under Article 8 ECHR on private
life grounds.  If the appellant were able to secure the documents and/or
locate his family, he would potentially be returnable in the future.

I accept that as he has been unable to obtain documents and he is at real
risk of destitution based on his lack of documents he has established a
private life, bearing in mind he has been here since 2008 and there are
medical reasons why he should continue to remain here in the interim
because his medical circumstances would place him at a real risk of
destitution were he returned to Baghdad without documents.

If the Iraqi government were accepting returns without CSID documentation
direct to Erbil or even Baghdad, then this issue would not have troubled
the Tribunal because clearly, he would be returnable.  However, as
documentation remains a live issue, this appeal should be granted outside
the Immigration Rules under Article 8 as it would be disproportionate to
remove him following the principles of Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.

Decision

I have previously set aside the decision of Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Abebrese.  I remake the decision as follows: -

      1) I dismiss the protection claim.

      2) I dismiss the appeal under Article 3 ECHR.

      3) I allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made as no fee was payable.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
