
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05239/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 6 February 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MOHAMMED SHWAN HASSAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms F Khan (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
         brought with the permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,
         from a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it
         made on 4 September 2019 (the date of its written reasons)
         following a hearing of 9 July 2019. The tribunal's decision was to
         allow the claimant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
         State of 17 May 2019 refusing to grant him international
         protection.

      2. I have not ordered anonymity. The tribunal did not do so and I was
         not invited to consider doing so by the claimant's experienced and
         competent counsel.

      3. By way of brief background the claimant, who was born on 6 April
         1995, is a male national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity. He is from
         Erbil which is located in the part of Iraq under Kurdish
         administrative control (the IKR). In seeking international
         protection, he had claimed to be at risk if returned to Iraq at
         the hands of family members of a man he had knocked down and
         injured in a car accident. He says that, in consequence of that
         risk, he fled Iraq in October of 2018 and travelled to the United
         Kingdom (UK) via Turkey, Greece, Italy and France. He claims that
         certain family members of the person he injured are influential
         because they are Peshmergas and are members of a political party
         which operates in the IKR and which is called the Kurdish
         Democratic Party (KDP). He also says that he would not be able to
         internally relocate either within the IKR or to some other part of
         Iraq.

4.    The Secretary of State, in considering the application for
international protection, disbelieved the claimant. That was for a number
of reasons including his failure to claim asylum in a safe country prior to
entering the UK. The Secretary of State also made the point that the
claimant's account even if true did not disclose the existence of an
applicable 1951 Refugee Convention reason.

5.    The claimant was represented, before the tribunal, by Counsel. He
gave evidence to it. There were no other witnesses. The Secretary of State
was not represented before the tribunal. The tribunal decided not to
adjourn the proceedings despite the lack of a representative for the
Secretary of State.  Having heard from the claimant the tribunal accepted,
to the lower standard applicable in cases where international protection is
sought, that he had given a truthful account of events. It did so for
reasons which it explained, in some detail, in a passage running from
paragraph 38 to paragraph 46 of the written reasons. At paragraph 47, the
tribunal explained why it did not think there would be a sufficiency of
protection if he were to return to the IKR. At paragraph 48 the tribunal,
in considering the prospect of internal relocation within Iraq, suggested
that the Secretary of State had failed to give a clear indication as to
where it was thought the claimant could relocate to. At paragraphs 50 and
51 it explained why it thought, if the Secretary of State had asserted that
the claimant could relocate to Baghdad, that would have been wrong.

6.    The tribunal did not allow the appeal on asylum grounds because it
did not think that there was an applicable 1951 Refugee Convention reason.
But it did allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds. The
Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal followed. What was said in support of the application was not
separated into distinct grounds but the propositions advanced may be
summarised as follows: the tribunal erred through adequately explain why,
in the absence of the Home Office Presenting Officer, it was not
adjourning; the tribunal erred through not fully addressing the impact and
relevance of section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
Claimants, etc) Act 2004 coupled with what had been said in JT (Cameroon) v
Secretary of State  for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878 when
addressing credibility; the tribunal provided inadequate reasons for its
factual findings; the tribunal erred through failing to adequately explain
its view that the claimant could not safely relocate within the IKR; the
tribunal erred through effectively reversing the burden of proof with
respect to internal flight; the tribunal erred through failing to explain
what caselaw it had in mind when assessing the prospect of internal flight
to Baghdad; the tribunal erred through failing to have regard to a document
known as the February 2019 CPIN Iraq: Internal Relocation, Civil
Documentation and Returns. I appreciate that the order I have set those
propositions out is not the same as they are set out in the actual grounds
themselves. But I cannot see that that matters.

7.    As to the ground concerning the tribunal's decision to proceed rather
than to adjourn, the tribunal noted, at paragraph 14 of its written
reasons, that it had been notified that there would be no Presenting
Officer in attendance due to operational constraints and that "a request
was made requesting that the tribunal to adjourn the appeal or
alternatively if the tribunal proceeded with the appeal to then consider
the reasons for refusal letter and dismiss the appeal". The tribunal then
went on to say, in effect, that it decided not to adjourn because it was
satisfied that it could proceed in the absence of a Presenting Officer and
justly decide the appeal. It also indicated that a further factor in its
thinking was its reluctance to prolong or delay matters.

8.    The decision whether to adjourn or to proceed was, essentially, a
case management decision which, absent perversity or irrationality, was one
for the tribunal to take, applying its expertise and experience. It was
open to it to take the view that it could fairly decide the appeal and it
was open to it to attach weight to the undesirability of prolonging
matters. It is not remotely arguable that the tribunal was obliged, as a
matter of law, to adjourn. What is said in the grounds, in my judgment,
does not go beyond a disagreement with the tribunal's permissible finding.
I do, therefore, reject that ground of appeal.

9.    As to the argument about credibility and section 8 of the Asylum and
Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004, I cannot see that the
reference to caselaw adds anything. It is right to say, of course, that the
claimant had passed through a number of European countries on his way to
the UK and had not claimed in any of them including, in particular, France.
The tribunal knew that and expressly referred to his journey at paragraph
26 of its written reasons. At paragraph 38 of its written reasons it said
that the "failure to claim asylum en-route undermines his credibility". It
then went on to immediately make the point that it was still necessary for
it to assess his claim against the backdrop of that damaged credibility. It
seems to me that, in fact, what the tribunal did was what the Secretary of
State in the grounds has suggested it should have done. It is obvious that
section 8 is not determinative but it is equally obvious that the tribunal
was statutorily obliged to take certain behaviour specified in section 8,
such as a failure to claim in safe countries visited on the way to the UK,
into account. It did that. It was obliged to do no more than that. It did
not err in law and I reject that ground of appeal.

10.   There is then the contention that the tribunal gave inadequate
reasons for its factual findings. Essentially, this is a complaint that it
did not adequately explain why it believed the claimant's account. In
explaining why it did believe it, it made the points that the account had
been largely consistent; that the claimant's assertion that he had been
asked to pay a large sum of money as compensation for the injuries he had
caused was in line with background country material; and that what he had
said about responding to the situation he found himself in by relocating to
a friend's house and hiding there was credible. A tribunal does have to
give adequate reasons for its decision. It is important that it achieves
that task but it is a relatively undemanding one. It is clear to a reader
of the written reasons why it is that the tribunal decided to accept the
claimant's account. There is nothing perverse or irrational about its
reasoning. I would readily accept that a differently constituted tribunal
might have reached a different view as to credibility on exactly the same
evidence. But, in the context of resolving whether this tribunal actually
erred in law, that is not a consideration. The tribunal gave adequate
reasons for believing the claimant and it was open to it on the material in
front of it to believe him. I reject this ground of appeal.

11.   There is then the contention that the tribunal did not adequately
explain its conclusion that it would be unsafe for the claimant, on the
assumption that he had given a truthful account, to relocate outside of
Erbil but in another part of the IKR. But, as to that, the tribunal had
found that the claimant was a witness of truth and had accepted, therefore,
his assertion that the person he had injured had relatives who had been
involved with the KDP and who were Peshmergas. Accordingly, in my judgment,
it was open to the tribunal to conclude that there would be a risk at the
hands of the relatives in the IKR and that, further, the authorities would
not be in a position to afford protection. On any view, the KDP is an
influential organisation within the IKR. I reject this ground of appeal.

12.   There is then the contention (which is what it amounts to even if not
put exactly in this way) that the tribunal effectively reversed the burden
of proof when considering the availability of an internal flight
alternative. But that was not the way in which the tribunal approached or
decided matters. It pointed out, with respect to the Secretary of State's
position to it in the document sometimes referred to as the reasons for
refusal letter, that no safe venue for relocation had clearly been
suggested. It was entitled to make that point. It, it was entitled to say
that as the Secretary of State was not suggesting that the claimant could
locate to Baghdad or any other part of Iraq outside the IKR, then it was
not required to assess the matter itself. So, it was entitled to end its
enquiry into possible internal flight outside the IKR at that point. That
is what it did. That does not amount, on any view, to reversing the burden
on proof. I reject this ground of appeal.

13.   There is then the contention regarding the failure to reference case
law when assessing internal flight to Baghdad. It is I think, in the
context of that ground, that the Secretary of State also argues that the
tribunal failed to have regard to the document I have referred to above and
which I shall now simply call the CPIN. The first point to make about
internal flight to Baghdad is that the tribunal was, here, reaching an
alternative finding in case its initial position that the Secretary of
State had not asserted internal flight to Baghdad was available and
therefore it need not address the matter at all, was wrong. I have
concluded that its conclusion as to that was not wrong. So, it matters not
what I decide with respect to this remaining ground of appeal. But it seems
to me quite obvious from what the tribunal had to say at paragraph 51 of
its written reasons, that it had in mind, perhaps amongst other things,
what had been said about internal flight to Baghdad in AA (Article 15(c))
Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC). It was entitled, indeed required, to take
that into account. I cannot see that the CPIN had been placed before the
tribunal by the Secretary of State. Such a document is evidence. If a party
wishes a tribunal to consider evidence which it says is relevant, then that
party should provide that evidence to the tribunal. Here it has not been
shown to me that the Secretary of State did that. I reject this ground of
appeal.

14.   It follows, therefore, that I conclude the tribunal did not make an
error of law. Accordingly, this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
There is just one matter I would like to briefly touch upon. There seems to
be a suggestion at paragraph 16 of the grounds of appeal that the
individual Judge who decided this appeal was, in some way, biased. It might
be that the author of the grounds did not intend to suggest that. But,
whilst not wishing to labour the point, an allegation of judicial bias is a
serious matter which should not be made lightly. Insofar as it might be
thought necessary for me to address the allegation, I can find nothing
capable of supporting either actual bias or what is sometimes referred to
as perceived bias.



Decision

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

Anonymity is not directed.


Signed:                                      Dated: 4 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
