
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05183/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2019                            |On 12 March 2020              |
|And 4 February 2020                           |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     FMS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Dar, Archbold Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer (7
                    November)
     Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer (4 February)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

I have made a direction anonymising the Appellant in accordance with the
Upper Tribunal Guidance Note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders and Rule 14 (7) of
The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  His date of birth is 23 May 1989.
He came to the UK on 5 January 2010, having been granted entry as a
student.  He was granted periods of leave until 30 October 2012.   He then
became an overstayer.

On 5 August 2016 the Appellant made an application for asylum on political
grounds and on grounds of his sexuality.  This application was refused on
20 May 2019.  The Appellant pursued an appeal against this decision on the
ground that he would be at risk on return based on his sexuality.  His
appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) C Chapman in
a decision promulgated on 12 August 2019, following a hearing on 6 August
2019.  Permission was granted by FtT Judge Nightingale on 9 September 2019.
The matter came before me on 7 November 2019 to decide whether Judge
Chapman had made an error of law.

The hearing before the FtT

The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and three witnesses.  They were
all cross-examined by the Presenting Officer.  They all gave evidence
relating to the Appellant's sexuality.  The evidence was that the Appellant
realised that he was gay in 2016 when he had sex with a man called Sunny.
They had a relationship until 2017.  The Appellant has had several
relationships since then.  The judge recorded the Appellant's evidence as
follows:

"19. He first realised he was gay in November 2016, when he met a man
called Sunny at a nightclub.  Sunny did not get angry like other men when a
drink was spilled so the Appellant was attracted to him.  They became drunk
and ended up at Sunny's house where they had sex.  They then saw each other
several times until the end of January 2017 when Sunny ended the
relationship because he wanted to have casual sex with other men.

20.  The Appellant describes having conflict between his religion and his
sexuality since discovering he is gay.  He continues to practice his
religion, but feels happier being gay and living as a gay man.  Since
Sunny, he has had several casual relationships with men, but always prefers
to keep his sexuality hidden from the community.  He can express himself
openly with other gay men but not with people in the community.

21.  Atif confronted the Appellant about his sexuality having seen him with
men when he took him to nightclubs.  Atif told him to refrain otherwise he
would tell his family, and eventually, in December 2016, Atif did tell the
Appellant's brother.  In turn, his brother informed his father.  One night,
his father's friend came into a club and saw the Appellant kissing a man.
There was a telephone call with his father in which his father threatened
to kill him and said he was dead to them.  He also received a call to the
same effect from his uncle.

22.  The Appellant fears he will be killed by his family because of his
sexuality of he is returned to Pakistan.

23.  In support of his appeal, the Appellant has provided letters and
statements from people who know him as a gay person.  He has also provided
Grindr chat messages between himself and other gay men, photographs of
himself with other men, and e-mails of LGBT and PRIDE events.

24.  The Appellant has also provided a 'disinheritance affidavit' from his
father, disowning and disinheriting the Appellant from his land and
properties in Pakistan."

The judge made the following findings:

"44. I am satisfied that, since November 2016, shortly after his release
from detention, the Appellant has involved himself in the 'gay scene' by
attending gay nightclubs, communicating with other gay people on Grindr,
meeting gay people at nightclubs, and having casual sexual relationships
with gay men.

45.  The Appellant's evidence to this effect is supported by the three
witnesses who gave evidence at the hearing and whose evidence I accept.
One of these confirmed that their relationship had been intimate.  The
Appellant claims to have had around ten such casual relationships but the
witnesses could not confirm the number.  Indeed, other than the one witness
who had personally been intimate with the Appellant, their oral evidence
was that they had not seen the Appellant with someone they considered to be
his partner or anyone with whom he was having a relationship.  They
confirmed, however, that he was seen behaving with other gay men at
nightclubs as if he was gay by dancing with men and kissing other men.
Their evidence was to the effect that the Appellant is not open about his
sexuality other than on those occasions when he frequents gay clubs.

46.  The Appellant's own evidence was limited as to how he lived his life
as a gay man other than his association with other gay men at nightclubs.
He has provided evidence that he chats on Grindr, but this, in itself is
not proof of sexuality.  He told me that he has lived with another
Pakistani man throughout the period in question.  His housemate is not gay
but the Appellant said his housemate knew he was gay because of the friends
who came to their house.  The Appellant said, however, that they had not
discussed his sexuality.  I do not find it credible that such a
conversation has not occurred given that the Appellant lived with this man
before he began his gay activity and given that homosexuality is such a big
issue for many Pakistani males.

47.  Overall, the impression I gained from the experience of the Appellant
and his witnesses was that he behaves in a gay manner when surrounded by
gay people in, for example, nightclubs, but that he is not very open about
being a gay.  There is nothing wrong in this as some people choose not to
be open about many things, including their sexuality, but it did strike me
that this was a feature of the Appellant's circumstances.  It leads me to
doubt his commitment to living life as a gay person, rather than merely
acting out the role from time to time, even if this has involved
relationships with other men.

48.  Another aspect of his claim to strike me from the outset was the
suddenness with which he declared himself to be gay, and based on only a
few contacts over a very short period with Sunny.  The Appellant confirmed
that he had not considered himself to be gay before, and I would have
thought that the sudden realisation that he might be, contrary to
everything he had known before, might cause some form of emotional turmoil.
 Yet this does not come across in the Appellant's evidence.  Although he
speaks of the conflict with his religion, again he does not demonstrate the
emotional turmoil I might have expected in a man who suddenly realises he
is gay against all the principles he has known before.

49.  I note that there is medical evidence to show that the Appellant
suffers from anxiety and depression, but this is being treated by his
doctor with a relatively low dosage of anti-depressant.  There is no
evidence that the Appellant has discussed his sexuality with his doctor or
any LGBT support group.  He agrees that he has not sought help from any
organisation.  This, of course, is not determinative of whether or not he
is gay, because everyone deals with things differently, but, again, the
lack of the evidence of the Appellant going through conflict and turmoil
because of such a significant change in his sexuality is an indicator that
he was not going through these emotions.

50.  I must also consider the Appellant's account to be gay in the context
of his life generally at the time, and his immigration status in
particular.  I find, when considering his immigration history, that this is
an Appellant who has done everything in his power to avoid removal from the
United Kingdom.  He has overstayed, he has appealed decisions when they
have gone against him, and he has made new claims when his removal from the
country has been threatened.

51.  He has also been dishonest in doing so.  This was the finding of Judge
Rose in 2014.  It is suggested that I can depart from that finding because
the Appellant was not present at the hearing, but, as can be seen from the
decision of Judge Rose, the Appellant voluntarily absented himself from the
hearing, and he did not appeal the decision at the time.  I find these not
to be reasons for departing from the decision, and I therefore take into
account that the Appellant is a man who is prepared to be dishonest to say
in the country.

52.  I find that the Appellant's history is relevant to his credibility in
this appeal.  Although I find he has engaged in gay activity and casual gay
relationships, this activity began within only a short time of being
detained and threatened with imminent removal.  His obvious strong desire
to stay in the United Kingdom suggests a motivation to do whatever is
necessary in order to do, including building a profile as a gay person
knowing that, if accepted, this is a likely ground on which refugee status
will be granted.

53.  Looking at the appeal in the round, I am not satisfied that the
Appellant's gay activities are anything more than that, namely
'activities'.  They do not suggest or demonstrate the sort of behaviour
that might show the Appellant is gay in the sense of there being any
enduring pattern of emotional, romantic or sexual attraction towards people
of the same sex.  I find it more likely than not that the Appellant has
engaged in gay activity in order to found yet another claim to remain in
the United Kingdom, and to stay in this country.  I do not find his
evidence about his sexuality (rather than his activity) to be credible.  I
find that he has not discharged the burden of showing that he is gay.

...

55.  In this respect, I have the Appellant's evidence that his family
believe him to be gay.  There is no evidence about this apart from the
Appellant's own evidence, and the 'disinheritance' affidavit from his
father.  So far as the Appellant's account about how his father discovered
his sexuality, I do not find his account credible for the same reason as I
reject his account to be gay.  I do not find the Appellant credible and
find that this part of his account is to bolster the claim.

56.  Regarding the affidavit, I accept Mr Darr's point that the
Respondent's DVR carries no weight because it is not claimed that the
affidavit is a genuine court document.  However, the Appellant was unable
to explain where it came from.  The Appellant said he received in late
2017, which was several months after he said his father discovered he was
gay.  There is no explanation why his father waited for so long to send the
affidavit to the Appellant.  If his father wanted the Appellant to know of
his thoughts in writing it is more likely he would have ensured the
Appellant received it immediately.  If the father had intended the letter
to be a document to protect his reputation in Pakistan, as Mr Darr
suggested, then there would be no reason to send it to the Appellant.  The
affidavit does not assist in terms of the Appellant's sexuality because
this is not mentioned in it."

The grounds of appeal

The grounds are lacking in focus.  They comprise ten pages and are
insufficiently particularised.  In summary, they assert that the judge
applied the wrong standard of proof.  They assert that the judge made
findings which were not open to him.  They challenge the decision on
Devaseelan grounds (Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 702).  They assert that the
judge misapplied HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
UKSC 31 [2011] 1 AC 596.  It is asserted that he did not consider the
evidence including an affidavit from the Appellant's father.

Error of law

Mr Lindsay conceded at the start of the hearing that the judge made a
material error Although he properly directed himself on the burden and
standard of proof, he failed to apply his self-direction. Mr Lindsay drew
my attention to [53] where the judge said, "I find it more likely than not
..." and [57] where the judge said, "I suspect ...".  He referred me to
[58] where the judge said, "I find it more likely ...". Finally, my
attention was drawn to [47] where the judge said "overall, the impression I
gained from the experience ...".

While the judge materially erred for the reasons identified by Mr Lindsay,
it is my view that there are more problems with the findings regarding the
Appellant's sexuality. They are irrational.  The judge accepted evidence of
what he described as "gay activity".  He effectively accepted that the
Appellant had, since 2016 (over a period of three years), attended gay
clubs, had sex with men and been on the gay scene. He accepted the evidence
of three witnesses. Their evidence corroborated the Appellant's.  One of
the witnesses had had a sexual relationship with the Appellant.   However,
the judge did not accept that the Appellant is gay.  He found that that the
Appellant has been "acting out a role" for three years.  He doubted his
"commitment" to living life as a gay person.  This is irrational and wholly
misconceived.  One does not commit to sexuality as one would commit to a
belief or a faith.  Furthermore, it was not reasonable for the judge to
expect "an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic or sexual attraction
towards people of the same sex."  This not only shows a misapplication of
the standard of proof in asylum appeals, it discloses a fundamental
misunderstanding of sexuality and sexual identity.

The judge applied a too high standard of proof and made irrational
findings.   I set aside the decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal in
its entirety.

Re-making

Applying the correct standard of proof, I accept that the Appellant is gay
and that he has been disowned by his family and disinherited.   In this
regard the grounds raise an issue relating to the affidavit produced by the
Appellant in order to support his case that he would be at risk from his
family on return to Pakistan as a result of his sexuality.  The judge
rejected the reliability of the evidence because the Appellant was unable
to explain where it came from and that he said he received it several
months after his father had discovered that he was gay.  The judge said
that there was no explanation why his father waited so long in order to
send the affidavit.  Mr Dar drew my attention to findings made by the FtT
at [56].  He said that the findings of the about the affidavit are not
sustainable.

I accept the Appellant's evidence relating to how his family found out that
he is gay (see paragraphs 23-27 of the Appellant's witness statement).  I
have considered that the Appellant has in a previous decision been found to
have relied on a false document in order to support a student application.
However, considering the evidence in the round, it is credible that the
Appellant's father is aware of his sexuality, which led to the affidavit.
I find that the Appellant is gay and that he would be at risk on return to
his home area.  This is consistent with the background evidence.

I must consider whether relocation is safe and, if so, reasonable.  I
accept that the Appellant's family is wealthy, but there is no cogent
evidence that they would wish to or be able to track him down to another
part of Pakistan.  However, I accept that he has a subjective fear that
they would do so.

On 7 November 2019 Mr Lindsay drew my attention to what the judge said at
[29] about the reasons for refusal.  The FtT stated that; "The Respondent
does not suggest that, if credible, the Appellant should be returned to
Pakistan."  Mr Lindsay indicated that the Respondent made no such
concession in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  If such a concession has at
any time been made Mr Lindsay sought to withdraw it.  Mr Dar did not
comment upon this.  He did not seek to persuade me that the Respondent made
such a concession or that if such a concession was made it would be unfair
to withdraw it.  From the background evidence, there is no support that
someone who is gay, is without more, at risk.  This was not argued by Mr
Dar.  From the Appellant's grounds, I understand that the Appellant
accepted that an assessment should be made in accordance with HJ (Iran).
I raised with the parties the possibility of going on to remake the
decision based on HJ (Iran), bearing in mind that the Appellant did not
seek to rely on further evidence served (in accordance with the directions
of the Tribunal).  There was no application by Mr Dar to adjourn or to
submit any further evidence.  I heard brief submissions from the parties.

Following the hearing on 7 November, I decided to adjourn the matter
because I considered that I did not have sufficient evidence concerning how
the Appellant would live in Pakistan and why to be able to make proper
findings applying HJ (Iran).   I issued directions and gave the parties the
opportunity to serve further evidence.  On 4 February the hearing resumed.
I have taken into account the submissions made by the parties at both
hearings.

The Evidence

15.  The Appellant's evidence in his first witness statement is as follows:-



"21. Since discovering my sexuality, I have felt a lot of confusion due to
the conflict between my religion and my sexuality (my emphasis).  I
continue to practice the religion by saying my Friday prayers and other
prayers when I can.  I believe that religion is all about being a good
person and not about your preferences.  I am happier being gay and living
as a gay man makes be a better person.

22.  I have had many casual relationships with men since my relationship
with Sunny.  Although I prefer to keep my sexuality hidden from the
community, I can express myself openly to other homosexuals or people not
from the community (my emphasis).

23.  My friend, Atif, who used to drop me to clubs, once saw me with Sunny
outside a club whilst he was doing taxi.  He confronted me and told me that
he saw the way I was with a guy outside the club.  I told him that it was
just a friend.

24.  Sometime later, he saw me once again and he told me that I must
refrain from my homosexuality as it is forbidden in Islam.  He said he
would tell my family if I did not stop.  I was annoyed with him, so I told
him to mind his own business and let me live my own way.

25.  Atif is from my village in Pakistan and he informed my brother in
December 2016.  My brother called me, but I told him that Atif was lying
and he believed me.  Once Atif found out my brother believed me he informed
my father and I told him the same thing I told my brother.

26.  One day I went out to meet a guy in a gay club who I was speaking to
on Grindr.  We were getting along really well, he was kissing me on my neck
and cheek, when suddenly my father's friend came in the club with another
man and saw me.  They took me out of the club and called my father.  They
told him that I was a Gandu (a term used for gay people in Pakistan).  The
phone was on loud speaker and my father started swearing at me and told me
that he would kill me as I spoiled the family respect.  He told me that he
did not want anything to do with me and that I was dead for them.

27.  I was terrified after speaking to my father as I knew he would
definitely kill me.  I also feared my uncle, who has Islamic schools and is
a lot more stricter.  My family is very wealthy, and they have the
resources to track me down and kill me without worrying about the
authorities in Pakistan.  My father's political career is everything for
him and he would not think twice to kill me to maintain his respect and
honour.

28.  I felt as my whole world had collapsed as this was not something I
would ever disclose to my family.  It is not because of shame but due to
the fear of them killing me.

29.  In Pakistan, there was not an atmosphere in which people could discuss
homosexuality.  I came from a highly religious family and within our
community homosexuals were hated and killed.  We were always told that we
would marry a girl from our family, and we did not have the option to
choose for ourselves.

30.  I feel certain that due to his political position my father would
carry out his threat if I returned to Pakistan.  Both my father and uncle
are strict adherents to Islam and hold Islamic Teaching Schools in the
country.

31.  After that incident my father told my uncle about my activities and
that these activities were not forgivable.  My uncle called me and informed
me of the same.  At that time, I had nothing to fear as my family knew and
told me that I was dead to them, so I told him that I am what I am, and I
could not stop.  My uncle started swearing at me and threatened to kill me.
 My uncle, FAS is a well-known scholar.  He belongs to the Tehreek Labaik,
which is an organisation that causes a lot of problems in Pakistan.  He is
very resourceful, and he told me that he will bring me to Pakistan and kill
me.  Sometime later I received a letter from them which stated I am no
longer a part of the family.  This is shown here EXB.FS.03.

32.  The refusal letter states in paragraph 55 that the disinheritance
letter is not genuine and not a valid court document.  I am not aware why
the document was not presented to court.  My family is very wealthy and due
to my activities, my father most likely wanted to me to know that they
disown me and that I do not try to claim my share, which is why he probably
had this document sent to me.

34.  I cannot return and relocate as Pakistan is a Islamic country and I
would not be able to live my life as an open gay man anywhere in Pakistan
without the fear of being persecuted as it is not just my family I fear, I
also fear the society and the authorities due to being gay (my emphasis).

...

37.  I sent chats from Grindr to the Home Office, however, they returned
some of them saying they were too explicit.  I do not know what was
explicit as it was just conversations with other guys, which confirms that
I am openly telling other people that I am gay, and I am casually dating
other men.  Evidence of this is shown here as EXB.FS.06

...

43.  In paragraph 47 the respondent states that unclear how I managed to
maintain casual relationships with other men, whilst refraining from living
openly.  In question 58 of the AIR I did not understand the question as I
answered thinking the question was about going out, to which I answered,
no, because I was not able to afford.  In the answer to question 59 I did
mention that I fear from telling my community, but I do tell people who I
am chatting with.  I can confirm that I live openly as a gay man in the UK
and I do tell openly that I am gay.  However, I keep hide it from people
from my community who seem like strict Muslims (my emphasis)

...

49.  My family is really powerful and rich in Pakistan.  My father and
uncle are well known and regularly in the news and social media.  They are
politically active and are part of the ruling party in Pakistan.  Evidence
of this is shown here as EXB.FS.12.

50.  I attend events and parties of the LGBT community and even take part
in Pride.  I receive emails to stay up to date with LGBT events in order to
attend and meet other gay people so that I can explore my sexuality more.
I know these emails do not show my sexuality, but I joined because I want
to explore my sexuality.  Everyone I meet at these events is gay and I
enjoy spending time with them.  Evidence in the form of emails of events
are show here as EXB.FS.13.

51.  I have made many friends whilst in the UK and I love spending time
with them.  I believe that I have developed so much as a person whilst
being in the UK.  After finding out my true self as a gay man I have been
able to explore my sexuality and generally feel better about myself.  Even
though I am still suffering from depression and mental health problems,
when I go out to LGBT events, I feel better.

52.  I enjoy going to LGBT night outs and events and socialising with other
gay people.  My photographs of events in the UK are shown here as
EXB.FS.14.

...

54.  I do not wish to leave the UK as I am able to live comfortably as a
homosexual here.  I have many friends within the LGBT community and I
attend LGBT events.  I have no fear that I will be harmed for being who I
am in the country.  Although I originally intended to move to Saudi Arabia
after completing my studies in the UK, I am now unable to go there as it is
an Islamic country.  My family have vowed to end my life if I set foot in
Pakistan, and I have been disowned by my father who does not wish to
establish any contact with me."

 1. At the resumed hearing the Appellant relied on a supplementary bundle
    which was sent to the UT on 19 January.  There was a second statement
    from the Appellant of 16 December 2019. He gave oral evidence before
    the UT.  The thrust of the Appellant's evidence was that he lived
    openly here in the UK.  He did not tell strict Muslims here about his
    sexuality because he fears mistreatment.  His oral evidence before me
    was consistent with his statements.  There was a further witness
    statement from Mr Soaib Dastgir of 16 December 2019 ( he was one of the
    three witnesses who gave evidence before the FtT). He gave oral
    evidence before the UT.  His evidence was that the Appellant lived
    openly as a gay person.  He had advised the Appellant not to be open
    within the community because there were people who hated them for being
    gay.  The Appellant relied on additional letters of support and
    photographic evidence.  There was also evidence from Birmingham LGBT of
    23 November 2019 confirming the Appellant's engagement with the
    organisation.

    The AIR

    The salient parts of the Appellant's interview are relevant; -

"58. Question (required)

Have you lived openly gay in the UK?

58.  Response (required)

No, because my friend have left me and I cant afford, which I could in the
past.  In my community they don't even talk to me.  Only one or two friends
are friendly with me

59.  Question (required)

If someone was to ask you about your sexuality, what would you tell them?

59.  Response (required)

I fear from my community but when I am chatting with somebody, I can give
my feelings there.  I am keeping it discreet at the moment between the
community.  I feel quite safe at the moment here, nobody can challenge me".

The Country Policy and Information Note Pakistan: Sexual orientation and
gender identity or expression Version 3. July 2019.

The main points from the background evidence can be summarised. Pakistan is
a conservative Muslim society in which homophobic attitudes persist. LGBTI
persons face societal discrimination as well as family and societal
pressure to conform to cultural and religious norms, including marriage.
Strong and widespread cultural, religious and social intolerance of
homosexuality means it is not widely discussed or acknowledged in Pakistan.

The Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) does not explicitly refer to same-sex sexual
activity, but 'carnal intercourse against the order of nature', which is
punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment for a period of two years to life.
The Offence of Zina (Enforcement Of Hudood) Ordinance of 1979 criminalises
any form of penetration outside of marriage, but voluntary sexual acts
between persons of the same gender are not covered by the provisions
although they suggest that non-heterosexual sexual acts that involve
penetration could be prosecuted and sharia law provisions may punish same-
sex sexual acts by death.  The authorities very rarely prosecute cases, but
Sections 377 and 294 ('Obscene Acts and Songs') of the PPC has sometimes
been used by police as a pretext to arrest, threaten to arrest, harass,
intimidate and extort LGBTI persons, particularly men who have sex with
men.  Homophobic attitudes negatively affect how the police handle
complaints by LGBTI persons.   The government does not target persons
because of their sexual orientation although rogue officials discriminate
and commit abuses against LGBTI persons. In general, there is no real risk
of persecution by the state.

LGBTI persons are, in general, reluctant to be open about their sexuality
as they may face abuse, humiliation, societal discrimination and
harassment, including in the workplace, in the family and in renting an
apartment.  Some persons from a higher socio-economic background may 'come
out' to their family or friends and have access to the 'gay scene' albeit
'underground' but if their sexuality is known, they may be exposed to
violence or blackmail.  Reasons for not being open may be because the
person wishes to conform to societal norms but may also be due to fear of
discrimination and/or violence.

In general, a person will not be able to avail themselves of the protection
of the authorities.    Where the person has a well-founded fear of
persecution from non-state actors, State protection is not generally
available. It is unlikely that there is any place in Pakistan, to which an
LGBTI person could reasonably relocate without making fundamental changes
to their behaviour.  It would not, in general, be unreasonable for a gay
man, who has chosen to live discreetly due to social or religious
pressures, to relocate internally within Pakistan.

It is difficult for gay men to maintain same-sex relationships, because
'sex between men will be overlooked as long as no-one feels that tradition
or religion are being challenged'.

The extent of familial and societal discrimination and violence faced by
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) people tends to be
inversely proportional to their socio-economic status. Nonetheless, even
wealthy individuals face high levels of discrimination, and their families
often force them into a heterosexual marriage to preserve the family's
reputation and social standing.'

    HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department UKSC 31 [2011] 1
    AC 596

The Supreme Court gave guidance at [35] and [82]  on the questions that the
Tribunal should ask itself when determining an appeal brought by an asylum
seeker who claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution because he is
gay.  Lord Rodger described the approach at [82] as follows: -

82.  When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a well-founded
fear of persecution because he is gay, the tribunal must first ask itself
whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is gay, or that he would be
treated as gay by potential persecutors in his country of nationality.

If so, the tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on the
available evidence that gay people who lived openly would be liable to
persecution in the applicant's country of nationality.

If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual applicant
would do if he were returned to that country.

If the applicant would in fact live openly and thereby be exposed to a real
risk of persecution, then he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even
if he could avoid the risk by living "discreetly".

If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant would in
fact live discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself
why he would do so.

If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would choose to live
discreetly simply because that was how he himself would wish to live, or
because of social pressures, e g, not wanting to distress his parents or
embarrass his friends, then his application should be rejected.  Social
pressures of that kind do not amount to persecution and the Convention does
not offer protection against them.  Such a person has no well-founded fear
of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing to do with any fear
of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of life which means that
he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay.

If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a material reason for
the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a fear of the
persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as a gay man,
then, other things being equal, his application should be accepted.  Such a
person has a well-founded fear of persecution.  To reject his application
on the ground that he could avoid the persecution by living discreetly
would be to defeat the very right which the Convention exists to protect -
his right to live freely and openly as a gay man without fear of
persecution.  By admitting him to asylum and allowing him to live freely
and openly as a gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state
gives effect to that right by affording the applicant a surrogate for the
protection from persecution which his country of nationality should have
afforded him.

At [77] and [78] the Supreme Court gave guidance on living discreetly and
sexual identity; -

"77.    At the most basic level, if a male applicant were to live
discreetly, he would in practice have to avoid any open expression of
affection for another man which went beyond what would be acceptable
behaviour on the part of a straight man.  He would have to be cautious
about the friendships he formed, the circle of friends in which he moved,
the places where he socialised.  He would have constantly to restrain
himself in an area of life where powerful emotions and physical attraction
are involved and a straight man could be spontaneous, impulsive even.  Not
only would he not be able to indulge openly in the mild flirtations which
are an enjoyable part of heterosexual life, but he would have to think
twice before revealing that he was attracted to another man.  Similarly,
the small tokens and gestures of affection which are taken for granted
between men and women could well be dangerous.  In short, his potential for
finding happiness in some sexual relationship would be profoundly affected.
 It is objectionable to assume that any gay man can be supposed to find
even these restrictions on his life and happiness reasonably tolerable.

78.  It would be wrong, however, to limit the areas of behaviour that must
be protected to the kinds of matters which I have just described -
essentially, those which will enable the applicant to attract sexual
partners and establish and maintain relationships with them in the same way
as happens between persons who are straight.  As Gummow and Hayne JJ
pointed out in Appellant S395/2002 v Minister for Immigration (2003) 216
CLR 473, 500-501, para 81:

                      "Sexual identity is not to be understood in this
                      context as confined to engaging in particular sexual
                      acts or, indeed, to any particular forms of physical
                      conduct.  It may, and often will, extend to many
                      aspects of human relationships and activity.  That
                      two individuals engage in sexual acts in private (and
                      in that sense 'discreetly') may say nothing about how
                      those individuals would choose to live other aspects
                      of their lives that are related to, or informed by,
                      their sexuality" In short, what is protected is the
                      applicant's right to live freely and openly as a gay
                      man.  That involves a wide spectrum of conduct, going
                      well beyond conduct designed to attract sexual
                      partners and maintain relationships with them.  To
                      illustrate the point with trivial stereotypical
                      examples from British society: just as male
                      heterosexuals are free to enjoy themselves playing
                      rugby, drinking beer and talking about girls with
                      their mates, so male homosexuals are to be free to
                      enjoy themselves going to Kylie concerts, drinking
                      exotically coloured cocktails and talking about boys
                      with their straight female mates.  Mutatis mutandis -
                      and in many cases the adaptations would obviously be
                      great - the same must apply to other societies.  In
                      other words, gay men are to be as free as their
                      straight equivalents in the society concerned to live
                      their lives in the way that is natural to them as gay
                      men, without the fear of persecution.



Submissions

Mr Lindsay drew my attention to [20] of the decision of the FtT.  He drew
my attention to [47], which represents the judge's "overall" impression of
the evidence.  I was also drawn to [45] where the judge stated that the
witnesses confirmed that the Appellant was seen behaving with other gay men
in nightclubs as if he was gay by dancing with men and kissing with other
men.  However, their evidence was to the effect that the Appellant is not
open about his sexuality other than on those occasions when he frequents
nightclubs.  He relied on the Appellant's first witness statement (at [21]
and [22)) and Qs 58 and 59 of the AIR.

On 4 February 2020, on behalf of the Respondent, Ms Bassi submitted that
the witnesses had all seen the Appellant kissing and dancing at nightclubs.
 The evidence is that the Appellant choses only to live openly amongst
other gay people at gay nightclubs.  Only a handful of people are aware of
his sexuality.  She referred me to [45] of the decision of the FtT.  He
joined LGBT Birmingham after his appeal was dismissed, contrary to his oral
evidence which was that he joined in 2017.  He was not a member at the time
of his asylum interview in 2018.  The Appellant said in his asylum
interview (see Qs 58 and 59) that he lived discreetly.  At no time
throughout the proceedings has he said that he does this in order to avoid
harm.  He is now trying to bring himself within HJ (Iran).  He will
continue to live discreetly in Pakistan.

Mr Dar addressed me.  He said that there was no clear definition of living
openly and it is a matter of degree.  There is sufficient evidence that the
Appellant lives openly here.  He did not say in his interview that he lives
here discreetly.  He chooses not to tell some people here of his sexuality
because he fears persecution.  He openly attends gay clubs here and openly
socialises with gay men in public.  The people who attend gay nightclubs
are not exclusively gay.  There is evidence from heterosexual Muslims aware
of the Appellant sexuality.

Conclusions

I found the Appellant and Mr Dastgir to be credible witnesses. The
Appellant's evidence is that he lives openly to a significant degree here
in the UK. He would want to live openly in Pakistan. He would not do on
account of being in fear of persecution.  From the background evidence, I
find that if he lived openly to the extent that he does here in the UK in
Pakistan, he would be at risk.  Whilst he is from a relatively wealthy
family, he has effectively been cut off. His family's wealth would not
support him to live openly in safety.   Considering the evidence in the
round, any discrepancy relating to the date the Appellant joined the LGBT
Birmingham is not material.

Whilst throughout the evidence the words "open" and "discreetly" or
variations of these words have been used, it cannot be inferred that an
Appellant or witnesses have read and understand HJ (Iran).  I have analysed
the Appellant's evidence in order to determine how he would live in
Pakistan and why.   In order to establish that an Appellant is living
openly it is not rational to expect there to be evidence of the Appellant
kissing and dancing with gay men outside gay nightclubs or, as the FtT
described, behaving in a "gay manner" in public.  It is not rational to
conclude that in the absence of such evidence, he is living discreetly in
the sense envisaged in HJ (Iran).

 It is clear from reading the answer that the Appellant gave at Q58 of the
asylum interview that he did not properly understand the question.   I
accept the Appellant's evidence at [43] of his first witness statement.
With reference to Mr Lindsay's submission, I have no regard to the FtT's
"overall impression" of the evidence because of the material errors made.

Whilst the Appellant does not tell everyone in his community about his
sexuality, this does not amount to living discreetly.  I find that the
people here that he chooses not to tell are strict Muslims.  I find that
the primary reason he is not open with these people is that he has a
subjective fear of persecution.  In answer to Q59 in the AIR he expressed
fear from the community.  His evidence is that he is religious and attends
the mosque. I find that it is in that context that he fears being open
about his sexuality.  I find that reference to "community" in his asylum
interview and elsewhere is a reference to strict Muslims with whom he
worships.  However, he openly attends public events on the gay scene here.
He mixes with gay people within the wider society.  He attends night clubs
here which are not exclusively for gay people.  He has relationships with
other gay men which he makes no effort to hide from the wider society.  His
evidence before the FtT was that he lives with a heterosexual male who is
aware of his sexuality. The FtT found that it was not credible that the
Appellant would not have discussed his sexuality with his housemate.
However, this is not a rational finding. It was not the Appellant's
evidence that he was attempting to hide his sexuality from his heterosexual
housemate who according to the Appellant is aware of his sexuality in any
event.  His evidence is that he is open about his sexuality to people who
are not strict Muslims (the majority of the population here). There was no
challenge to the evidence from the Appellant's heterosexual friends here.

I find that the Appellant is, to a significant extent, living openly here
in the UK. He is not living discreetly in the sense envisaged at paragraph
77 in HJ (Iran) nor would he want to on return.  He would however not live
openly to any extent on return to Pakistan.  He would live discreetly.  He
would seek to avoid any expression of his sexuality most of the time (save
when he is in a small and trusted group of other gay men) to avoid
persecution.  Properly applying HJ (Iran) this makes him a refugee.

The FtT made a material error of law.  I remake the appeal.  The appeal is
allowed on protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Joanna McWilliam                 Date 25 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
