
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05453/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 November 2019                           |On 6 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     N X
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Anderson, Counsel, instructed by Virgo
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the appellant is an asylum  seeker  and  so  is  entitled  to
privacy.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Albania born in  July  2000  against  a
decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a
decision of the  respondent  refusing  him  recognition  as  a  refugee  or
humanitarian protection or leave to remain on human rights grounds.

3. By way of introduction, it is the appellant's case that he  is  a  victim
of trafficking having been sold into slavery with the  full  connivance  of
his father  to  discharge  debts.   That  much  is  accepted.   It  is  the
respondent's case that internal relocation  and  effective  protection  are
appropriate remedies in this case and the appellant has not shown they  are
not available to him.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was
thought arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had misdirected herself
when considering the option of internal relocation.

4. The grounds make out a strong prima facie case by  concentrating  on  the
precise words of the judge and taking them out of context.   The  criticism
is that the judge "elides questions 2 and 3" set by the Court of Appeal  in
SSHD v SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 by saying that the appellant  will
be safe in Tirana.  The judge said at paragraph 63:

  "having considered all the evidence in the round, I  find  the  appellant
  could safely internally relocate to Tirana and therefore, it would not be
  unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect the appellant to relocate  in  the
  circumstances."

5. The grounds point out correctly  that  at  paragraph  33  in  SSHD  v  JC
(Jamaica) the Senior President, Sir Ernest Rider said:

  "the issue of  the  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation  accordingly
  involves three separate questions:

  1.  What is the location to which it is proposed the person could move?

  2.  Are there real risks of serious harm or persecution in this place?

  3.  If not, is it reasonable or not unduly harsh to expect the person  to
  relocate in this place?".

6. If the judge had  elided  the  questions  as  alleged  then  there  would
clearly be an error of law.  Taken in  isolation  it  is  not  sensible  to
assert that because the appellant could go to Tirana  it  follows  that  it
would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him to go there.

7. However the judge had considered evidence about  conditions  in  Albania.
The judge made  findings  beginning  at  paragraph  59  under  the  heading
"Available support network".

8. Clearly this is a case where the appellant could not turn to  his  family
for support.  His family were a major part  of  his  problems.   The  judge
recognised this.

9. The judge relied on a report from the ARC Foundation  entitled  "Albania:
trafficked boys and young men".  The judge described the report as  dealing
with the issue of protection "thoroughly" and referred to pages 103 to  126
in the bundle.  I have them before me.   As  the  judge  explained  a  Home
Office fact-finding report described the Albanian framework for  protecting
victims of trafficking as "good" but also recognised that  there  was  room
for improvement.  This includes (at page 103) the  claim  from  a  briefing
report on Albania by World Vision and ChildPact which confirms that:

  "Trafficking  victims  repatriated  to,  or  identified  in  Albania   as
  foreigners, are entitled to all the services provided to Albanian victims
  identified domestically."

10. The same source referred to the  Group  of  Experts  on  Action  against
Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA) in  the  bundle  (at  page  109)  which
recognises that there are no shelters for male victims of  trafficking  but
an NGO provides counselling, legal  advice,  medical  services,  vocational
training and assistance with job-seeking and residential flats for victims.
 Typically the people they  helped  were  between  17  and  20  years  old.
Eighteen young men had benefitted from that assistance in 2014.  Other NGOs
were involved in broadly similar services.

11. The judge's use of the word "therefore"  followed  clear  findings  that
the appellant would be returned to Tirana where support mechanisms existed,
including support mechanisms particularly tailored to the  needs  of  young
men who had been victims of trafficking.  With  respect  to  the  Court  of
Appeal's decision there was no reason for the  judge  to  make  an  express
finding in this case concerning the risk of serious harm  in  Tirana.   The
availability of protection was irrelevant unless it that  was  the  judge's
view that there was such risk.  Given that the appellant is on his own  and
has been appallingly treated by his family it is obvious that he could  not
turn to them for support and  would  need  help  to  establish  himself  in
Tirana. I assume that that is what the judge meant because it is  extremely
likely to be right and it makes sense of the decision.

12. The risk that can be addressed properly by the agencies that are set  up
by the government of Albania or with the approval  and  connivance  of  the
government of Albania specifically to help such people.

13. Mr Anderson, who appeared  before  me  but  not  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal, based his arguments firmly around the grounds  and  I  understand
his reasons for doing that.  It was a proper approach  to  take  but  I  am
persuaded having looked at the evidence as a whole that would not  be  fair
to the First-tier Tribunal  to  ignore  the  context  of  the  infelicitous
remark.  I am not constructing a statute but deciding if an appeal has been
decided lawfully and I am satisfied from reading the decision  as  a  whole
that the judge applied her  mind  to  the  relevant  tests  and  reached  a
sustainable conclusion.

14. This is a  shocking  case.   It  must  be  an  extraordinarily  horrible
experience for a young man to be  sold  into  slavery  by  his  father  but
international protection is not  a  reward  or  compensation  for  horrible
experiences but a protection mechanism available to people whose own  state
has let them down.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to  and  did
conclude that the Albanian state will provide  appropriate  protection  and
therefore I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and I dismiss this appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 March 2020                   |





