
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05141/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Determination and reason promulgated |
|from George House                    |on:                                  |
|on 4 August 2021                     |08 September 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                AHMED RAWAND
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Heeps, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of  Iraq  and  gives  his
    date of birth as 1 January 1992.  His appeal to the FtT  was  dismissed
    by Judge Debra C Clapham by a decision promulgated on 5 November 2019.

 2. The decision of Judge Clapham was set aside by the decision of UT Judge
    Lindsley, dated 3 and issued on 7 July 2020, which should be read as if
    incorporated herein.


 3.  The decision of Judge Lindsley states at [13]:

      I set aside the findings at [102] of the  decision  but  preserve  the
      other findings of the FtT ... The article 3 ECHR appeal based on  real
      risk ... resulting from ... not being able to access a CSID (or  INID)
      on return ...  will therefore be remade on the basis ...  that  he  is
      found generally not to be a credible witness and that he  has  family,
      including his father, in Diyala with whom he has some contact.

 4. The decision of UT  Judge  Lindsley  also  gave  directions,  including
    directions for skeleton arguments, and for the appellant to  provide  a
    consolidated bundle of documents.

 5. On  19  July  2021,  the  UT  made  a  transfer  order  to  enable  the
    determination  of  the  appeal  to  be  completed  by   a   differently
    constituted tribunal.

 6. The SSHD's position is set out in a skeleton  argument  dated  23  July
    2020.   The appellant's position is  set  out  in  an  amended  written
    submission filed on  3  August  2021.   Representatives  adopted  those
    items, and  made  further  oral  submissions,  having  heard  which,  I
    reserved my decision.  I am obliged to both sides for their assistance.



 7. Ms Everett accepted that there is general difficulty in  resolving  the
    practicalities of obtaining identification, whether a CSID, an INID, or
    a  passport.   She  submitted,  however,  that  the  first  source   of
    difficulty   is   the   appellant's   intransigence   over   his   true
    circumstances, and it was for him to establish his case,  not  for  the
    respondent to map out his route.

 8. The appellant's submissions are weighty and detailed on  those  general
    difficulties over documentation, but they gloss over the primary  facts
    of the case.

 9. At [7] of his written submission, the appellant says, "From the  outset
    in this appeal the appellant has  no  documentation  ...  This  is  not
    disputed,  it  would  appear,  by  the  respondent.   The  respondent's
    position is that it would be possible for the appellant to  re-document
    himself either in the UK or in Iraq.  However, with regard  to  country
    guidance, it can be shown this is not possible."

10. The appellant goes on to argue at [8] that  he  would  be  returned  to
    Baghdad as "the only way he would be able to return to the IKR would be
    if he were to return voluntarily, which would not be the case".  On the
    hypothesis of return to Baghdad, he submits at [18] that the  "sticking
    point in the appeal" is that he would be unable to travel from  Baghdad
    to Jalawla in Diyala province, and is therefore entitled to protection.



11. The respondent refers in  her  skeleton  argument  to  the  appellant's
    interview:

      Q25: What identity documents did you have in Iraq?

      A: Passport, taskera and nationality ID.

12. The respondent has recorded that the appellant  produced  no  documents
    and that he denied having any in the UK.  I have not been  referred  to
    any acceptance of his position going further than that.

13. The appellant has been found generally to be not credible, but there is
    no reason not to accept his evidence about documents he had in Iraq.

14. The appellant has been found  to  have  contact  with  family  in  Iraq
    including his father and brother.

15. There is no reason to think that the appellant does not have  available
    to him, or is unable to obtain, the originals, or at least  copies,  of
    the above documents, which would be more  than  enough  to  enable  his
    travel to anywhere in Iraq where transport is available, including  the
    IKR.

16. In the alternative, there is no reason  to  think  that  the  appellant
    would be unable to   obtain copies of  family  members'  documentation,
    and details of his record in the family  register,  to  enable  him  to
    obtain up-to-date documents with ease.

17. Thus, with all respect to his representative's  detailed  arguments  on
    obstacles in his way, the appellant fails to show, even  to  the  lower
    standard, that there are any, other than his own recalcitrance.

18. There is an alternative strand to the appellant's case, although not so
    developed, which is that even if the difficulty is his non-cooperation,
    as in refusal to return voluntarily, he is entitled to protection.

19. A person who can return voluntarily in safety is not a refugee, a point
    settled in AA & Another v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  401,  where  Brooke  LJ
    gave the judgment of the Court:

      [99] ... a person who can voluntarily return in safety to the  country
      of his nationality is not a refugee, notwithstanding that on a  forced
      return he would be at risk. Such a person  is  not  outside  his  home
      State  owing  to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  Neither s
      84(1)(g) of the Act of 2002 nor Article 3 of the Convention can begin
      to demonstrate the contrary,  since  neither  enlarges  the  "refugee"
      definition; and a safe voluntary returnee is outside the definition.

20. The question in respect of article 3 was left unanswered, see  [107]  -
    [108], and, perhaps surprisingly, does not appear to be the subject  of
    further authority.

21. In so far as it is necessary to answer it for purposes of this case,  I
    find that it would be contrary to principle to find  protection  to  be
    available on grounds of refusal to return voluntarily.

22. All forms of protection are conditioned on the person being unable  or,
    owing to some risk against  which  they  are  entitled  to  protection,
    unwilling to avail him or herself of the protection of the  country  of
    return.  Absent such risk, protection is not available by  refusing  to
    make arrangements for return, or by refusing to  cooperate  in  schemes
    for assisted and voluntary return operated by the respondent.

23. For the above reasons, the appellant fails  to  establish  his  primary
    case of inability to  obtain  documents  to  return  to  Iraq  (and  to
    relocate, if necessary); and his alternative, less developed case, that
    he is entitled to protection by refusing to cooperate  in  his  return,
    also fails.

24. The appellant's appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

25. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      5 August 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




