
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06929/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 February 2021                 |On 16 February 2021                |
|(remote hearing)                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Radford, Counsel instructed by Pickup Scott
Solicitors

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, I will refer  to
      the parties as they were designated in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born in 1974, who has lived  in
      the UK since 1991, when he was  16  years  old.  In  January  2007  he
      murdered his wife and  was  sentenced  to  life  imprisonment  with  a
      recommendation to serve at least 13 years.

   3. In July 2016 the appellant was  served  with  a  decision  to  make  a
      deportation order against him in accordance with section 32(5) of  the
      UK Borders Act 2007, subject  to  consideration  of  section  33.  The
      appellant made a protection and human rights claim, which was  refused
      by the respondent in July 2019. The appellant appealed to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal where his appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Conrath ("the judge"). In a decision  promulgated  on  1  May
      2020 the judge allowed the appeal. The  respondent  is  now  appealing
      against that decision.

   4. The appellant's protection claim, in summary, is that his late  wife's
      family, who live in the UK and Somaliland, have threatened to kill him
      and that his life will be at risk in  Somalia  from  his  late  wife's
      family who will stop at nothing to exact revenge.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   5. Relying on a psychological assessment  report  by  Dr  McKeown  and  a
      Parole Board decision dated 15 January 2020 (but  without  making  any
      reference to the OASys report) the judge found that the appellant does
      not constitute a danger to the community for the purposes  of  section
      72 of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002
      Act").

   6. The judge accepted the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  sister
      regarding threats from the appellant's late wife's  family  and  found
      that the appellant would be at risk from them on  return  to  Somalia.
      The judge relied on  a  country  expert  report  of  Mr  Ingiriis.  At
      paragraph 46 of the decision the judge quoted the  following  from  Mr
      Ingirris's report:

           "Revenge remains a means of punishment to respond to present and
           past issues between clans, groups and individuals. Therefore, it
           will be a danger for a person like [OS] who committed  a  murder
           to safely return and live anywhere in Somaliland".

   7. I pause to make the observation that Mr Ingirris did  not  comment  in
      his report on whether the appellant would also be  at  risk  in  other
      parts of Somalia, such as Mogadishu.

   8. Whether the appellant would be at  risk  in  Mogadishu  was  at  issue
      before the judge (although relocation to Mogadishu is  not  raised  in
      the respondent's refusal letter). At paragraph 26 of the decision  the
      judge recorded the appellant's evidence at the hearing as  being  that
      if he were to return to Hargeysa his  wife's  family  would  find  out
      because it is a small community. With respect to Mogadishu  the  judge
      stated:

           "He accepted that he didn't know about Mogadishu, because he had
           never been there. However, he believed  that  the  family  would
           find out where he was, wherever he went to in Somalia"


   9. The judge concluded, in respect of the appellant's  protection  claim,
      at paragraph 48:

           "I find that this appellant is still at risk on  being  returned
           to Somalia, whatever part of that country he is returned to, and
           I find that, because of the lack of sufficiency  of  protection,
           relocation is not an option in  this  case.  I  find  that  this
           appellant would be  at  risk  whenever  he  is  returned  to  in
           Somalia, including Mogadishu".

  10. With respect  to  article  8  ECHR,  after  considering  the  relevant
      sections of Part 5A of the 2002 Act, the judge concluded at  paragraph
      58 of the decision that there were "very compelling  circumstances  as
      to why this appellant should be allowed to remain  in  this  country".
      One of the reasons given by the judge (in paragraph  58)  for  finding
      there to be "very compelling circumstances" was that  if  returned  to
      Somalia the appellant would face a risk to  his  life  from  his  late
      wife's family.


Analysis


  11. The respondent advanced (and I heard submissions from both parties on)
      a wide range of arguments as to why, in  the  respondent's  view,  the
      judge made several material errors of law. However,  I  only  need  to
      consider one of the points raised in  the  grounds  as  the  error  it
      identifies is such that the decision will need to be set aside in  its
      entirety.

  12. The error is that the judge did not give any reasons  to  explain  his
      finding at paragraph 48 of the decision that the appellant would be at
      risk from his  late  wife's  family  in  Mogadishu.  Moreover,  having
      reviewed the evidence that was  before  the  judge,  I  am  unable  to
      discern an  evidential  basis  to  support  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant would be at risk from his former wife's family in Mogadishu.
      The evidence of the appellant was that his late wife's family live  in
      Somaliland and in the UK, not Mogadishu; and the report of Mr Ingirris
      does not address the issue of  whether  the  appellant's  late  wife's
      family  would  be  able  to  locate  the   appellant   in   Mogadishu.
      Accordingly, I find that the judge fell into error in concluding  that
      the appellant would be at risk in Mogadishu because (a) the conclusion
      was not supported by reasons; and (b) the evidence before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal did not support the conclusion.

  13. This error is plainly material to the appellant's protection claim  as
      if the appellant would not be at risk from his late wife's  family  in
      Mogadishu it was necessary for the judge to consider whether he  could
      safely and reasonably relocate to Mogadishu.

  14. The error is also material to the judge's article 8  assessment.  This
      is because one of the factors weighing in the  appellant's  favour  in
      the judge's article 8 proportionality assessment (at paragraph  58  of
      the decision) was that he would face a risk to his life from his  late
      wife's family in Somalia. Given, in particular, the high threshold  to
      be met under section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act and that,  in  accordance
      with 117C(2), the more serious the  offence  the  greater  the  public
      interest in deportation, the same conclusion on proportionality  might
      not have been reached if the judge had found that there was a part  of
      Somalia in which the appellant could live safely.

  15. Both parties were of the view that in the event I found there to be an
      error of law the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.
      Given that significant further fact-finding is likely to be  necessary
      for this decision to be re-made, and  that  both  the  protection  and
      article 8 claim will need to be considered, I agree that this  is  the
      appropriate course of action.

  16. I have considered whether  any  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal should be preserved. I have reached the view that they should
      not. This is because the assessment  of  whether  the  family  of  the
      appellant's late wife will pose a threat to the appellant in Mogadishu
      cannot easily be separated from consideration of the risk they pose in
      Somaliland (or, indeed, in the UK). I therefore have formed  the  view
      that  the  appeal  should  be  considered  afresh,  with  no  findings
      preserved, by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a
different judge with no findings preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                       |       |                      |
|                                       |       |                      |
|Signed                                 |       |                      |
|D. Sheridan                            |       |                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan          |       |Dated:  4 February    |
|                                       |       |2021                  |

