
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06757/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th December 2019                 |On 24th December 2019                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr X A
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Youssefian, Counsel, instructed by Malik &
Malik Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary of State
but nonetheless, hereinafter I shall refer to the parties as they were
described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr X as the appellant.

The Secretary of State applies with permission to appeal the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge K M Verghis in allowing the appellant's
appeal on human rights grounds.  The appeal on asylum and humanitarian
protection grounds was dismissed.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 11th March 2000 and it was
accepted that he had been a victim of trafficking and as such, the judge
had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010, Child,
vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance.  His mother whilst in
Albania had a relationship with a man called A, the leader of a criminal
gang in Albania who took the appellant's mother to Italy to become a
prostitute.  She and the appellant travelled to Italy, but the mother made
arrangements to escape.  The mother was discovered and detained by police
and he has not seen her since 5th January 2014.  The appellant has a sister
in Albania who lives with her husband in Burrell and his grandparents died
in 2014 and 2017.  His brother lives in the UK, fifteen minutes' walk away
from where he lives, and he sees him almost every day.

The judge recorded in the evidence at paragraph 13 that:

 "The appellant does not feel safe in Albania.  All he knows is that A has
power over people, and he does not know any more about him.  He is a
danger.  Albania is a very corrupted country and the police don't do things
in the right way there are lots of protests as the government is not
helping the country.  The appellant does not see the point in going back
there and does not see a difference."

At paragraph 14 of the evidence the judge recorded:

"His brother has just got his visa and the appellant has his own.  He does
not rely on his brother.  The appellant does not remember anyone back home.
 He has been with his partner for two years and it is a serious
relationship.  They want to take things slowly and be a family.  He sees
her every week and stays at her parents' house.  It would be problematic if
he didn't see her.  She has bipolar disorder relies on the appellant.  He
is the only person who is able to help her with her illness and the way she
feels emotions."

The judge made the following findings at paragraph 33:

"The appellant has made enquiries through the British Red Cross about his
mother, (those enquiries have been negative) and so he does not know her
whereabouts.  ...  Given that the last place A was seen as Italy in 2014,
it is far from certain that he is in Albania."

At paragraph 34 the judge found that:

"The appellant's claim for international protection rests substantially
upon his fear of being found and killed by A; this is because the
appellant's mother escaped with the appellant from A.  The appellant
asserts that his mother was the victim of trafficking and that he would be
at risk of being trafficked upon his return to Albania as a lone male and
at risk of serious violence or death at the hands of A.

The judge did not find that he had engaged a Convention reason and that
although the journey and the circumstances which led him to the UK were
troubling it did not fulfil the test of real risk of serious harm.

The judge stated at paragraph 36: "I accept the respondent's submissions on
sufficiency of protection.  ...  There is no suggestion that A has any
links or influence on the police in Albania.  Appellant has never been
identified."

At paragraph 37 the judge found:

"The appellant in strict terms was not trafficked.  As he has a sister in
Albania with whom he is in contact, it is open to him to seek her help and
support in settling there.  He is therefore not a lone male on return.  The
appellant is able to communicate in the native language and is now an
adult.  He is in good health.  He has attained qualifications whilst in the
UK.  He has not since entering the UK been at risk of domestic abuse.  He
has not been the victim of sexual abuse within the family."

In sum, at paragraph 37 the judge stated: "I conclude that relocation
within Albania would be possible for this appellant."

The judge found that the appellant would have some vulnerability but that
was not the same as persecution and was not entitled to international
protection.

Similarly, at paragraphs 39 and 40 the judge found that he was not at risk
of serious harm from A and that he could obtain sufficiency of protection.

Those findings in relation to international relocation and humanitarian
protection were not challenged by the appellant.  The judge proceeded in
terms of Article 8 and stated at paragraph 45:

"If an applicant fails to meet the Rules, it should only be in genuinely
exceptional circumstances that there would be a breach of Article 8.  In
this context 'exceptional' means circumstances in which a refusal would
result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual so would not
be proportionate.  The same considerations would apply to paragraph
276ADE."

The judge proceeded to apply Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
and Asylum Act and found the appellant having attended mainstream school in
the UK since he was 13 and was able to speak English.

At paragraph 49 the judge noted that little weight should be given to
private life established at a time when a person is in the UK unlawfully or
at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious and noted that
the public interest in ensuring immigration controls were maintained by
removing those who had no right to remain, paragraph 55.  At paragraph 52
she stated this:

"52.  The Appellant's leave has always been precarious.  The respondent
accepts that the account as to the appellant's mother's trafficking is
plausible and therefore his connection to that scenario.  He sought
assistance in a timely way when in the UK.  The appellant therefore
attempted to regularise his position as soon as he could and has lived as a
supported minor since entry to the UK.

53.   In terms of his private life, the respondent concedes that this
aspect of the appeal is the appellant's strongest.  The appellant is in the
fortunate position that he has found his brother in the UK.  The appellant
has no relationship with his biological father as his parents' relationship
broke down before he was born.  He has a sister in Albania with whom he has
electronic contact.  His grandparents with whom he lived within Albania,
have both died.  The most tenable and nurtured relationship for the
appellant is the relationship with his brother and his sister-in-law.  When
giving evidence about this relationship, I found that the appellant
somewhat underplayed the value of the relationship when describing the
level of dependency.  What is clear from his evidence, is that the
appellant sees his brother and sister-in-law very regularly and this is an
important and nourishing form of family contact for this young appellant,
especially so given he cannot draw on the support of parents or
grandparents.  At the time of writing, this appellant is 19 years of age
and on the threshold of adult life.  I accept to the ordinary civil
standard the closeness of this relationship which I find goes beyond a
normal sibling relationship and that the appellant's older brother stands
in a quasi-parental role.

54.   I take account of the appellant's relationship with his partner.  I
accept her evidence and that of her mother.  This is a relationship of less
than two years duration.  I accept the health issues of the appellant's
partner but have not seen medical evidence to support the assertions made.
Although still developing I accept that this is a genuine and subsisting
relationship."

The judge stated that she took account of his important years of
development here, a traumatic journey where he lost all contact with his
only parent, he had made good use of the opportunities and that he had a
very close relationship with his brother and sister-in-law.  His brother in
essence was acting in a quasi-parental role.  The judge took into account
the progress in education and his close relationship with his partner.

The judge also acknowledged he had a sister in Albania, spent all his life
in Albania until he travelled to the UK and it was possible, he could
relocate to Albania "although this would be very difficult for him".

The Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal stated that the judge had
made a material misdirection in law on a material matter by stating that
the appellant had established family life with his UK sibling.  It was
argued that there was nothing in the appellant's case which went beyond
normal emotional ties to constitute family life for the purposes of Article
8.  The judge at paragraph 11 had recorded that his brother lives in the UK
and is fifteen minutes' walk away from where he lives.  He sees him almost
every day.  He does not reside with his brother and paragraph 14 stated "he
does not rely on his brother".

Reliance was placed on Singh & Anor v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630:

"The love and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings will
not of itself justify a finding of a family life.  There has to be
something more.  ...  On the other hand, a young adult living independently
of his parents may well not have a family life for the purposes of Article
8."

Ground 2 asserted that the judge had failed to correctly carry out the
proportionality balancing exercise in accordance with the requirements of
117B of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.  The judge
stated at paragraph 56 that the appellant had "significant private life".

It was argued that this was contrary to the requirements of Section 117B
(4) and Section 117B(5), which require little weight to be attached to a
private life established with unlawful or precarious immigration status.

Analysis

At the hearing Mr Tufan produced the authorities of Miah (section 117B NIAA
2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 00131, which held that Section 117B made no
distinction between adult and child immigrants.  Albeit the appellant had
entered the UK at the age of 13 following an incident of trafficking that
did not negate the application of Section 117B (5).  Also cited was AAO v
Entry Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840 at paragraph 35, which held
that:

         "35.     As for the position of parents and adult children, it is
         established that family life will not normally exist between them
         within the meaning of article 8 at all in the absence of further
         elements of dependency which go beyond normal emotional ties: see S
         v. United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196, Abdulaziz, Cabales and
         Balkandali v. United Kingdom [1985] 7 EHRR 471, Advic v. United
         Kingdom [1995] EHRR 57, Kugathas v. SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31, and JB
         (India) v. ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 234.  That is not to say that
         reliance on the further element of financial dependency will bring
         a breach of article 8: no case in which it has in the present
         context has been discovered."

There was initially a discussion as to whether the appellant had relied on
the private life with his brother owing to the production of a further
decision dated 29th January 2019 in relation to Article 8 protected right
with the appellant's girlfriend, C.  That relationship could not come
within the scope of Appendix FM because they had not been living together
or had been in a relationship for the previous two years.

The Secretary of State's decision, however, did consider the relationship
with his brother and found that it was not demonstrated that it remained
one of dependency between adult siblings and contact could be maintained
through modern forms of communication.

The Secretary of State effectively argued two grounds, the first that the
appellant had not established a family life with his brother because the
relationship did not go beyond normal emotional ties and secondly that the
judge did not carry out the proportionality balancing exercise in
accordance with the requirements of Section 117B(4) and (5), which required
little weight to be attached to a private life established when it was
precarious.

The consideration of the family life with the brother was not a new issue,
as can be seen from the decision dated 29th January 2019 of the Secretary
of State, and effectively considered through the lens of his private life.
Mr Tufan took issue with the judge's approach to the extent of the
relationship, particularly the reference to finding

         "the appellant somewhat underplayed the value of the relationship
         when describing the level of dependency"

    but the judge did proceed to find that "the appellant sees his brother
    and sister-in-law very regularly and this is an important and
    nourishing form of family contact for this young appellant, especially
    so given he cannot draw on the support of parents or grandparents."
    The judge noted that the appellant was an adult at the age of 19 but
    found that the relationship went beyond normal sibling relationship and
    that the appellant's brother stood in a quasi-parental role.  Clearly
    the judge found, in these particular circumstances, a close
    relationship with the brother, owing to the young age of the appellant,
    the loss of his parent, the experience of his mother being trafficked,
    did equate to being beyond normal emotional ties.  This is implicit in
    the findings.

Even so, the relationship with the brother effectively was considered as an
integral part of the appellant's private life.

It was the judge who listened to the oral evidence given by the appellant
and had a first-hand opportunity to examine his evidence.  She also found
that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with the girlfriend,
albeit that it did not fall within the ambit of the Immigration Rules.  The
grounds of appeal refer to the appellant's evidence that "he does not rely
on his brother".  That, however, was in relation to his visa.  The full
context of that statement was recorded as follows:

         "His brother has just got his visa and the appellant has his own.
         He does not rely on his brother.  The appellant does not remember
         anyone back home."

That, to my mind, is the reference to the visa and nothing more and thus,
it was open to the judge to find that the appellant had a very close
relationship with his brother.  The grounds have sought to rely on a
misunderstanding of the decision.  The reasoning of the judge, although
brief, illustrates the reliance of the appellant on his brother.

It is not manifest that the judge failed to appreciate that Section 117B
applies to minors as well as adults as per Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 -
children). This is because it is clear that the judge did direct herself
appropriately in relation to Section 117B(4) and (5), as can be seen from
her legal self-direction at paragraph 49, stating that little weight should
be given to a private life established when a person's immigration status
is precarious.

The judge noted the public interest and specifically made findings in
relation to the appellant's ability, for example, to speak English.  There
is no challenge in relation to the fact that the appellant was not self-
sufficient and that he had lived as a supported minor since entry to the
United Kingdom.  The judge found that the appellant had developed a
significant private life and Section 117B governs the weight to be accorded
to that private life.

As set out at paragraph 50 by the judge, Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803 confirms that Section 117B intended
a structured approach but does not impose a straitjacket on the decision
maker and all relevant factors have to be taken into account.  It is not
conceivable that the judge would not have been aware of the provisions of
Section 117B, when making her decision.  She was aware, for example, that
the appellant had only been in the United Kingdom since 2014 but equally,
the appellant had spent "important years of development here" particularly
that he had been at school here since the age of 13 years, a very
significant period of time of the appellant's formative years.  The judge
had set out in detail the circumstances of the appellant when refusing the
asylum claim, for example the traumatic experience the appellant had
undergone in losing his parent and the context of the trafficking.

The judge did apply a balance sheet approach and applied the correct test
as set out by R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11, that of unjustifiably harsh
consequences.

Albeit that the appellant had only been in the UK for five years, he had
come here at the age of 13 owing to the travails of his mother, and
significantly, the judge stated at paragraph 59 that "with reference to all
the cumulative factors in this appeal" that she found that to separate this
appellant from his brother, sister-in-law and partner would have, in the
context, unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant and thus, the
refusal of grant of leave would be in these circumstances disproportionate.


The judge's decision may have been generous but the approach to
proportionality did not disclose legal error.  It should be noted that mere
disagreement about the weight to be accorded to the evidence is a matter
for the judge and should not be characterised as an error of law, Herrera v
The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

I am further emboldened by UT (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1095, which held
at paragraph 19:

"Although 'error of law' is widely defined, it is not the case that the UT
is entitled to remake the decision of the FtT simply because it does not
agree with it, or because it thinks it can produce a better one.

Baroness Hale in AH (Sudan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department at
[30] held:

'Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirections simply because
they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts or expressed
themselves differently.'"

For these reasons, I find no error of law and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal should stand.


Signed     Helen Rimington                         Date 21st December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington







