
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06887/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2019                           |On 3 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    C G G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 we make an order prohibiting the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public  to  identify  the  appellant's
children. Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We
make this order because our decision necessarily touches on  their  welfare
and they are entitled to privacy.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Jamaica against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State on 11 May 2018 refusing to revoke  a  deportation  order
made against him.  It was the appellant's case that he  is  a  refugee  and
that  refusing  to   revoke   the   deportation   order   would   interfere
disproportionately with the private and family life of the appellant or his
close relatives. It is now accepted  that  he  is  not  a  refugee  but  he
maintains that deporting him would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights and  particularly
Article 8.

3. The appellant was born in 1987  and  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
visitor in December 2000.  He remained in the United  Kingdom  for  a  time
without permission although clearly he cannot be blamed for that because he
was an infant.  In February 2009 he was given indefinite  leave  to  remain
because of the amount of time he had spent in the United Kingdom.

4. He has a criminal record but significantly on  3  November  2011  he  was
convicted at the Crown  Court  sitting  at  Inner  London  of  offences  of
burglary and theft and sentenced to fifteen months' imprisonment.  He was a
looter after a  well-publicised  riot  and  it  is  recorded  that  he  was
sentenced on the basis that although he had the necessary intention he  did
not actually take anything.  As a consequence of that  sentence  he  became
liable to "automatic" deportation.  He was given formal notice of  that  to
which he made a formal response and further submissions in April 2012.   On
16 January 2013  a  Deportation  Order  was  signed  and  he  appealed  the
decision. His appeal was dismissed and his appeal rights were exhausted  on
26 March 2015.  Notwithstanding this decision he  remained  in  the  United
Kingdom  and  on  18  December  2015  he  made  submissions  by  his  legal
representatives raising a protection and human  rights  claim.  Before  the
application was decided it was supplemented by further submissions.

5. The asylum procedures were followed and the application  was  refused  on
11 May 2018 on  protection  and  human  rights  grounds  including  grounds
relying on Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

6. The appeal against that decision was heard in the First-tier Tribunal  on
4 July 2019 and the Decision and Reasons was promulgated on 16 August 2019.
 The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

7. The appellant asked for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
permission was granted by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  First-tier
Tribunal's ground said "Ground 2B only is arguable.  There is  an  arguable
material error of law." Ground 2B is identified as:

  "Failing to make clear findings on the  issue  of  whether  it  would  be
  unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without  their  father,
  given that it was accepted that it would be unduly harsh for four of  his
  children to relocate to Jamaica."

8. Mr Ball, for the appellant, had produced a note for  the  Upper  Tribunal
entitled "Grounds" and maintaining that he was entitled to  argue  both  of
the grounds of appeal.  He is right.  Whilst the wording of paragraph 3  is
unequivocal the grounds as a whole were sent out in  the  form  appropriate
for a grant of permission on  all  grounds.   We  doubt  that  it  was  the
intention of the First-tier Tribunal to limit the grounds in the  way  that
it might look as though it had tried to do.  There was no commentary on the
reasons why the ground identified as "2A" was not arguable and although  it
does raise a discrete point it is not so different from the ground on which
permission was unarguably granted that restricting the scope of  the  grant
would make for a needlessly tortuous hearing.

9. The respondent had served a skeleton argument signed  by  Mr  Christopher
Bates in the Specialist Appeals Team dated 1 November 2019.  That  did  not
suggest that the grant of permission was limited. Mr Jarvis did not seek to
argue that the grant of permission was limited.

10. Without being disrespectful to Mr Ball's drafting we summarise  the  two
grounds as a contention that the First-tier Tribunal,  first,  applied  the
wrong test and, second, gave inadequate reasons.

11. The only relevant ground of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  that
created by Section 84(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002 and is that "the decision is unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998."

12. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  which  we  treated  as  a
skeleton argument, make much of the application of  paragraphs  390,  390A,
391, 391A, 396 and 397 and A398 of HC 395.  This is relevant because, as is
now recognised as almost trite law,  a  person's  ability  to  satisfy  the
requirements in Immigration Rules illuminates the public interest  in  that
person being allowed to remain but the judge was obliged by its  own  terms
to consider Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
and, although acknowledged, this should have featured more  prominently  in
the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

13. At paragraph 38 of the Decision and Reasons the judge  said  that  "very
compelling reasons had to be shown  to  displace  the  public  interest  in
deportation".

14. A difficulty with this direction is that "very compelling  reasons"  did
not have to be shown. Paragraph 398 of HC 395 shows that the deportation of
a foreign criminal is in the public interest and that interest will only be
outweighed by "very compelling circumstances (not "reasons")  when  neither
paragraph 399 (parental  and  partner  relationships)  nor  paragraph  399A
(lived in United Kingdom for over half his life) apply. The statutory  test
of "very compelling circumstances" is created by  Section  117C(6)  of  the
2002 Act and is relevant in the case of a foreign  criminal  who  has  been
sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years.  This  appeal
does not concern such a case. In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD, [2013] EWCA Civ  1192
"very compelling circumstances" were identified as a  characteristic  of  a
case that should be allowed on "private and family life" grounds but it  is
not strictly a test.

15. It is not necessarily a fundamental error but  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  has  overstated  the  difficulties  slightly  by  saying  that  very
compelling reasons had to be shown.

16. He was certainly entitled to remind himself of Arden  L.J.'s  ruling  in
IT (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 932 where she said at paragraph 57:

  "I conclude that the commencement of Section 117A to D of  the  2002  Act
  does not mean that a different and lower weight is to  be  given  to  the
  public interest in applications to revoke a deportation  order  following
  deportation and in other deportation situations."

17. However we do not agree with the judge when he said at paragraph 38:

  "The starting point had to be that the assessment  of  what  was  in  the
  public interest at the date on which the order was made could not  be  of
  any less weight when revocation was sought."

18. We certainly agree that deportation  remains  in  the  public  interest.
That is hardly controversial but if authority is needed Section 117C(1)  of
the 2002 Act says that the deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the
public interest. We do not agree that the weight to be given to the  public
interest in deportation is fixed.  Section 117C(2) provides that "the  more
serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the  greater  is  the
public interest in deportation of the criminal". It must  follow  that  the
public interest in deporting the foreign criminal  is  not  equal  for  all
foreign criminals. The term "foreign criminal" is defined  in  Part  5  and
includes a person who has been sent to prison for at least  twelve  months.
There will always be a public interest in deporting such a person  although
such a person will not always have to be deported.

19. Paragraph 391A provides:

  "In other  cases,  a  revocation  of  the  order  will  not  normally  be
  authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either by  a
  change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh information
  coming to light which was not before the  appellate  authorities  or  the
  Secretary of State.  The passage of time since the  person  was  deported
  may also in itself amount to such a change of circumstances as to warrant
  revocation of the order."

20. Given that very clear explanation in the policy manifested in the  Rules
we cannot agree that the "starting point had to be that the  assessment  of
what is in the public interest at the date on  which  the  order  was  made
could not be of any less weight when revocation was sought." Regard must be
given to the decision to dismiss the appeal against the decision to  deport
but the circumstances at the time of decision are  the  ones  that  matter.
That said, we agree that the public interest in deporting the appellant  in
this case has not diminished with the passage of  time.  A  person  who  is
subject to a deportation order knows that he or she is  required  to  leave
the United Kingdom and it is hard  to  see  how  remaining  in  the  United
Kingdom in defiance of that clear  instruction  can  in  any  circumstances
diminish the public interest in deportation. We are  satisfied  that  there
are no such circumstances here and  there  is  no  material  error  in  the
judge's misdirection.

21. Of much greater concern is the judge's consideration of  the  rights  of
the claimant's partner (if he has one) and his children.  It is quite plain
from the terms of Section 117C that there are two statutory  exceptions  to
the public interest requiring deportation.

22. Exception 1 applies where,  inter  alia,  there  are  "very  significant
obstacles" to the appellant's integration into  the  country  to  which  he
would be sent.  This case has not been run on that basis except in  so  far
as it was incidental to the asylum claim that is not now pursued.  Although
the appellant has only childhood knowledge of Jamaica he is  a  citizen  of
Jamaica and is resourceful and it not arguable that Exception 1 applies.

23. Exception 2 has to be considered carefully.  We set out below the  terms
of Section 117C(5):

  "Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
  relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of  C's  deportation
  on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

24. It is not apparent from paragraph 38 of the Decision and Reasons, or  at
all, that the judge gave Exception 2 proper consideration.

25. At paragraph 51 of the Decision and Reasons the judge said:

  "Taking account of all relevant facts I do not consider that  the  effect
  of the appellant's deportation upon his fianc�e and all of his  children,
  while undoubtedly detrimental, will be unduly harsh.  Certainly, no  very
  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  the  factors  mentioned   in
  Exceptions 1 and 2 have been established."

26. There was no need for very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above.
This is not a case  of  at  least  four  years'  imprisonment.   Satisfying
Exception 1 or Exception 2 would be proper reasons to allow the appeal.  We
find that the judge did not make proper findings about the  application  of
Exception 1 or Exception  2.  Failure  to  make  such  findings  concerning
Exception 2 and the child CJ is, we find, a material error.

27. Although the appellant  has  clearly  had  intimate  relationships  with
several women and has a current "partner" he does not  live  in  a  nuclear
family with any of the named children. The judge did not accept that  there
was a "qualifying partner" because the relationship  was  formed  when  the
appellant knew that he was in the United Kingdom without permission and  so
could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 339(b) of HC 395. We do not
agree that a "qualifying partner" for the purposes of Section  117D  cannot
be a partner who relies on a relationship established when he  was  in  the
United Kingdom unlawfully because that is not what the Act says. However we
find no error in the judge's conclusion that separating the appellant  from
his present partner, if that is what she is,  is  not  disproportionate  or
otherwise unlawful.

28. The appellant does have children.  RG was born on 28  October  2008  and
so is now 11 years old.  JG was born on 4 January 2010 and  so  is  now  10
years old.  CG was born on 11 June 2010 and so is now 9� years old.   Sadly
that child's mother  has  died,  on  21  December  2016.  We  find  this  a
significant change of circumstances since the earlier appeal was  dismissed
and we consider it in more detail below.  KG was born on  9  November  2011
and so is now 8 years old.  The appellant also has a  further  child  whose
date of birth is not given in the social worker's report but  is  described
as being a few weeks old.

29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge should have decided if the  appellant  had
a "subsisting parental relationship" with any of the children and  if  they
were in fact qualifying children. As far as we can see he did not.  We  are
concerned most about CG and it is accepted in the refusal letter  that  she
is a British citizen. It follows that she is  a  qualifying  child  if  the
parental relationship is established.

30. All the named children appear to have lived in the  United  Kingdom  for
at least seven years. It may well be that each of the  other  children  are
qualifying children too but we have not found it necessary to make specific
findings on this point.

31. There is a social  worker's  report  is  prepared  by  an  appropriately
qualified independent social worker, Mr Gary Crisp (MSc BA (Hons),  NBASW).
It is in some ways a disappointing document.  He has seen the children.  It
is clearly his opinion that it is in their best interests that their father
remains in the United Kingdom. The children all spend a great deal of  time
together, with the appellant, typically at  weekends  and  sometime  during
school holidays, and the appellant's present partner is  at  least  content
with that arrangement.

32. It is not helpful when the report refers to the effects  of  removal  as
"unduly harsh".  This phrase coincides with a statutory test.   We  do  not
know if the social worker understood that or whether he was  coincidentally
using words that chime with the statute.  It  would  have  been  much  more
helpful if, instead of using a phrase  that  is  a  term  of  art,  he  had
predicted the consequences of removal  so  that  the  Tribunal  could  then
decide if they were unduly harsh.

33. All of the children report being upset  if  they  are  not  in  frequent
contact with their father but we are particularly concerned about the child
CG whose mother has died.  The appellant said of her that CG's mother  died
"about three years ago and that since her mother's death the child had been
'bad, she is not focused in school and she needs a  lot  of  attention  and
comfort from me.  She sometimes says that she misses her Mummy and  I  have
to be there to comfort her or take her to school.'"    The  child  CG  said
that she would be "sad" if she would not be able to see her  father  for  a
long time.

34.  We  had  been  particularly  impressed  with  the  letter   from   CG's
grandmother.  It is at page 109 in the bundle.  It  is  in  manuscript  and
although clear and sober in its tone it is not professionally drawn and  in
some senses is all the better for that.  This is a grandmother  telling  us
about her grandchild whose mother is dead.   She  described  the  child  as
"very close" to the appellant and that the appellant  "play  (sic)  a  good
role in her life by helping me".  She said how the child spent every  other
weekend with the appellant.   Sometimes  the  appellant  took  her  to  her
mother's grave.  She said that the child "love her dad very much  it  would
break her little heart if she is separated from her dad as  her  mother  is
not around any more."

35. There is a letter from CG's school dated 12 February  2019  [page  131].
The school is a state junior school in  Surrey.   It  says  the  child  was
admitted to the school in 2017 and that the  appellant  "is  known  to  the
school.  He has come to collect his child on several occasions  during  the
past two years." The letter is signed by the head teacher.   This  evidence
is valuable because it confirms the claim that the appellant is involved in
the life of the child.

36. There is also a letter from the Head of School of the  "Pegasus  Academy
Trust" dated 1 March 2017 identifying the appellant as the "main carer"  of
CG and saying that CG is more settled since [the Appellant] has  been  more
involved in her up-bringing, bringing her to and from school etc."

37. We have considered the reasons for dismissing the  appeal.   The  judge,
rightly, reminded himself that the  test  asks  if  separation  is  "unduly
harsh" which phrase assumes that the consequences can  be  expected  to  be
harsh. In the case of all the  children  except  CG  we  find  the  judge's
approach to be sound.

38. However there  are  two  passages  in  the  appellant's  statement  that
impress. He refers to having an agreement with the child's grandmother that
he sees the appellant every other weekend and collects her from school.  He
said how he had taken the child to visit her mother's  grave  and  that  he
wanted her to remember her mother and he told her stories about her  mother
and described her as a "kind and a  loving  person."   The  appellant  then
said: "my daughter is a strong girl however;  she  always  breaks  down  in
tears when she sees me and as she fears that she will also lose me.  I  try
to explain to her that she will never lose me and I will always be part  of
her life."

39. Mr Jarvis indicated that he saw no reason to challenge  the  appellant's
evidence on this point or the evidence of the  grandmother  or  the  social
worker.

40. We consider again the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and  reasons.
 He reminded himself correctly of the need for there to be undue  harshness
before much weight could be given to the  breakup  of  a  family  life  and
reminded himself, correctly, to the well-known maxim in A D Lee [2011] EWCA
Civ 348 that splitting up families "is what deportation does".

41. We agree with the judge to a large extent that the consequences  of  the
appellant's removal on the children  will  be  of  the  kind  that  can  be
expected.  Parliament has said that such disruption is only significant  if
it amounts to undue harshness.  We see no basis for criticising the judge's
findings insofar as they relate to the children other than CG.

42. However CG's position is different.  Although there  are  many  examples
of children being brought up successfully by only  one  parent  it  is,  we
find, still the received view that being brought up  by  both  parents  is,
usually, inherently desirable.  Sometimes for a variety of reasons that  is
not possible and the consequences of the criminal behaviour of a parent are
often good reasons for a parent's involvement in the life of  child  to  be
minimised even if greater involvement is desirable  for  the  sake  of  the
child.  However this child has already lost her mother.

43. We do not wish to suggest that the grandmother is anything other than  a
competent, caring and effective substitute parent but with the best will in
the world she is not the child's mother.  The child  has  frequent  contact
with her father and that will stop if her father is deported.   We  do  not
know what the effect  of  that  would  be.   No  one  does.   But  all  our
experience entitles us to conclude that it would be another nasty  jolt  to
an already hurt little girl. We would expect it  to  unsettle  her  as  she
comes to terms with  her  mother's  death  and  leave  her  bewildered  and
insecure.

44. We find that those consequences would be  unduly  harsh.   We  find  the
judge was wrong to conclude otherwise.  He did not explain his decision and
we reach a different decision on the facts.

45. This is not important  for  the  purposes  of  Exception  2  unless  the
appellant and CG enjoy a "parental relationship".  It  is  clear  from  the
respondent's decision that the Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  this.
There the relationship is described as a  "private  fostering  arrangement"
where the child's grandmother was the primary  carer  (see  paragraph  92).
This conclusion was reached after accepting evidence that  the  appellant's
role in CG's life increased considerably to her benefit in the aftermath of
her mother's death but diminished later as the grandmother took day to  day
control.

46. We are unaware of any complete  definition  of  the  phrase  "subsisting
parental relationship" for the purposes of section 117C(5). We  doubt  that
it can ever be established simply by proving a biological link. If it could
then the words "subsisting" and "relationship" would be  otiose  but  other
than that it is a matter of fact and degree.

47. Here the child does not live with the appellant but contact is  frequent
and enriching. When the child's mother died  the  appellant  promptly  took
responsibility and provided a home. He was later instrumental in organising
the transfer of day to day care to a grandmother.  It  seems  that  he  has
helped organise appropriate care without the need for involvement by  stage
agencies. That is to his credit. He is plainly known to the school.  We  do
not see how the relationship can be described meaningfully  as  other  than
"parental" and "subsisting".

48. We do not accept all of the criticisms made of the judge.

49. We do not accept there has been any diminution in  the  public  interest
in his deportation.  The only thing that has changed save for the death  of
the mother of CG is that the appellant has extended his stay in the  United
Kingdom when he knew he ought to have left and has had  no  more  sense  of
responsibility than to allow another close relationship to develop  and  to
father another child.  We accept that the passage of time can diminish  the
need but this is not a case where the need is diminished in that way.

50. Clearly the appellant is able to work in the United Kingdom if given  an
opportunity.  He is articulate and not without wit.  He knows life  in  the
United Kingdom.  Although he has been in trouble for matters other than the
offence leading to his deportation most of the offending was some time  ago
and nothing was comparably serious.  The most recent offence was dealt with
by way of a caution and although wholly  discreditable  it  should  not  be
given more weight than it deserves.  It is  an  episode  of  bad  behaviour
which was dealt without prosecution.  These matters  are  slightly  against
the appellant in the balancing exercise but carry very little weight.

51. Removing him  will  impact  adversely  on  the  lives  of  his  children
including the fourth child as she grows up from being a tiny baby.  This is
against their best interests, which are for the appellant to remain in  the
United Kingdom where his children can see him, but the law does require the
best interests of the children to be satisfied  when  the  public  interest
requires deportation.  Parliament has  decided  that  the  public  interest
requires the deportation of foreign nationals who commit criminal  offences
in the United Kingdom below a modest level of severity and  the  disruption
to the family lives of those who cared about the offender is the price that
has to be paid.

52. We find the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.  The  judge  misdirected
himself about the appropriate test and made no  reasoned  findings  on  the
application of "Exception 2".

53.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  CG  enjoy   a   parental
relationship and the consequences of deportation  on  CG  would  be  unduly
harsh. We therefore allow the appeal.

54. It is important that  the  appellant  understand  that  we  allowed  the
appeal for the sake of his daughter whose mother has died and for no  other
reason. If, and when, he ceases to be in a parental relationship nothing in
this decision helps him and he must not assume that, as CG  grows  up,  the
effects of his removal will continue to be unduly harsh. Presently they are
and we allow the appeal.

Decision and Reasons

55. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We  set  aside  it  aside  and  we
substitute a decision allowing the appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 January 2020                |



