
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06655/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a Hearing   |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 15 July 2020                               |On 5 August 2020             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     SQ
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
because the appellant is an asylum seeker and is entitled to  privacy.   His
appeal rights are not exhausted and it  is  possible  that  publicity  could
create a risk that did not otherwise exist.

This is an appeal by a citizen of Iraq.  I emphasise this  because  although
it is clearly the case the suggestion that he  is  a  citizen  of  Iran  has
crept into the papers and, I find, may have caused  confusion.   He  appeals
with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal a decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State
refusing him international protection.

Permission to appeal was given on one ground only but as far as  I  can  see
the paperwork that should have accompanied such a decision did  not  so  the
Appellant was not alerted to  the  possibility  of  applying  to  the  Upper
Tribunal for permission to appeal on the points on which permission had  not
been granted.

The appeal was identified as one possibly suitable for  disposal  without  a
hearing and Upper Tribunal Judge Lane gave further directions, sent  on  out
29 April 2020, suggesting that, given the constraints on Tribunal  resources
arising from the well-publicised national lockdown as a consequence  of  the
COVID-19 pandemic the appeal should be determined without a hearing.

I remind myself that the Rules do not provide that either party is  entitled
to a hearing but I am obliged by Rule 34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 to have regard to any view  expressed  by  the  parties
and I recognise that appeals are usually decided after an oral hearing.

In response to those directions the Secretary of State has produced  a  Rule
24 notice indicating amongst other things that the  Secretary  of  State  is
content for a disposal without a hearing.  The appellant has  not  addressed
the point but has made further submissions.

The Tribunal's proceedings  must  be  fair.  Both  parties  have  had  ample
opportunity of making full representations.  The strain  on  the  Tribunal's
resources means that listing this case  for  an  oral  hearing  would  cause
delay and, probably, delay to other cases too as space was made in the  list
to accommodate this appeal.  I  am  satisfied  that  on  this  occasion  the
balance between efficiency and the interests the parties  is  in  favour  of
determining the appeal without a hearing.

I must begin by determining the scope of that  hearing.   The  Secretary  of
State's  additional  grounds  drawn  by  Mr  E  Tufan,  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer point out that permission has only been  granted  on  one
point.  This  should  have  resulting  in  the  grant  of  permission  being
accompanied  by  a  Notice  informing  the  Appellant  that  the  grant   of
permission was limited and that he could apply to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
permission on other the other grounds.

Having considered all of the material before me I have decided to treat  the
Appellant's full skeleton argument as an application to rely on all  of  the
grounds.  I am satisfied that if I choose  to  allow  that  application  the
Secretary of State will not be disadvantaged unfairly.

Ground 1 complains that "The IJ failed to take  into  account  the  relevant
law".   This  is  wide-ranging  but  the  criticism  is  narrowed   in   the
particulars.  The point is that the Appellant claims to have  been  involved
in a certain amount of internet activity such as Facebook in  which  he  was
critical of the government of Iraq.  The grounds draw attention  to  a  case
of the European Court of Human Rights known as SF and Others v  Sweden  (app
no: 52077/10) ECtHR (Fifth Section) 15 May  2012  and  also  AB  and  Others
(internet activity - state of evidence) Iran  [2015]  UKUT  0257  (IAC)  but
both  of  these  cases  relate  to  conditions  in  Iran.   As  a   sweeping
generalisation that will do but for present purposes there are good  reasons
to be concerned about the safety of a person returned to Iran who  had  been
involved in any kind of internet activity but the ground draws attention  to
no evidence before the Tribunal or in reported cases to  show  that  similar
concerns exist in the case of returns to Iraq.

Ground 2 is similarly wide  and  complains  that  "The  IJ  is  taking  into
account things that he should not".  This is a reworking of the  same  point
arising  from  alleged  difficulties  facing  someone  because  of  internet
activity. It adds nothing to Ground 1.

Ground 3 states "The IJ has failed to consider internal  relocation".   This
appears to be a criticism of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
binding decision in Devaseelan but I cannot discern precisely what point  is
being made.

Ground  4  is  entitled  "The  IJ  does  not  consider  Internal  Relocation
correctly".  The complaint here is that the Immigration Judge  has  accepted
that the Appellant can live in Baghdad if he can get there but he  does  not
have  the  travel  documents  that  would  enable  him   to   pass   through
checkpoints.   The  Immigration  Judge  is  said  to  have  found  that  the
Appellant does not have documents and so a return to Iraq is  not  feasible.
Ground 4 then refers to the appellant being a national of Iran.  I can  only
assume this is a mistake.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge giving permission noted that the  trial  judge
found that the Appellant's case was not credible but she did say that  there
was arguably an error in the "finding at [16(xi)]". I set  that  out  below.
The trial judge said:

  "It was submitted that the appellant would be  returned  to  Baghdad  but
  would be unable to travel due to lack of documentation as he  would  have
  to pass through a number of checkpoints.  I accept that this is the  case
  but, having found the appellant's evidence to lack  credibility,  do  not
  accept that there is no family support available to him in Iraq to assist
  in obtaining the relevant  information  to  enable  him  to  acquire  the
  necessary documentation on return.  In making this finding I  have  taken
  into account the relevant country guidance case law of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
  internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC)."

I do not permit argument on the first three grounds.   To  the  extent  that
they are intelligible they are wrong.

In the Secretary of  State's  response  Mr  Tufan  draws  attention  to  the
decision of  the  Tribunal  in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT and the guidance  there.   Clearly  this  was
not before the First-tier Tribunal but it is now the view  of  the  Tribunal
that, as explained at paragraph 13 of  the  headnote,  that  Iraqi  citizens
generally can be relied upon to recall their necessary  details  because  it
is so much part of society and therefore something that they will need.   Mr
Tufan's argument is that the appellant can obtain a  replacement  CSID  from
the Iraqi Consulate in London or he can obtain support from  his  family  if
necessary.  This point is good even without reliance on the  latest  country
guidance because the judge's found that the Appellant was not truthful  when
he said there was no-one to support him.

This is not a case where the grounds  challenging  the  decision  have  been
particularly helpful.  The short point is that the  Appellant  is  an  Iraqi
Kurd.  Ordinarily he can be returned safely.  It is his case that he  cannot
get the necessary documents for travel but he was disbelieved and  no  error
of law has been found in the decision to disbelieve him.

It follows that I find no  error  of  law  and  I  dismiss  the  appellant's
appeal.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 July 2020                   |

