
                             [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA064512016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 July 2017                      |On 14 August 2017                     |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     l A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    v


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Lingajorthy, counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Following a hearing which took place on 20 April 2017, I found errors of
law in the decision of the First tier Tribunal. A copy of the decision is
appended. I adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing, which took place on
5 July 2017.

2. No further evidence was called thus the appeal proceeded on the basis of

submissions only.

3. Mr Lingajorthy handed up a skeleton argument along with the judgment in
MP (Sri Lanka). He drew my attention to page 30 of the Appellant's Bundle
dated 4.11.16 at Q.21 onwards. He submitted that the starting point with
regard to GJ is who was there at the end of the war to witness: see the
skeleton argument at [7](c) and [8]. The Appellant was not released
following rehabilitation ie his threat to the State is not neutralized and
there would be an ongoing risk to him now. After having come here he
continues to take part in diaspora activities. Mr Lingajorthy argued that
the Appellant's credibility has not been challenged. He has given a clear
and succinct account in light of the background information. He was
adversely identified and taken to the Joseph camp and he will still be of
ongoing interest.

4. Mr Lingajorthy explained that pages 7-8 attached to the additional
witness statement comes from the British Tamils Forum website and in
response to the a question from the Upper Tribunal that Dr Shanmugarajah is
in the USA.  He submitted that simply because a bribe has been obtained
does not mean a person is not telling the truth. What is absolutely crucial
cf. MP (Sri Lanka) iat [35] onwards is the last days of the war. Tamils
died in no fly zone and the Appellant was one of the very few people
present in an area the size of a football ground watching these events
unfold.

5. Mr Lingajorthy drew my attention to Dr Gupta's psychiatric report and Dr
Martin's scar report and the fact that First tier Tribunal Judge Andonian
had cited large parts of the reports. This shows not only that his evidence
is accepted but is corroborated. There is ample evidence that this
Appellant would become cannon fodder if he were to go back to Sri Lanka
now. There is revived interest in diaspora activities and if someone is
involved in the UK there will be a knock at their parents' door. He
submitted that GJ is engaged and that looking at the context it is clear
that he comes with a profile: report from Freedom from Torture at page 63
onwards from May 2009 to August 2015; page 83 at 1.3 and page 74 which
refers to torture following return from the UK, which is treated as a
hotbed of diaspora activities.

6. In response, Mr Duffy submitted that even if the Appellant's claim is
that he was detained at the end of the war, tortured and released on
payment of a bribe, it does not necessarily mean he would be at risk on
return cf. GJ . There were a lot of people like the Appellant who had a
minor role in the LTTE and contributed a member of the family. There is
nothing in the profile of this Appellant that would put him in the first
category of risk factors at [7] viz a threat to the unitary state in Sri
Lanka. In relation to his activities cf. MP & NT someone who might
potentially be a witness would be at risk. With regard to page 74 of the
bundle most of those tortured on return were in the UK as students and it
may just be a means of extorting bribes and not necessarily a risk. With
regard to 1.3 of page 83, all of the Tamil detainees who have been tortured
will have an association with the LTTE as they were the government in the
area where they lived. With regard to the Freedom from Torture report this
is a survey of people who claimed to have been detained are connected with
the LTTE. In relation to his connection with Dr Shanmugrarajah and risk on
this basis, doctors would be at risk but the Appellant himself was very low
level and was just assisting; the combination of the Doctor being there and
speaking out puts the Doctor at an elevated risk but this would not
necessarily attach to the Appellant and he is outside the GJ risk
categories.

7. In relation to the point about being released on payment of a bribe if
one looks at the level of interest towards the end of the war, the Sri
Lankan authorities were rounding up everybody so it was not necessarily
indicative of future risk. If Prabakaran himself was arrested, he would not
have been able to obtain his release by payment of a bribe. Those who are
released on this basis are at a very low level or would not be released.
The Appellant is not important enough and his particular profile as
asserted is not enough to meet GJ categories or disclose any risk outside.

8. In his reply, Mr Lingajorthy submitted that the Home Office were
clutching at straws in asserting the Appellant's role as minor. The
evidence at [84] clearly states that even a low level member would be of
interest to the authorities. GJ does not distinguish between high level and
low level members but just supporters. Whilst the Appellant entered the UK
as a student it does not matter to the Sri Lankan CID whether or not he
came as a student but the fact that that he is returning from the UK means
he would be seen to destabilize Sri Lankan as a unitary state. It is not a
law and order problem but a serious issue: see GJ risk factors. The Sri
Lankan authorities want to extract information as to progress by the LTTE
in re-grouping overseas. The LTTE is an organisation ranked by the FBI and
there is no question but that a high ranking member would be arrested and a
bribe would not be effective.

9. Mr Lingajorthy submitted that if a doctor is at risk where are the Sri
Lankan authorities going to look but for his orderly or assistant in order
to discredit him? When the Appellant was in the LTTE he had sufficient
profile to be on the side of the wrong hands for them to attack the
integrity of the LTTE.  He still has a value to the Sri Lankan authorities
and that increases his risk. He is one of the very few people to witness
the war, which is a war "without witness" yet the Appellant was present in
this situation. The Doctor would have been taken much more seriously but
the Appellant was his assistant and would be taken seriously, particularly
bearing in mind the lower standard or proof. The fact that he was an
assistant only does not undermine his fear on return.

10. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings

11.  The following findings of fact made by the First tier Tribunal Judge
were unchallenged by the Respondent and are thus preserved: the Appellant
had reporting conditions imposed upon him from 2009 to 2011 and the reasons
provided by the Appellant for not claiming asylum earlier are credible.

12. Whilst I did not hear evidence from the Appellant, I have given careful
consideration to the refusal decision of 8 June 2016. The Respondent's
position at that time was that the Appellant's account of claimed torture
including sexual abuse, being blindfolded and beaten continuously and the
body map do not show that his injuries are consistent with his account and
they could have been established in any number of ways [21]-[22] refer.
However, before the Tribunal is a report from his GP dated 21 October 2016,
in which he stated "I believe this man has almost certainly experienced the
torture he describes"; a psychiatric report of Dr Avirup Gupta dated
November 2016 and a report regarding the Appellant's scarring by Dr Andrew
Izquierdo-Martin, following an examination of the Appellant on 4 November
2016, all of which post date the refusal decision. Dr Martin's report
describes as 'typical" the Appellant's scars on his back and upper right
limb. Mr Duffy, on behalf of the Respondent, did not seek to go behind or
challenge the findings in the medical evidence and I accept that evidence
as showing that there is a serious possibility that the Appellant was
detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities.

13. The issue is whether the Appellant would be at risk on return now, in
light of his accepted history ie. that he was forced to join the LTTE in
2007. In May 2009, he surrendered to the authorities and was taken to an
IDP camp where he assisted with manual jobs and later assisted a doctor in
treating wounded soldiers. The Appellant was identified by masked men as
one of the helpers of Dr Shanmugarajah and he was asked to renounce the
statements made by the doctor that the government authorities had bombed
the hospital where he was working and helping the doctor. He was detained
in June 2009, taken to Joseph camp and was subjected to torture during the
first three months of his detention. He was released in November 2009 and
payment of a bribe and was placed on reporting conditions but in early 2011
he ceased reporting, moved to Colombo and came to the United Kingdom in
January 2011.

14. Mr Duffy's submissions, in essence, were that, even if the Appellant
had been detained and ill-treated, he was too low level to now be of
interest to the Sri Lankan authorities. Mr Lingajorthy submitted that the
key issue is that the Appellant was a witness to the last days of the war
and the fact that Tamils were killed by the Sri Lankan authorities rather
than taken as prisoners of war and this would put him at risk. This
reflects the Appellant's witness statement of 28 June 2017 at [22]-[25].
The document from the British Tamils Forum appended to the statement dated
23 June 2017 makes express reference to the fact that Dr Shanmugarajah was
one of three government appointed medics who worked with the most basic
medical facilities to run a makeshift clinic inside the conflict zone and
that "to the fury of the government, the doctors were also one of the few
sources of independent information about the civilian casualties of a
conflict that was all but hidden from view... In the very final days of the
conflict, the three doctors fled the conflict zone and were detained by Sri
Lankan troops ... the three men were being held by the criminal
investigation department in Colombo."

15. The risk category identified by Mr Lingajorthy in GJ and Others (post-
civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) is at 356(7)(c)
which provides:

      (7) The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution or
serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or  otherwise,
are:...
      (c) Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned and
Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri Lankan security forces,
armed forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in alleged war crimes.   Among
those who may have witnessed war crimes during the conflict,  particularly
in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those who have    already identified
themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to the Sri Lankan
authorities and therefore only they are at real risk of  adverse attention
or persecution on return as potential or actual war      crimes witnesses."

16. However, it is not the Appellant's case that he has given evidence to
the LLRC. This point was one which was taken on appeal to the Court of
Appeal in MP & NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829 in respect of which Lord Justice
Maurice Kay held as follows at [36]-[38]:

      "36.     The complaint in relation to this risk category is that it
is too narrow.   The ground of appeal is advanced on behalf of the
appellants and it is also    vigorously supported by submissions made on
behalf of the Intervener, Tamils  against Genocide (TAG), represented by Ms
Shivani Jegarajah and Ms     Parosha Chandran. Their submissions
essentially seek to extend the need for      the protection to (1)
individuals who did not give evidence to the LLRC but    wish to give
evidence to any future inquiry or investigation and (2)  individuals who
may never give such evidence but who may wish to speak out    about
egregious conduct witnessed by them - whether for therapeutic, political
or other personal reasons. As to this second group, it is submitted that
their       protection needs are comparable with those of homosexuals who
might be    returned to Iran (see HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the
Home  Department [2010] UKSC 31) or citizens of Zimbabwe who might feel
obliged     to simulate support for ZANU/PF on return (RT (Zimbabwe) v
Secretary of     State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 38).

      37.     At the moment, the evidence about these circumstances is
understandably vague and speculative. It may well be that, if international
      pressure were to lead to the establishment of a different form of
inquiry, the     position would call for further consideration in a case in
which appellants       could give and adduce evidence about specific
difficulties. However, we are not       in that position (although Ms
Jegarajah was able to point to current  developments at the United Nations
and elsewhere which could give rise to  such developments). Nor is the
evidence of the second putative group in     concrete form. It rests on a
passage in the report of Dr Smith which, on  analysis, seems to relate to
those who have provided evidence of war crimes. At       this stage, there
is no evidence of an evidence-receiving body beyond the  LLRC, in relation
to which protection is established. In this respect, the      principal
witness would appear to be Dr Suthaharan Nadarajah, a London- based expert.
However, his evidence was given limited weight on these issues
because, "his expertise is terrorism and he has not researched the position
of    returned asylum seekers". He has not been to Sri Lanka for ten years.

      38.     I tend to the view that counsel for the appellants and for
TAG have    identified a potential risk category which is not protected by
paragraph 356 (7)      (c). I reject the submission on behalf of the
Secretary of State to the effect that   any necessary protection would be
provided by paragraph 356 (7) (a) which,     in my judgment, does not
address these situations. However, I do not think  that the UT fell into
legal error by not confronting these concerns at this    stage. The
position is either hypothetical, un-evidenced, or both. It may need to
be revisited by the UT in the future."

17. Whilst this Tribunal is not in a position to make definitive findings
in the manner of a country guidance decision as to an extension of this
risk category in the manner envisaged and set out at [36] of MP above, I
have concluded that, in light of the accepted history of detention and
torture of this Appellant due to the fact that he was a witness through his
work assisting Dr Shanmugarajah to potential war crimes by the Sri Lankan
authorities in the conflict zone in the last days of the war in May 2009, a
risk to him on return to Sri Lanka cannot be excluded. I bear in mind in
this respect that, following his election in January 2015 and following
intense lobbying, President Sirisena indicated that his administration
would consult with the UN concerning plans to set up a domestic enquiry
into the worst crimes committed during the final stages of the war.

18. If I am wrong about this, I find in the alternative, that the Appellant
falls within the guidance set out in GJ at [356](7)(a) viz (a) Individuals
who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as
a single state because they are, or are perceived to have a significant
role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora
and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka." Whilst the Appellant has
been involved with some activities in the diaspora his case was not put on
the basis that these activities amounted to a "significant role in relation
to post-conflict Tamil separatism." However, I find that the fact the
Appellant is a potential witness to war crimes committed by the Sri Lankan
authorities and the fact that he was detained and placed on reporting
conditions for this reason prior to coming to the United Kingdom, means
that there is a serious possibility that he would, on return, be perceived
to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state, as his
evidence could lead to a renewal of hostilities within the country or
otherwise be perceived as de-stabilising and at the very least, impugning
the integrity of the State authorities.
Decision

19. For the reasons set out above, I allow the appeal on protection
grounds, on the basis that the Appellant is entitled to recognition as a
refugee.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

13 August 2017

ANNEX

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA064512016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2017                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    v


                                     l A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah, counsel instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State for the Home
Department against a decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Andonian, dated
9 January 2017 in which he allowed the appeal of the then Appellant against
a decision by the Secretary of State dated 8 June 2016 refusing to grant
him asylum. I shall refer to Mr LA as the Claimant for the purposes of this
appeal.

2. The Claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, of Tamil origin, born in 1990.
He arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2011 with a student visa, which
was subsequently extended to 15 February 2014 but was then curtailed on 14
May 2013. He made two applications for a residence card on the basis that
he was a non-EEA national dependent of an EEA national but both were
refused. The Claimant was detained on 13 May 2015 and claimed asylum on 22
May 2015, after removal directions to Sri Lanka were set on 19 May 2015.

3. The basis of his claim is that he had been forced to join the LTTE in
2007, received two weeks of basic military training and afterwards worked
in the kitchen and later in the medical unit. He surrendered to the
authorities in May 2009 and was taken to an IDP camp, where he assisted
with manual jobs and assisted a doctor in treating wounded soldiers. He was
identified by masked men as one of the helpers of Dr Shanmugarajah and was
asked to renounce the statements made by the doctor that government
soldiers had bombed the hospital where he had been working and helping the
doctor. He feared that the Sri Lankan authorities would consider that he
was someone who could have a part to play in the resurgence of LTTE
activities and that he would be on a wanted list. The Secretary of State
rejected his claim, essentially on the basis of credibility and
inconsistencies in his account.

4. On appeal to the First tier Tribunal, the appeal was allowed, it would
appear on the basis that the Judge accepted the credibility of the
Claimant's account and the medical evidence submitted in support,
particularly the report of Dr Izquierdo-Martin, who concluded that the
scars on the Claimant's back abdomen and upper limbs were typical of
unwilling and deliberately caused injuries [19].

5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal, in time, on the basis that the Judge had erred materially in law
(i) in failing to make findings on disputed facts and failed to give
reasons for finding that the Claimant had discharged the burden of proof
and (ii) in failing to apply the country guidance decision in GJ [2013]
UKUT 319 (IAC) in that he failed to make any finding that the Claimant
would be at risk of persecution on return and failed to identify the risk
category into which the Claimant would fall. No rule 24 response was lodged
on behalf of the Claimant.

Hearing

6. At the hearing before me, Ms Jegarajah sought permission to rely on an
extract from the COIS on Sri Lanka dated June 2009. Ms Isherwood submitted
that this document was not of assistance and ignores the fact that the
Respondent did not accept the Claimant's account, in that she does not
accept the detention between 2007 and 2009 and ensuing events. She
submitted that the Judge made no reference properly to GJ (op cit) and
whilst the Judge looks at the medical evidence in some detail, this was
based on what the Claimant said. Ms Isherwood submitted that the Judge
considered the evidence without taking into account the Secretary of
State's position and there is no reference to the refusal letter. The Judge
needed to make findings as to whether or not he accepted what the Claimant
claims and what he has said happened in Sir Lanka, bearing in mind [13] of
the refusal letter where the only matter accepted by the Secretary of State
is the nationality and identity of the Claimant. Ms Isherwood further
queried how on the Claimant's own facts he would succeed, with reference to
GJ [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC). She submitted that the decision of the First tier
Tribunal Judge contained material errors of law and needed to be re-heard

7. In her submissions, Ms Jegarajah submitted that, contrary to the
assertion by the Secretary of State, the Judge has considered the issues
between the parties as raised in the refusal letter at [6] and [9] of the
decision. The relevance of the extract from the COIS on Sri Lanka dated
June 2009 is that it refers directly to Dr V Shanmugarajah who spoke out to
foreign observers and this places in context the fact that the Sri Lankan
authorities were trying to use the Claimant as a counter witness and this
is made clear from the Claimant's asylum interview record where he refers
to the doctor and the consequent interest in him by the authorities at Q's
21-42, & Q's 66-67, 90 and 99. She submitted that on this basis it was
clear that the Appellant was in a potential risk category cf. MP [2014]
EWCA Civ 829 at [35] through to [38] regarding witnesses to war crimes.

8. Ms Jegarajah took me through the detail of the Judge's decision and the
fact that at [2] he noted that the Claimant did not have a good immigration
history; at [3] that he is a Tamil from Sri Lanka and at [4] onwards he
sets out the basis of the case, both factually and legally and he refers to
GJ (op cit) specifically on two occasions, thus Ground 2 is simply wrong.
At [6] in respect of the fact that the Secretary of State did not think it
was credible that the Claimant would be placed on reporting conditions if
his mother would pay a bribe, this was addressed by the Judge and at [8]
the Judge addressed the delay in claiming asylum. At [9]-[23] the Judge
goes very carefully through the medical evidence and gives extensive
reasons for attaching weight to the medical evidence of Dr Martin at pages
31 onwards of the Claimant's bundle. There was a also Rule 35 report and
photographs of the Appellant's scarring which were before the Respondent at
pages 37 and at page 43, which is a body map showing extensive scarring.
Having gone into all this evidence at [24] the Judge applied the lower
standard of proof and found the Claimant's account to be credible.

9. Ms Jegarajah submitted that the challenge by the Secretary of State is
misconceived in that one can see from the contents of the decision of the
First tier Tribunal Judge that he was fully engaged with the contents of
the Secretary of State's decision and addressed these in broad terms so
that the parties know why they have won or lost. He has read the interview
and the refusal letter but took account of the quantity of corroborative
evidence in the case and applying lower standard of proof allowed the
appeal. She submitted that the GJ point is misconceived because this was
addressed at [4] of the Judge's decision. Ms Jegarajah submitted that this
is a very serious case so far as the Sri Lankan authorities are concerned
because of Dr Shanmugarajah and the fact that he was witness to the
shelling of the hospital and this been investigated by the United Nations.
She acknowledged that the structure of the decision was unorthodox but the
content is there and the decision discloses no material error of law.

10. In her reply, Ms Isherwood submitted that it is irrelevant to go
through the evidence and it was clear from [15] of the refusal that the
Secretary of State did not accept the core of the account. She submitted
that nowhere in the decision does the Judge consider the core of the
account. At [6] of the decision reference is made to the Claimant's mother
paying a bribe but that ignores the challenge at [16] of the refusal
letter, which concludes that it was not credible the Claimant would be
placed on reporting conditions. The Judge at [2] refers to the Secretary of
State's position but does not set out what is accepted or not. It was not
enough to say that the Claimant has been detained solely on the basis of
the medical evidence and it is not possible to ascertain from the decision
how the scars were caused. She submitted that the fact that the UN had
investigated in 2016 was irrelevant in terms of the safety of the decision;
that the Judge needed to make findings on issues in dispute and failed to
give reasons for finding that the Claimant has discharged the burden of
proof.

Decision

11. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons. I find that
First tier Tribunal Judge Andonian materially erred in law, for the reasons
put forward by the Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal. Firstly, it
is the submitted by Ms Jegarajah and I accept that the Judge did engage
with some aspects of the refusal letter viz that the Claimant's mother had
paid a bribe, that reporting conditions were imposed upon the Claimant and
the reasons for the delay in claiming asylum. However, the Judge failed to
address: the point raised at [15] of the refusal decision as to
inconsistent statements made by the Claimant regarding the reason for his
detention and the fact that the Claimant left Sri Lanka on his own
passport, indicating a lack of interest in him by the authorities: [19] of
the refusal decision refers. These are material issues and it was incumbent
upon the Judge to make findings of fact in respect of them.

12. It is also the case that whilst at [24] the Judge held that the
Claimant had discharged the burden of proof that he has a well-founded fear
of persecution for a convention reason, he failed to give reasons for that
finding, which follows directly after a lengthy summary of the medical
evidence from [9]-[22] of his decision. Whilst it may be that the Judge was
convinced by the conclusions of the medical experts that the Claimant was a
victim of torture, he does not state this in terms nor provide any reasons
as to why this evidence, even taken with his other findings of fact, meant
that the Claimant had demonstrated to the lower standard of proof that he
is a refugee. I further find that the Judge erred materially in law in this
respect.

13. The second ground of appeal asserts that the Judge failed to apply the
country guidance decision in GJ [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) in that he failed to
make any finding that the Claimant would be at risk of persecution on
return and failed to identify the risk category into which the Claimant
would fall. I find that this ground of appeal is also well-founded in that,
whilst at [4] the Judge makes reference to the GJ principles, it is clear
that this is in the context of the Claimant's claim and what he believed
and feared. The Judge makes no finding as to the application of the GJ
principles to the particular facts of the case and no finding as to which
risk category the case falls to be considered.

14. For these reasons, I find that First tier Tribunal Judge Andonian erred
materially in law and that the decision needs to be re-made. I adjourn the
appeal for a resumed hearing before me on the first available date.
Directions are appended to this decision. I maintain the anonymity order
imposed by the First tier Tribunal.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

21 May 2017


                       ___________________

                             DIRECTIONS
                       ___________________


1. The resumed appeal is to be listed for 2 hours.

2. The following findings of fact are preserved: the Claimant had reporting
conditions imposed upon him from 2009 to 2011 and the reasons provided by
the Claimant for not claiming asylum earlier are credible.

3. Any further witness statements or evidence upon which the Claimant seeks
to rely is subject to application to the Upper Tribunal in accordance with
the requirements of paragraph 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

4. A Tamil interpreter will be required.



Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

21 May 2017
