
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/06646/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 10 August 2020                    |
|on 22 July 2020                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    BO QU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:         Mr B Criggie, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China, born  on  21  January  1964.   She
    appealed to the FtT against the  respondent's  decision  dated  4  July
    2019.  FtT Judge David C Clapham SSC dismissed her appeal by a decision
    promulgated on 13 November 2019.

 2. The appellant appealed to the UT.  She  did  not  challenge  the  FtT's
    findings on protection grounds.  She argued that  there  was  error  on
    article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. By a decision dated 15 May 2020, UT Judge Keith set aside the  decision
    of the FtT.  At [12] he found error through lack  of  analysis  of  the
    nature and quality of family life among the appellant, her  adult  son,
    and her daughter-in-law.  At [13] he found on  private  life  that  the
    FtT's analysis on integration in China  was  insufficiently  explained.
    At [15], having regard to the limited scope of the issues remaining and
    of the fact-finding necessary, the case was  retained  in  the  UT  for
    remaking of the decision.

 4. A transfer order was made to enable decision-making to be completed  by
    another UT Judge.

 5. Parties had no objection to a remote hearing.  Representatives attended
    remotely.  No member of the public  attended,  either  remotely  or  in
    person.  There were a few "glitches" to  resolve,  and  brief  loss  of
    connection, but representatives raised no significant concerns over the
    eventual  quality  of  communications.   I  was  satisfied   that   the
    technology had enabled a full and fair hearing.

 6. Mr Criggie advised that the appellant to elected not to attend or  give
    oral evidence.  The interpreter was discharged.

 7. I am obliged to  both  representatives  for  their  clear  and  concise
    submissions.

 8. The main matters advanced for the appellant were these:

      i) At the time of the FtT hearing the  appellant  was  in  immigration
         detention.  The current position is that she has been  admitted  to
         bail and resides with her son and daughter-in-law.  She  is  fairly
         elderly, and depends on her family financially, with no recourse to
         benefits.

     ii) The appellant spent most of her 16  years  in  the  UK  "under  the
         radar", on the margins of society.  The conclusion to be drawn  was
         not that she is resilient and resourceful, but rather that  she  is
         vulnerable and in need of her family connections.

    iii) The appellant is now in a  much  more  desirable  situation,  in  a
         family unit, and no burden on the state.

     iv) The  appellant  has  no  close  relatives  in  China.   No  similar
         situation is available to her there.   She  faces  difficulties  in
         obtaining identification and any form of assistance.

      v) An additional factor in her favour is the medical  report,  with  a
         diagnosis of depression and  anxiety,  and  showing  the  value  of
         family support.

     vi) The appellant's son and daughter-in-law are well established in the
         UK.

    vii) The UT should find that family life exists,  within  the  scope  of
         article 8, and that the appellant faces very significant  obstacles
         to integration in China.

   viii) The appeal should be allowed on either or both of family  life  and
         private life grounds.

 9. The main points for the SSHD were:

      i) The FtT's finding that the appellant advanced an untrue  protection
         claim  remained  in  place,  a  factor  adverse  to   her   general
         credibility, and to her human rights claim.

     ii) The value to be attached to the appellant's witness  statement  was
         further lessened by her choice not to give evidence, and not to  be
         tested by cross-examination.

    iii) Despite the appellant's evidence  to  the  contrary,  it  was  more
         likely than not that she supported herself by working unlawfully in
         the UK, and she might still be doing so.

     iv) Family life  had  not  continued  throughout  the  time  after  the
         appellant's son became an adult, but ceased around  2009,  as  they
         lived separately and had no contact for several years.

      v) The evidence did not show financial  dependency  on  relatives,  or
         financial independence from the state.

     vi) Family life which ceased to exist  between  adult  relatives  might
         resume through change of circumstances.  There  was  no  reason  to
         doubt that the appellant presently lives with her son and daughter-
         in-law.  However, there was nothing to show ties of  such  strength
         as to justify a finding of family life within the scope of  article
         8.

    vii) If family life did exist within the meaning of article 8, there was
         no  feature  showing  it  to  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the
         appellant to China.

   viii) If family life had resumed, that happened while parties  knew  that
         the appellant had no right to be here, so it should be given little
         weight.

     ix) There was no evidence that the appellant speaks English.

      x) The appellant was a long term overstayer who had worked unlawfully.

     xi) The balance of relevant matters in terms of family life was heavily
         against the appellant.

    xii) On private life, and integration, the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
         China; she speaks Mandarin; she is familiar with the  culture;  she
         would have to re-adjust, but there is nothing to show she would not
         be able to do so; nothing to  show  she  might  be  destitute;  and
         nothing to stop her son supporting her from the UK.

   xiii) The psychological report was not by a medical doctor, and  did  not
         contain  a  specific  diagnosis.  It  did  not  disclose  that  the
         appellant had sought any medical intervention.  It was based  on  a
         brief interview.  It accepted assertions about difficulties for the
         appellant which the FtT had found  not  to  be  true.   The  report
         should be given little weight.

    xiv) Even taking the report at highest, there was nothing in it,  or  in
         the rest of the evidence, amounting to very  significant  obstacles
         to integration.

     xv) The appeal should be dismissed.

10.  Mr Criggie replied on these points:

      i) The adverse credibility findings on the protection claim were not a
         reason to reject the evidence about family and private life,  where
         the appellant was supported by the evidence  of  her  son  and  her
         daughter-in-law.

     ii) The author of  the  report  was  a  consultant  psychologist,  well
         qualified to form a view after a 60 minute appointment.

11. I reserved my decision.

12. I accept, for present purposes, that the appellant has lived  with  her
    son and daughter-in-law since her release from detention, and that  she
    does not presently receive state benefits.

13. The appeal does not involve any real conflict  on  the  primary  facts.
    Credibility is not to the fore.

14. I accept that the author of the report was well qualified  to  give  an
    opinion.  The appellant did attribute her resentments in  life  largely
    to the claim which was found not to be credible; however,  for  present
    purposes, I do not take that as undermining  the  author's  finding  of
    anxiety and depression.

15. On other points above, I broadly prefer the submissions for  the  SSHD,
    for the reasons given; and I find that the balancing of  considerations
    required by part 5A of the 2002 Act is adverse to the appellant.

16. Section 117A, so far as relevant, states:

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B ...

         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).

17.  Section 117B states:

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life ...

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

18. The appellant has family life in the broad sense of the word  with  her
    son and his wife, but family life in the  core  sense,  of  the  nature
    protected by article 8, ended years ago, during his early adulthood.

19. The appellant has  not  provided  evidence  to  support  a  finding  of
    dependency, emotional or financial, or of links which are otherwise out
    of the ordinary between a mother and her adult son.

20. Even if a finding of family life had been made, there is no feature  of
    that which would render the appellant's removal disproportionate.

21. The appellant is a Chinese citizen.  There is no reason  to  think  she
    would be in any difficulty in  documenting  herself  with  the  Chinese
    authorities, if she chose to do so.  As  the  respondent  accepts,  she
    would have to readjust, but there is no reason to think that  would  be
    difficult.  She has specified nothing which might rationally  be  found
    to be a very significant obstacle to integration.

22. The appellant's immigration history is poor.

23. The appellant does not speak English.

24. The appellant may not currently receive public funds, but there  is  no
    evidence that her son has the wealth or the  inclination  to  keep  her
    indefinitely from being a burden on the taxpayer.  It is likely that in
    the medium to longer term she would consume rather than  contribute  to
    public resources.

25. The appellant's private life has been established while her status  has
    been precarious, and, for most of the time, unlawful.

26. The appellant's private life carries little weight.

27. The balance of  considerations  is  heavily  to  the  effect  that  the
    interference with the appellant's right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life is justified under Article 8(2).

28. The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The  decision  substituted
    is that the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

29. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

30. The date of this decision is to be taken as the date it  is  issued  to
    parties.


     [pic]

     UT Judge Macleman Date: 3 August 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.


