
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06530/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2018                           |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Stephen [Q]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr [Q] against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
decision refusing his appeal against the decision of 8 May 2018 refusing
asylum.

2.   I need not say a great deal about this case.  I have had helpful full
submissions by Mr West on behalf of Mr [Q] and equally helpful, albeit
briefer, submissions by Mr Mills on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The
challenge is a reasons challenge.  The appellant provided his own grounds,
having been represented at the hearing but without representation at the
time that the grounds were drafted and they are, unsurprisingly, given that
he is a layman, not quite on the point as one might expect if they had been
provided by counsel or a solicitor but in any event he succeeded in
obtaining a grant of permission and that is essentially as set out at
paragraph 2, subparagraph 3 of the grounds, on the basis of failure to
assess the evidence properly and in particular challenges to the
credibility findings.

3.   Mr West has set out in some detail challenges to those findings and I
agree entirely with Mr Mills that although not all the points that were
made by way of challenge are more than disagreement there are a number of
points which do go to the heart of the case, for example the finding of a
lack of credibility concerning the appellant's claim that he and the
captain of the vessel had sex on the bridge.  The judge found it incredible
that they would have chosen the risk of discovery by other shipmates but he
had given an explanation for that, one only went on the bridge if invited
by the captain there so nobody else would have turned up.

4.   Also, with regard to the fight in the bar, the judge took the view
that it was extraordinary that homosexual men wishing to keep their
relationship secret would openly pick a fight over jilted love in a bar but
it is clear, I think, from the appellant's evidence and the other evidence
provided by his friend [D] and from the bar owner that that was not the
circumstance which occurred.  It was a bar fight.  People were not
declaring themselves as homosexuals, they were simply having a fight in a
bar and when somebody mentioned that the police had been called the
fighting broke up.

5.   The judge took issue with the failure to claim asylum in Glasgow in, I
think, February 2018 but does not appear to have considered the appellant's
explanation for this other than regarding it as a slur on the Immigration
Officers.  It was not a slur, it was simply an explanation that he had been
interviewed without legal representation, without an interpreter and Twi is
his first language.  He has some English and an education in English but
the asylum interview tells a rather different story from the screening
interview and again there was the difficulty of the lack of an interpreter.

6.   The matter which was taken significantly adverse to the appellant was
an incident in 2005 involving an incident on a tanker but quite apart from
the fact that it has no materiality that I can see to his claim, in any
event the appellant, I think, did not in his evidence say he suffered burns
to his legs but injuries to his legs, which would have happened a long time
before the Rule 35 report in 2018 and, as Mr West says, that report was
geared towards the 2015/2016 incidents rather than the much earlier
incident, which had no bearing on his claim to be at risk on account of his
sexuality in any event.

7.   Bringing all these matter together, and I agree again with Mr Mills
that credibility has to be a holistic assessment although, as I say, there
are points made on the appellant's behalf that are no more than
disagreement, I think, for example the issue with regard to sex in the
shower room with his friend John, nonetheless, there are matters of
sufficient weight where the judge's reasons have been found to be found to
be wanting and I think that it is right that the matter will have to be
reconsidered and reconsidered in full and it seems to me the extent of the
reconsideration is such that it will have to be done in the First-tier by a
judge other than Judge Lawrence at Harmondsworth or Hatton Cross.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 25 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
