
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06867/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 11 December 2019              |On the 17 December 2019              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Brakaj, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a national of Iran. He appeals with permission against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtTJ"), promulgated on the  11
    September 2019 dismissing his appeal against the decision to refuse his
    protection and human rights claim.


 2. The appellant's history is set out in the decision letter of the 8th
    July 2019 and the decision of the FtTJ at paragraphs 1-2. The appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on the 13th November 2018  and made a
    claim for asylum on the following day.

 3. He provided a screening interview and later provided a statement of
    evidence (SEF statement) and was interviewed about the factual basis of
    his claim.

 4. The basis of his claim can be summarised as follows. The appellant is a
    citizen of Iran and is of Kurdish ethnicity. He claimed to have met a
    woman who was of the Christian faith  and who told him that if he
    wanted to propose marriage to her, he would have to convert from Islam.
    The appellant wanted to know more, and his neighbour introduced him to
    a man  whom the appellant met with and asked questions of. It was
    stated that this man was arrested, and the appellant left his home to
    travel to his Uncle's house.

 5. The appellant left Iran a few days later on the 3 February 2018;
    travelling from Iran to Iraq to stay with  a friend of his Uncle's. His
    family later found put about why he had left,  and they threatened him
    whilst living in Iraq.  He remained in Iraq for 6 months  and  then
    travelled to Turkey on foot and remaining in Turkey for around 9 days.
    He continued his journey and was then put on the back of a lorry and
    arrived in France. After 2 ï¿½  months, via a lorry, he arrived in the
    United Kingdom.

 6. Since arriving in the UK, the appellant stated that he had attended
    demonstrations in front of the Iranian embassy in London, to express
    his dissatisfaction of the Iranian government. He also posted material
    on his Facebook account that was also critical of the regime.


 7. In a decision letter dated the 8 July 2019, the respondent refused his
    claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. It was accepted the
    appellant was an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnicity but did not
    accept his claim that he had been of interest to the Iranian
    authorities .The Secretary of State set out a number of credibility
    issues relating to the core aspects of his claim to be of interest to
    the Iranian authorities as a result of interest in Christianity  or
    from his family members. As to the issue of risk on return,  the
    respondent applied the relevant country guidance case of HB (Kurds)
    Iran CG [2018] UKUT . Having done so, it was considered that there was
    no real risk of persecution or serious harm on the basis of his
    ethnicity as a Kurd.


 8. The appellant sought to appeal that decision and in a decision
    promulgated on the 11 August 2019 the FtTJ dismissed the appeal having
    concluded that the appellant had not given a credible or consistent
    account as to his activities in Iran or that he was a genuine Christian
     convert.  Those findings are set out at paragraphs 9-11. There is no
    challenge to those findings of fact, or the assessment made by the FtTJ
    of the evidence relating to events in Iran or his claimed conversion.


 9. Since arriving in the UK, and since the substantive asylum interview,
    the appellant stated that he had attended three pro-Kurdish
    demonstrations in the UK and he also posted material on his Facebook
    account.


10. When considering the appellant's activities in the UK, including his
    attendance at demonstrations and the postings on Facebook, the FtTJ
    reached the conclusion that he was not genuinely committed to
    supporting pro-Kurdish organisations and had shown no interest when in
    Iran and the evidence of his involvement was "light on detail". The
    FtTJ accepted tht he had posted details of attendance on his face book
    page. After taking into account the decision in AB and others (internet
    activity-state of evidence Iran [2015] UKUT 00257, relating to the face
    book posts , the FtTJ concluded that social media postings may place
    him at additional risk upon return to Iran given that he had left Iran
    illegally in 2018 and thus the FtTJ then considered the decision of BA
    (demonstrators in Britain-risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36. At
    [13] the FtTJ concluded that the appellant was not politically active,
    nor would he be perceived to be so and having applied that country
    guidance decision she reached the conclusion that the appellant would
    not be at risk of harm, taking into account his stated activities. The
    judge therefore dismissed his protection claim.


11. Following the dismissal of his appeal, grounds of appeal were issued
    for permission to appeal and that application was granted by Judge Loke
    on the  9th October 2019, 2019 for the following reasons:

         " It is arguable that the Judge, having accepted at [13] that the
         appellant had posted on social media photographs of him supporting
         Kurdish rights, notwithstanding  the finding that this was with
         cynical intent, ought to still have consider the risk on return in
         light of Danian v SSHD CO/30274/97 and  HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018]
         UKUT 0430".


12. It is as a result of that grant of permission that the appeal comes
    before the Upper Tribunal. The grounds advanced by the appellant are
    those originally provided, and Ms Brakaj on behalf of the appellant,
    relies upon those grounds.


13. At the outset of the hearing there was a preliminary issue raised on
    behalf of the respondent. On the day prior to the hearing an
    application was made on behalf of the respondent to rely upon an
    unreported determination of the Upper Tribunal  of PA/03758/2016. In
    the application it was said that it had relevance to the appellant's
    claim and the acceptance of the FtTJ that the appellant had posted
    comments on Facebook and that the Tribunal would be assisted by the
    expert evidence in that case which considered a number of specific
    questions in relation to the scope and limitations of Facebook
    including technical aspects around data storage. It was submitted  that
    it would be extremely difficult to find such evidence in the public
    domain. Mrs Brakaj submitted that permission should not be granted to
    the respondent to rely on that decision on the basis that the issues
    raised in that decision had not formed any part of the evidence before
    the FtTJ and that the appellant had not been cross-examined on the
    basis of the material within that decision in particular the deletion
    of his Facebook account or whether that was something that he would
    have done in any event.


14. I have considered the submissions made by each of the advocates. In
    doing so I have reached the conclusion that I should not grant
    permission for the respondent to rely upon that unreported
    determination. Whilst it is submitted that it is relevant to the FtTJ's
    decision and the acceptance by the judge that the appellant had posted
    comments on Facebook, as Mrs Brakaj submitted there had been no cross-
    examination of the appellant upon any of the issues set out in the
    unreported decision. In particular, he had not been questioned about
    the specifics of his Facebook account nor had it ever been suggested to
    him that he would be able to delete his account or whether it fact he
    would even do so. As there is no evidential foundation for that
    decision when considering this particular appellant's claim, I am not
    satisfied that it should be taken into account in reaching a decision
    on this appellant's claim.


15. In the written grounds, it was submitted that the judge made an error
    of law by failing to properly assess the claim by reference to the
    country guidance decision HB(Kurds) and that by applying the decision
    in BA (demonstrators) (as cited) the FtTJ failed to take into account
    the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity as a risk factor which would lead him
    to being questioned on return or that he will be asked to log into
    social media accounts upon return.

16. The grounds make reference to the decision in in HB(Iran), and by
    reference to paragraph 95 of that decision it was submitted that  the
    "hair trigger" approach would apply and that the threshold for
    suspicion of  Kurdish returnees is low and the reaction of the
    authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme.

17. It was further submitted that HB at paragraph 9 recognise that even
    "low-level" political activity can be perceived to be political.
    Therefore the wrong test had been applied and there was a  failure to
    consider the most up-to-date country guidance. It was the appellant's
    case that his low-level political activity (accepted by the FtTJ) would
    be discovered via his Facebook activity; A would be questioned on
    arrival as a Kurd (paragraph 97 HB) and he would be asked if he had a
    Facebook page which would then be examined. It was submitted that this
    was consistent with the approach the Tribunal took in HB and at
    paragraph 114 of HB the Tribunal accepted that the appellant and that
    case be questioned on return as a Kurd and that a person would be asked
    for their Facebook account logon details.

18. Consequently she submitted that this had not been considered when
    assessing risk upon return  and that there were material errors of law
    in the decision of the FtTJ.


19.  There was no rule 24 response on behalf of the respondent. As to the
    merits of the appeal, Mrs Petterson recognised that the FtTJ had not
    directed herself correctly in relation to the decision in HB (Kurds)
    and in terms of risk on return and that it was an error of law not to
    apply relevant CG decision and it had not been referred to either by
    name or in substance.

20. As to the Danian point, the judge accepted that he had attended
    demonstrations but that he was not someone who had a prominent role .
    The judge also accepted that he placed posts on Facebook, but he was
    entitled to draw the inference that he was posting such material in a
    cynical attempt to bolster his claim.

21. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
    give.

22. I  turn to the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant which relate
    to the  sur place claim.


23.  Paragraph 339P states:
    "A person may have a well-founded fear of being persecuted  or  a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm based on events which have  taken  place
    since the person left the country of origin or country of return and/or
    activates which have been engaged in by a  person  since  he  left  his
    country of origin or country of  return,  in  particular  where  it  is
    established that the activities relied upon constitute  the  expression
    and continuation of convictions or orientations held in the country  of
    origin or country of return."


24.  There is no appeal advanced  that there is any error  of  law  in  the
    FtTJ's assessment of the  appellant's  claim  as  to  events  in  Iran.
    Therefore the FtTJ's assessment that the appellant would not  be  known
    to the authorities as a result of his claimed activities before leaving
    Iran is correct.



The relevant Country Guidance:


25. The Upper  Tribunal  in  HB(Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  430  (IAC).
    provided as follows as summarised in the headnote:

"(1) SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT
308 (IAC) remains valid country guidance in terms of the country guidance
offered in the headnote. For the avoidance of doubt, that decision is not
authority for any proposition in relation to the risk on return for refused
Kurdish asylum-seekers on account of their Kurdish ethnicity alone.

(2) Kurds in Iran face discrimination. However, the evidence does not
support a contention that such discrimination is, in general, at such a
level as to amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(3) Since 2016 the Iranian authorities have become increasingly suspicious
of, and sensitive to, Kurdish political activity. Those of Kurdish
ethnicity are thus regarded with even greater suspicion than hitherto and
are reasonably likely to be subjected to heightened scrutiny on return to
Iran.

(4) However, the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or
without a valid passport, and even if combined with illegal exit, does not
create a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(5) Kurdish ethnicity is nevertheless a risk factor which, when combined
with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-
treatment. Being a risk factor it means that Kurdish ethnicity is a factor
of particular significance when assessing risk. Those "other factors" will
include the matters identified in paragraphs (6)-(9) below.

(6) A period of residence in the KRI by a Kurdish returnee is reasonable
likely to result in additional questioning by the authorities on return.
However, this is a factor that will be highly fact-specific and the degree
of interest that such residence will excite will depend, non-exhaustively,
on matters such as the length of residence in the KRI, what the person
concerned was doing there and why they left.

(7) Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at risk of
arrest, prolonged detention and physical abuse by the Iranian authorities.
Even Kurds expressing peaceful dissent or who speak out about Kurdish
rights also face a real risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(8) Activities that can be perceived to be political by the Iranian
authorities include social welfare and charitable activities on behalf of
Kurds. Indeed, involvement with any organised activity on behalf of or in
support of Kurds can be perceived as political and thus involve a risk of
adverse attention by the Iranian authorities with the consequent risk of
persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment.

(9) Even 'low-level' political activity, or activity that is perceived to
be political, such as, by way of example only, mere possession of leaflets
espousing or supporting Kurdish rights, if discovered, involves the same
risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Each case, however, depends
on its own facts and an assessment will need to be made as to the nature of
the material possessed and how it would be likely to be viewed by the
Iranian authorities in the context of the foregoing guidance.

(10) The Iranian authorities demonstrate what could be described as a 'hair-
trigger' approach to those suspected of or perceived to be involved in
Kurdish political activities or support for Kurdish rights. By 'hair-
trigger' it means that the threshold for suspicion is low and the reaction
of the authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme."

26. The issue relates solely to his conduct in the United Kingdom which the
    FtTJ accepted that the appellant had had attended  demonstrations  (see
    findings of fact at  [9] and [13] ) which were on his face  book  page,
    and thereafter the judge did make an  assessment of the sur place issue
    in the context of risk on return.

27. The FtTJ's findings at paragraph 9 can be summarised as follows:

       1. The appellant is not a genuine convert to Christianity.
       2. The appellant is not genuinely committed to supporting pro-
          Kurdish organisations and he showed no interest in supporting
          such organisations whilst in Iran and is only chosen to attend
          the pro-curd demonstrations post his substantive asylum
          interview.
       3. His own statement of his involvement with pro-curd organisations
          in the UK is "surprisingly light on detail".
       4. The FT TJ accepted that he was present at three demonstrations
          and that he posted details of his attendance on his Facebook
          page.
       5. There is no suggestion that he is regularly attended any pro-
          Kurdish meetings.


28. By reference to the decision in AB and others (as cited) and whilst not
    a CG case, the FT TJ considered that it gave some indication that
    social media postings may place the appellant at additional risk upon
    return to Iran and that given that he left Iran illegally in 2018 the
    authorities may seek to question him upon return which may then lead to
    the discovery of the postings on social media (see paragraph 12).


29. The FtTJ then made a self-direction that the appellant's claim should
    be assessed in accordance with the country guidance decision of BA
    (demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011) UKUT 36
    which identified the following factors, the nature of the sur place
    activity, identification risk, factors triggering enquiry/action on
    return, consequences of identification and identification risk on
    return.


30. At paragraph 13 the judge applied those factors to the evidence that
    was before the Tribunal. The assessment of the FtTJ can be summarised
    as follows:


      i) the theme of the demonstrations is to support Kurdish rights and
         the regime would take exception to such demonstrations, but the
         appellant had no particular role at the demonstrations. He is seen
         holding a Kurdish flag and making an obscene gesture outside the
         embassy but was not responsible for organising the demonstration.
     ii) He is a member of the crowd and is pictured holding the Kurdish
         flag the photograph of him doing so is not taken outside the
         Iranian embassy. Instead he is standing away from a group of
         demonstrators holding a flag with the church in the background.
    iii) The picture of him making an obscene gesture outside the Iranian
         embassy is a selfie, the appellant has his back to the embassy was
         making the gesture and is not a group of pro-Kurdish demonstrators.
     iv) He has attended two or three demonstrations and is not a regular
         participant.
      v) The Iranian authorities may operate surveillance on demonstrators,
         but the FtTJ was unaware of any methods used by them to identify
         individuals.
     vi) The only evidence of the appellant outside the Iranian embassy is a
         photograph showing him with his back to the embassy making an
         obscene gesture; he is a hundred metres away from the Iranian
         embassy.
    vii) The appellant is not known by the Iranian authorities as a
         Christian convert and he has only sought to lend his support to pro-
         Kurdish activities four months ago and therefore the Iranian
         authorities would not regard him as a committed opponent or someone
         with a significant political profile.
   viii) The appellant may come to the attention of the Iranian authorities
         upon return because he left Iran illegally and whilst he may be
         questioned upon return, for all of those reasons above, he is
         unlikely to be subjected to treatment which amounts to persecution
         or breached Article 3.

31. As identified in the grant of permission, activities undertaken in bad
    faith can found a sur place claim but careful attention must be given
    to whether those activities are likely to come to the attention of the
    authorities on return - see the reasoning in YB (Eritrea) v SSHD [2008]
    EWCA Civ 360.


32. The real question in, most cases is would be what followed for an
    individual claimant if any information reached the authorities. This
    was a question of fact for the judge to assess on the evidence.  The
    FtTJ  accepted that he had attended demonstrations and even if it could
    be inferred that this was solely to found a sur place claim rather than
    any genuine political commitment, the FtTJ would have to consider
    whether the appellant in his particular circumstances would, as a
    result of his activities coming to the attention of the authorities and
    be at a real risk of serious harm or persecution in Iran.

33. Whilst the FtTJ did make reference to the decisions of  AB and others
    (internet activity-state of evidence Iran [2015] UKUT 00257 ( which is
    not a country guidance decision) and BA (demonstrators in Britain-risk
    on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 ((which is CG) there was no
    assessment  of risk and by reference to the CG decision of HB.  Ms
    Petterson acknowledges that there was no reference to that decision or
    importantly any reference to it in substance. Failure to apply relevant
    country guidance decision is an error of law and I am satisfied that it
    was a material omission on the facts of this case because that decision
    was relevant to a number of aspects of the appellant's claim and most
    notably his Kurdish ethnicity which is not a factor set out in BA
    (demonstrators in Britain-risk on return) and therefore was missing
    from the factual assessment of risk.

34. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtTJ and proceed to remake
    the decision. I was not asked to hear any further evidence given that
    the FtTJ had made findings of fact which were not challenged. I have
    given reasons earlier in this decision as to why I have not granted
    permission to the respondent to rely upon the unreported decision and
    that remains in place as I have not heard any further evidence relevant
    to the issues outlined in the unreported decision. There may be cases
    before the Tribunal where that decision may be relevant and therefore
    lead to its citation but that will depend on the particular facts and
    the evidential basis upon which the facts were considered. I therefore
    proceed to re-make the decision on the basis of the FtTJ's findings of
    fact which I have summarised earlier and in the light of the current CG
    decision as to risk on return.


35. The issue to be determined is whether or not the appellant would on
    return be viewed or perceived by the authorities in Iran as a person
    that has been adversely acting against the Iranian government by reason
    of his Facebook posts at the point of re-entering the country. The
    issue not being whether or not the appellant was a genuine in his
    activities, but whether the authorities in Iran on his return would,
    irrespective of whether he is a genuine, wish to see his face book
    posts and by reason thereof view him as an individual that had acted
    adversely against the government and would the appellant in those
    circumstances be at risk.

36. As set out above there is a reasonable likelihood that he will be
    questioned as the FtTJ accepted. The decision in SSH and HR sets out
    that the duration of initial questioning would be for a "fairly brief
    period" (at 12]), although I recognise that there is other evidence
    which demonstrates that questioning may take a few hours (see [58] of
    HB(Kurds). What follows from that questioning is if the authorities
    have any particular concerns arising from activities in the UK then
    there is a real risk that there would be further questioning
    accompanied by ill-treatment.

37. The appellant is also an illegal departee from Iran and gives an
    additional reason as to why the appellant is likely to be questioned at
    the point of return. He will also be returned without a passport (see
    paragraph[97] of HB(Iran). He is also of Kurdish ethnicity.

38. Paragraph 23 of SSH and HR highlighted that a failed asylum seeker will
    be questioned and that 'if there are particular concerns arising from
    their previous activities either in Iran or in the United Kingdom or
    whichever country they are returned from, then there would be a risk of
    further questioning, detention and potential ill-treatment'.

39. It is necessary therefore to consider the individual factors relating
    to a particular appellant and to consider them cumulatively when making
    a decision as to risk on return. In relation to this appellant he is of
    Kurdish ethnicity. As set out in the CG decision of HB (Kurds) (as
    cited above), since 2016 the Iranian authorities have been increasingly
    suspicious of Kurdish political activities and as a result those of
    Kurdish ethnicity are regarded with even greater suspicion and
    subjected to heightened scrutiny on return. Mrs Brakaj has referred me
    to the description in HB(Kurds) at  [95] where it is stated that the
    evidence indicates that the Iranian authorities demonstrate what could
    be described as a "hair trigger" approach to those suspected of or
    perceived to be involved in Kurdish political activities or support for
    Kurdish rights. As the Tribunal set out at paragraph 95, that means
    that the threshold for suspicion is low and the reaction of the
    authorities is reasonably likely to be extreme.

40. As to the face book posts the judge makes reference to them and on the
    basis that they were of recent origin and the inference raised is that
    they had been put up to bolster his case. The FtTJ did accept that the
    pictures of his attendance at demonstrations were posted on his face
    book  page  and accepted that he would be questioned on return ( see
    [13]

41. In HB (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT the Tribunal said this at paragraph
    116:-

             "We are satisfied that the content  the  appellant's  Facebook
             page would become known to the authorities on return  as  part
             of the process of investigation of his background. That is the
             effect of the expert background  evidence  before  us.  It  is
             then, no step at all to the conclusion that this would involve
             a real risk of persecution and Article 3 ill-treatment in  his
             case."



42. The FtTJ accepted that there were photographs of the appellant which
    were placed on his Facebook account holding a Kurdish flag (at [13]).
    The Facebook posts that were set out in the appellants bundle at pages
    15 - 23 show the appellant prominently holding a Kurdish flag and that
    his updated profile picture, showing his face clearly, as against a
    Kurdish flag. There are also posts that appeared to lend support to the
    circumstances of  Ms Ratcliffe in Iran. The posts show that there have
    been a large number of comments also. Whilst the account is in a
    shortened version of his name, it has his photograph as his profile
    picture.


43. I have taken into account that the posts are at the lower end of the
    scale in terms of number and the timing of posts are presently over a
    short period. I also take into account that the FtTJ reached a finding
    that the activities were undertaken in "bad faith" in the light of his
    previous lack of political activity and that his attendance at
    demonstrations and that placing posts on his Facebook page came after
    his substantive interview. I also take into account the finding that he
    was not of any interest to the Iranian authorities before he left Iran.
    However, the objective material demonstrates that it is reasonably
    likely that the Iranian authorities will be less interested in the
    reasons or motivation for undertaking activities. Furthermore, it is
    not necessary for there to be large amounts of material and that there
    may be cases even with low-level activity, such as in this case, that
    would give rise to a real risk of ill-treatment on return. On the facts
    of this particular appellant's case, those posts do demonstrate pro-
    Kurdish sympathies and are reasonably likely to be perceived in a
    negative light and risk the adverse attention by the Iranian
    authorities.


44. Therefore taking into account the particular factors in this
    appellant's case, I am satisfied that he has demonstrated to the lower
    standard of proof that upon return the activity undertaken is likely to
    become known upon questioning and from his posts and alongside his
    Kurdish ethnicity would give rise to a real risk of persecution or
    Article 3 ill-treatment. I therefore remake the appeal by allowing it.





Notice of Decision

45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  I remake the appeal; the
    appeal is allowed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds                     Date     12/12/2019

                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

