
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06602/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      A
                            (Anonymity dIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms T Bond (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Ms S Jones (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. On 5 October 2017 the claimant entered the UK, with limited leave,
         as a student. It is formally recorded that he claimed
         international protection on 10 November 2017. On 11 May 2018 the
         Secretary of State curtailed his student leave and refused his
         claim for international protection. The claimant appealed to the
         First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) but on 30 July 2018, following
         a hearing of 21 June 2018, it dismissed his appeal. The claimant
         obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and, on 11
         February 2019, I set aside the tribunal's decision, without
         preserving any of the findings and conclusions, and directed that
         the decision on the appeal be re-made by the Upper Tribunal after
         a further hearing. My reasons for setting aside the tribunal's
         decision are contained in my written decision of 11 February 2019
         and it is not necessary for me to repeat those reasons here. But,
         put simply, I had concluded that the tribunal's adverse
         credibility conclusions were unsound. The hearing for the purposes
         of the re-making of the decision took place before me on 9
         September 2019. Representation at that hearing was as stated above
         and I am grateful to each representative. I heard oral evidence
         from the claimant, given with the assistance of an interpreter
         whom he appeared to understand throughout the course of the
         proceedings, and then I received oral argument from the
         representatives.

      2. I have decided to continue to grant the claimant anonymity in
         these proceedings. Anonymity was originally granted by the
         tribunal and, although the matter was not specifically addressed
         before me, it does seem to me appropriate to continue the status
         quo.

      3. Turning then to the background circumstances, the claimant was
         born on [~] 1999. He is, therefore, currently aged nineteen years.
         He is, it is accepted, a Palestinian national who has resided with
         his family in the Lebanon, where he was born, under the protection
         of the Lebanese authorities and with residency status.
         Specifically, he lived in the Lebanon with the protection of the
         United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian refugees in
         the Near East.

4.    As to the account said by the claimant to underpin his claimed
entitlement to international protection he says as follows: he had decided
that he wished to study abroad. He was issued with a passport by the
Lebanese authorities and applied for a visa which would enable him to come
to the United Kingdom (UK) as a tier 4 student migrant. But he says that
prior to securing leave and coming to the UK he had gone on a scout trip to
a place called Elkhaium Kharoub in the company of some fellow scouts. There
was, at the camp, another group of individuals consisting of some ten
persons in total. His application for a visa was successful and he entered
the UK on 5 October 2017, intending to take up a place he had obtained at a
university in Sunderland. But shortly after he arrived in the UK, in fact
on 31 October 2017, his father was arrested by the Lebanese authorities and
questioned about what the claimant had been doing at the scout camp. The
claimant says that the Lebanese authorities suspected that, whilst at the
camp, he had been taking part in military training with a view to his
fighting against the forces of Hezbollah. His father was released from
detention shortly after his apprehension and telephoned the claimant to
inform him what had happened. The relevant telephone conversation took
place on 2 November 2017. At some point shortly after that the claimant was
expelled from the university. The claimant says that he was prompted to
seek international protection as a result of his learning about his
father's apprehension and questioning and because he fears that the
Lebanese authorities will now persecute him upon return.

5.    It follows from the above that credibility is a central issue in this
appeal. So, I have found it necessary to consider whether, to the lower
standard of proof applicable in international protection cases (the real
risk test) I am able to accept the claimant as a credible witness. In
undertaking that assessment, I have taken into account all of the oral
evidence I have heard, all of the documentation before me, including that
which was before the tribunal when it heard the appeal, and additional
documentation which has been provided subsequently, as well as the
submissions of the two representatives. I have reminded myself that I
should be cautious in rejecting, as incredible, an account offered by an
inexperienced and anxious asylum seeker. I have reminded myself that I
should not regard an account or a part of an account as being incredible
merely because it might at first blush appear so when viewed from a UK-
based perspective. Irrespective of the order in which matters are set out
below, I have considered all of the evidence, together, as one composite
whole. I now set out my credibility assessment below.

6.    A key component of the claimant's account is that he fell under
suspicion because of his attendance at a scout camp which was also attended
by ten other persons who the group he had been attending with had had no
involvement with (paragraph 15 of the claimant's witness statement of 12
August 2018). On the claimant's own account, he had not been of any adverse
interest to the Lebanese authorities or Hezbollah in the past. It would
have been relatively easy for the authorities to have established that the
trip the claimant had attended was a genuine scout trip.  Against that
background I do not consider it credible that the authorities would,
essentially without direct evidence, suspect the claimant of the sorts of
activities he claims they did.

7.    The claimant, in his substantive asylum interview of 2 May 2018, was
asked questions about his claim that his father had been arrested by the
authorities in the Lebanon and had been questioned. He provided information
about the claimed arrest of his father in a passage running from question
49 to question 57. He was asked whether his father had been beaten or
physically abused and his recorded reply is "I have no idea whether he had
received any abuse or beating I have no idea". I think that if there had
been such an arrest and a subsequent discussion or discussions about it
(over the telephone or by electronic means) between the claimant and his
father he would have known whether his father had suffered any ill
treatment or not. I believe with respect to a matter of such gravity he
would have been keen, if such had occurred, to establish all of the
details. I find his assertion that he had "no idea" about that to be
unpersuasive.

8.    It is the claimant's account that his father was arrested but, after
being questioned, released shortly afterwards. The claimant also asserts
that his father has not been the subject of any further adverse interest
from the authorities (see his answers to questions 119, 120 and 121). The
claimant is effectively asserting that despite not having had any
involvement with anything untoward at the scout camp the authorities or
Hezbollah will persecute him upon return. First of all, it seems to me that
if the authorities would be inclined to take such an aggressive approach to
him they would not have simply released his father after a short period as
claimed. Secondly, it seems to me that if they are as keen to apprehend the
claimant as he suggests, they would have kept his father in custody and
informed his family in the Lebanon that he (that is the father) would be
released if the claimant gave himself up. Thirdly, it seems to me that if
the authorities truly did take the moderate and restrained stance with
respect to his father that he says they did, they would take a similar
considered approach with respect to their suspicions about him rather than
simply assuming he had been acting against them purely on the basis of his
attendance at a scout camp.

9.    The claimant, in his witness statement of 12 August 2018, said that
after his father's arrest and release "some men who we believe are from
Hezbollah visited my home again and again and they asked my family what
they knew about me joining a military training group". That, to my mind,
sits unhappily with what he had to say in his substantive asylum interview
which, as noted above, was to the effect that his father had not
encountered any further problems from Hezbollah or the Lebanese authorities
and that neither had gone to the family home (see his responses to
questions 121 and, in particular, 122). It is perhaps worth setting out the
record of the latter question and answer. The claimant was asked:

         "122. After your father was released the authorities or Hezbollah
         have not come to the house? Is that right"

         "No they haven't come".

10.   That does seem to me to be a stark inconsistency. I appreciate that
the statement I have in mind was given after the substantive asylum
interview which raises the possibility of intervening events. But since the
claimant's father had been released, according to the claimant, towards the
latter end of 2017, it seems most improbable that there would have been no
visits to the family home by May 2018 but there would then be a flurry of
such visits in the period of relatively short duration between the
substantive asylum interview taking place and the witness statement being
prepared. In any event that inconsistency was specifically identified by
the tribunal in its decision of 30 July 2018. Of course, I have set aside
that decision and all of its findings but the point I am making is that the
inconsistency was identified so it would have been in the mind of the
claimant and his representatives, but it has not been subsequently dealt
with (see paragraph 30 of the tribunal's written reasons of 30 July 2018).

11.   The claimant has consistently asserted that he believes he will be
subjected upon return to persecution or serious harm. He stated matters
quite starkly in his substantive asylum interview. He was asked at question
38 what he feared would happen if he were to be returned and his recorded
reply is "if I went back to Lebanon then will be subjected to extreme
violence at least and also could be death or imprisonment for life". If
that were to be true then matters could hardly be more serious for him.
Later in the same interview, when the claimant was being asked about the
witness statement he had given and what was perceived to be an important
omission in it, he said of that statement "I've read it but casually" (see
question 113 of the substantive asylum interview). When it was put to him
that it was implausible he would only read such a document casually he gave
what I find to be a rather confusing reply (question 115). But anyway, if
he genuinely feared treatment of such extreme severity it is, in my
judgment, entirely implausible that he would not familiarise himself
completely with the content of such a statement made for the purposes of
pursuing his claim and, therefore, avoiding such treatment. There is an
inconsistency between the extent of his claimed fear and his apparently
casual approach to a document relevant to his application to be permitted
to remain in the UK in order to avoid such fears being realised.

12.   The claimant has provided a witness statement said to have been made
by his father.  I have decided that I am only able to accord this witness
statement very limited weight. Firstly, what is said in the statement was
not tested in cross-examination. I appreciate that that is not the
claimant's fault.  I do not see how, practically speaking, it would have
been feasible to have him cross-examined at the hearing before me. At
least, making such arrangements would in all probability have been fraught
with difficulty and complexity. But the fact remains that the content of
that statement is untested. Further, the document is strikingly brief. The
information given about the questions asked of the father in the course of
what he refers to as "interrogations" is really very generalised.  If he
had truly been interrogated I believe that he would have been willing and
able to give more detail about the content of the questions put to him and
would have actually done so in a statement he would have known was being
used to support his son's bid for sanctuary. If he could prepare a
statement at all there would seem to be no reason why he could not and
would not wish to prepare a detailed one. So, I have concluded that the
claimant does not derive significant assistance from that statement.

13.   The claimant has provided two letters said to have been written by
the Palestine Liberation Organisation. The letters are brief. Both are said
to have been written on 14 January 2018 and both contain largely similar
content. What was said in the two letters could simply have been said in
one and it is odd that that was not done. Further, one of those letters, on
my reading, says that the "popular committee" of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation actually visited the claimant's family's residence, at the
request of the Lebanese Intelligence Army, to tell the claimant to hand
himself in to the authorities. The letter indicates, that during that
visit, the popular committee was informed by the claimant's father that the
claimant was "out of the country for education purposes in the United
Kingdom". It is odd that no mention of this visit is contained in the
father's own statement. I do not feel able to accord any more than little
weight to those letters. Further documentation was provided for the
purposes of the hearing of 9 September 2009 and that included documentation
said to emanate from a lawyer acting on behalf of the claimant in the
Lebanon. The documentation, which had also been translated in the Lebanon,
suggested that the claimant remained a wanted person either as a witness or
as a person accused of something. There is no explanation as to why such
documentation could not have been obtained at an earlier stage. There is no
evidence to verify that the author is a lawyer in the Lebanon. I do not
discount the documentation but, again, I accord it only little weight.

14.   There was an issue regarding the timing of the claim for asylum. That
revolved around the circumstances which led to the claimant being suspended
by the University of Sunderland and then being effectively expelled from
the university. There was a suggestion that the claimant had or might have
made his claim for asylum as a reaction to his expulsion from the
university rather than as a reaction to his genuinely being of adverse
interest in the Lebanon. Such might be suspected, of course, because of the
likelihood of his student visa being curtailed in consequence of the
expulsion.

15.   When setting aside the tribunal's decision I had indicated that I
would appreciate more evidence as to all of that. The documentary evidence
now emanating from the University of Sunderland shows that the claimant was
admitted as a student on 10 October 2017. However, he only attended classes
from 10 October 2017 until 26 October 2017. He was sent what are described
as "several written warnings", presumably regarding his non-attendance
though he referred in oral evidence to other matters too, prior to his
being suspended indefinitely on 6 November 2017. He was then expelled on 8
November 2017. I have taken that from a letter written by one S J Wood, a
senior solicitor with the University of Sunderland, of 10 May 2019. The
documentation also refers to his having received a warning for
inappropriate behaviour, which appears to be a separate matter to the non-
attendance issue, on 23 October 2017. There is also, as another separate
matter, a mention of his having been arrested due to an allegation "of a
very serious nature" but I have disregarded that because no prosecution was
pursued. It is recorded that the claimant formally claimed international
protection on 10 November 2018 which is when he attended for a preliminary
interview, commonly referred to as a screening interview. But I accept he
would have contacted the Home Office prior to that date in order to
indicate his intention to make his application and, presumably, so that a
screening interview could be booked. He himself says, as I understand it,
that he was contacted by telephone by his father on 2 November 2017 and it
was then when he was informed of his father's arrest and the adverse
interest of the authorities in him. I do not detect any clear evidence as
to the precise date upon which the claimant contacted the Home Office to
intimate his intention to claim international protection. But I am prepared
to accept it would have been prior to his actual expulsion from the
university. Ms Bond argues that the sequence of events and timeline with
respect to all of this is of particular importance. The point really is
that the evidence does appear to suggest that the claim for international
protection was made prior to expulsion. So, it cannot be said to have been
made as a response to expulsion and with the simple aim of remaining in the
UK as a matter of preference. But, as is apparent from the above, the
claimant's situation at the university was somewhat precarious prior to
expulsion anyway. He had had written warnings, there was a concern about
his behaviour and also his non-attendance at classes, and he had received a
final warning on 23 October 2017. Against that background it is clearly
conceivable that he might have either become disenchanted with the
university such that he did not want to attend it any more or he might have
thought it was likely he would be expelled anyway. I am not saying that I
positively take a point against the claimant with respect to his
credibility, through his applying for international protection at a time
his continued place at the university was under threat. I am simply saying
that, against the above background, he does not gain positive support as to
his credibility through his having made a claim for international
protection prior to his actual expulsion.

16.   In light of all the above I have concluded that I am not able to
accept the claimant as a credible witness even on the basis of the lower
standard applicable in international protection cases. I have made my
relevant findings of fact in light of that conclusion.

17.   I find that the claimant is a Palestinian national born in the
Lebanon and that he and his family members enjoy UNRWA protection there. I
find that either the claimant did not attend a scout camp or, if he did,
his attendance and participation in activities there was uneventful and did
not lead to the Palestinian authorities or Hezbollah developing an adverse
interest in him. I find that his father has not been arrested and
questioned by the authorities as claimed or at all. I find that the
claimant will not be persecuted or otherwise ill-treated upon return either
by the Lebanese authorities or by Hezbollah.

18.   In light of the above I have concluded that the claimant has not
shown himself to be a refugee nor a person entitled to a grant of
humanitarian protection. Similarly, he has not shown himself to be a person
who will face a real risk of being treated in such a way as to bring about
a breach of Article 3 of the ECHR. Accordingly, in re-making this decision,
I dismiss the claimant's appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of
11 May 2018, refusing to grant him international protection.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already been set aside.

In re-making the decision I dismiss the claimant's appeal against the
Secretary of State's decision of 11 May 2018 to refuse him international
protection.



Signed:     Dated: 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





Anonymity

The claimant was previously granted anonymity. I continue that grant
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the claimant or
any member of his family. The grant of anonymity applies to all parties to
the proceedings. Failure to comply might lead to contempt of court
proceedings.



Signed:     Dated: 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





To the Respondent

Fee award

I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


