
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/06129/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |                                     |
|On 18 November 2020                  |On 23 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                      S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 24 April 2018, declining to  accept
         that the appellant is Syrian, and considering him to be Egyptian.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Blair, promulgated on 12 December 2018.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT, (i) - (iv), as  stated
         in the application for permission to appeal filed with the FtT, and
         expanded upon in his application to the UT.

      v) The joint minute between the  parties  in  the  Court  of  Session,
         agreeing that in refusing permission to  appeal,  the  UT  did  not
         consider whether the  FtT  erred  in  law  in  its  evaluation  and
         acceptance of the linguistic report.

     vi) The grant of permission by the UT, in light of the interlocutor  of
         the Court and the joint minute, dated 16 September 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  The technology enabled an effective hearing.

 3. Ground (i) challenges the findings  based  on  the  linguistic  report.
    Ground (ii) is  inadequacy  of  reasons  for  finding  the  appellant's
    account implausible.  Ground (iii) is that the judge jumped too readily
    from an adverse finding on the nationality issue.  Ground (iv) is  that
    the judge failed to factor the  medical  report  into  the  credibility
    assessment.

 4. The grant of permission stems from the concession that  ground  (i)  is
    arguable, but extends also to the other grounds.

 5. Ms Everett said that the grounds  disclosed  several  errors,  none  of
    which might alone have been material, but which, taken  together,  were
    such that the decision could not safely stand.

 6. The outcome, as agreed by parties, is that the decision of the  FtT  is
    set aside, and the case is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

 7. The anonymity direction made by the FtT is maintained.

      [pic]

      18 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

