
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06073/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2018                             |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                  AHMED [A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Colvin promulgated on 15 January 2018 dismissing the Appellant's protection
appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 8 June 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt whose date of birth is given as 1
January 1984. He last entered the UK on 20 March 2014 pursuant to a visit
visa, having previously been a visitor here from 10 November 2013 until 16
March 2014. The Appellant overstayed his visit visa. He made an application
for asylum on 12 December 2016 (on which state a screening interview was
conducted); a substantive asylum interview was conducted on 21 April 2017.
The Appellant sought to rely on 'Refugee Convention reasons' in relation to
membership of a particular social group with reference to his claimed
homosexuality.


3.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for protection for
reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 8 June
2017. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was homosexual.


4.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


5.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal following a hearing on 20
December 2017 for reasons set out in the Decision of Judge Colvin
promulgated on 15 January 2018.


6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that the Appellant was not
homosexual. The Judge's conclusions are summarised at paragraph 38 of the
Decision under the heading 'Overall assessment' in the following terms:


         "I am aware of the need to assess all the evidence as a whole when
         assessing the issue of credibility. I am also aware of the need to
         be cautious before reaching an adverse credibility finding in an
         asylum appeal. However, on all the evidence before me, I have
         reached the conclusion even on the lower standard of proof that the
         appellant's claim is wholly without merit. I consider that the
         medical evidence shows that when asked about his sexual orientation
         by his GP in February 2016 he said that he is heterosexual and that
         therefore his claim to be homosexual is a complete fabrication
         solely for the purpose of seeking asylum some months later. This is
         corroborated by the fact that there were significant
         inconsistencies in his and his partner's evidence and that the
         partner himself has not been believed in his asylum claim to be a
         gay man. It is also corroborated by the appellant's immigration
         history including the fact that he returned to Egypt for 3 days
         despite saying he was in fear and delayed claiming asylum for some
         2 years and 8 months without providing a reasonable explanation -
         as his explanation of possible anal testing in the UK was, in my
         view, correctly rejected by the respondent for the reasons given."



7.   The Judge also found that the Appellant could not succeed by reference
to Article 8 private life established in the UK.


8.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


9.   Permission to appeal was refused in the first instance by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Farrelly on 8 February 2018, but subsequently granted by
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 12 March 2018. In material part of the
grant of permission to appeal is in these terms:


         "It is arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin erred in
         failing to make findings in respect of the second witness, Mr [C]."


     Judge Rintoul observed whilst there was "less merit" in the other
grounds pleaded, permission to appeal was not restricted.


10.  In support of his appeal the appellant relied upon his own testimony
and the live testimony of two witnesses, in addition to various items of
documentary evidence including an expert report. The two witnesses were the
Appellant's supposed partner, Mr [MM], and Mr [MC].


11.  Mr [C] provided a witness statement signed on 10 December 2017, and
attended the hearing to give oral evidence in support of the appeal. The
Judge summarises this evidence at paragraph 20:


         "The witness [MC] gave oral evidence. He adopted his letter dated
         10 December 2017 as his evidence. This states that he met the
         appellant and [M] in May 2017 in a club called Blush when he helped
         them sort out a bill. They sat together, talked and became friends.
         He knows about the appellant's problems in Egypt and why he left.
         In oral evidence-in-chief he said that the appellant told him in
         August 2017 that he was gay and started to trust him. He has been
         in Egypt and knows the situation there. The appellant and [M] love
         each other and are trying to be together but there are financial
         reasons against this. In cross-examination he said that he meets
         the appellant once or twice a week and sometimes they are both
         together. The appellant has been to his house twice but he's not
         been to his home."



12.  Mr McVeety acknowledges on behalf of the Respondent that the Judge
makes no further reference to the evidence of Mr [C]. However, he submits
that Mr [C]'s testimony added little to the overall case, and reminded the
Tribunal that it was not incumbent upon a First-tier Tribunal Judge to give
reasons in respect of every single aspect of evidence in an appeal. He
submits that the Judge's overall conclusions were clear and transparent and
adequately reasoned, informed in particular by the comments and
observations in respect of the evidence of the Appellant and his supposed
partner at paragraphs 36 and 37. Nonetheless Mr McCready accepted it "would
have been better" if the Judge had stated in terms that the evidence of Mr
[C] took the Appellant's case no further.


13.  I accept that the Judge's reasons are for the main part clear and
understandable. Absent the concern in respect of the testimony of Mr [C]
they appear adequately sustainable.


14.  However, whilst I acknowledge that it is not incumbent upon a judge to
deal with every aspect of sometimes extensive materials filed in support of
an appeal, I do not think that such a principle operates to obviate the
need to address in terms a corroborating witness statement backed by
attendance and oral evidence if that evidence is relied upon as
establishing the core element of the claim. Mr [C]'s evidence was called to
corroborate the Appellant's sexuality and that he was in a relationship
with another man. Even if that evidence relied upon what the Appellant had
reported to the witness, it was still of potential significance - if
accepted - that the Appellant had discussed his sexuality with somebody.
The 'in the round' evaluation necessary in a protection appeal required the
judge not only to take into account the evidence of Mr [C], but to make it
apparent to the parties what the Judge thought of such evidence, and if it
were rejected to explain why it was rejected.


15.  In such circumstances, and notwithstanding the apparent cogency of the
rest of the Judge's reasoning, I am satisfied that this was a material
error of law that necessarily impacted upon the overall assessment of
credibility. In light of this conclusion it is not necessary for me to give
consideration to the other grounds of appeal.


16.  It was common ground between the parties that if I were persuaded of
this point the decision in the appeal would need to be remade pursuant to a
further hearing before the First-tier Tribunal with all issues at large. I
agree. It will be a matter for the Appellant as to what if any further
evidence he might now wish to file and to this extent standard directions
will suffice.


Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


18.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than first-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin  with
    all issues at large.



Signed:                                 Date: 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
