
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06468/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2019                           |On 9 March 2020               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     GS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by the Tamil Welfare
Association
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the appellant is an asylum  seeker  and  so  is  entitled  to
privacy.

2. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
dismiss the appeal of the appellant against a decision of the respondent on
14 June 2017 refusing him asylum and/or leave to  remain  on  human  rights
grounds.

3. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   He  says  that  he  risks
persecution because of things he did in support of the LTTE.



4. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was
granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb who has already  commented  adversely
on the inconvenience of having grounds prepared both by Counsel and,  in  a
separate document, by the appellant's instructing  solicitors.   I  do  not
know how this came about.  It is not helpful.  Judge Grubb gave  permission
on a limited basis and, given the potential for confusion generated by  the
two sets of grounds, I must take particular care in identifying the  points
that were arguable before me.

5. Judge Grubb's order showed  that  permission  was  granted  on  Counsel's
grounds and ground 1 of the additional grounds but  he  described  that  as
"repetitious of Counsel's grounds" and I find it adds nothing relevant.

6. I look now at the grounds drawn by Ms Allen.

7. It is an element of the appellant's case that he is at risk in Sri  Lanka
because the Authorities have shown an  interest  in  him  by  visiting  the
family home and by issuing a summons against him requiring him to appear in
the criminal courts.  This is potentially very important and the First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  30  where  he  was  considering  the
respondent's case that:

  "it was accepted that if the appellant were  to  be  the  subject  of  an
  arrest warrant for the reasons he stated that such had  been  issued,  he
  would be at risk."

8. The judge has explained at paragraph 27 of the Decision and  Reason  that
evidence relating to  the  summons  to  face  terrorism  charges  had  been
provided with a letter by a Mr R M Imam. It is in Appeal Bundle 5 at  pages
6 to 15 and Bundle 6 at pages 7 to 9.  At page 10 there is a letter bearing
a signature and a rubberstamp and a letter heading showing that the  letter
comes from R. M. Imam "Attorney-At-Law and Notary Public Former  Member  of
Parliament".  It is dated 5 June 2019.  There is nothing in the  appearance
of the letter  that  makes  its  authenticity  particularly  persuasive  or
dubious. There is then a copy of an e-mail from  a  Mr  K  Fred  who  is  a
solicitor with  the  Tamil  Welfare  Association  to  Mr  Imam  posing  two
questions.  The text is dated 6 June 2019.  It says:

  "It would be helpful if  you  would  provide  answers  to  the  following
  questions

  (i)    would you please explain why  your  name  does  not,  at  present,
  appear on the Bar Association of Sri Lanka (BASL) directory of lawyers?

  (ii)   would you please provide a copy of your BASL photo-membership card
  (if you hold one)?  We are aware that  Sri  Lankan  attorneys  registered
  with the BASL hold BASL photo membership cards with a BASL number".

  Please note that we will not be able to rely on this letter unless it  is
  supported by documentary evidence of the kind requested above"

9. There is a response dated 6 June 2019.  It seems to have been  sent  very
quickly. There the writer confirms that he is a lifetime member of the  Bar
Association of Sri Lanka and gives a membership number and  says:  "if  you
have any further queries about my membership you can verify  from  the  Bar
Association of Sri Lanka".  He then indicates that he lost  his  membership
card and had not applied for a replacement.  However he did provide what he
certified was a  true  copy  of  a  certificate  dated  18  September  1978
identifying the appellant as someone admitted and enrolled as  an  attorney
at law in the Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka.  There  was  with
it a certificate purporting to be from the registrar of the  Supreme  Court
of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka  showing  that  a  person
with the same name and address as Mr Imam and using the same identification
number was admitted as an attorney at law on 18 September  1978  "and  that
his name continues to appear on the re Roll of Attorneys at Law".  That  is
dated 24 July 2018.

10. The documents in bundle 6 have been considered above,  particularly  the
letter of 5 June 2019 which does indeed purport to  show  the  offices  and
residential address of the alleged lawyer Mr Imam.

11. I find it extraordinarily vexing that neither party  has  done  more  to
illuminate the status of the writer Mr Imam.  He  had  equivocally  invited
anyone having doubt to contact the Bar Association of Sri Lanka  to  verify
his membership.  As far as I can see no one has done that.  It  would  have
been open to the appellant's representatives to have  written  to  the  Bar
Association of Sri  Lanka  to  ask  if  Mr  Imam  was  a  member  of  their
association.  I find it even more extraordinary that the respondent made no
such inquiry.  Whilst fully appreciating that the  Secretary  of  State  in
asylum cases has  to  show  considerable  sensitivity  there  was  not  the
slightest reason for the Secretary of  State  to  link  any  inquiry  to  a
particular appellant or asylum seeker or even to state the reason  for  the
application.  Ordinarily members of  a  profession  such  as  advocate  are
listed by their professional body and it appears clear that this is not the
case here.  Certainly Mr Imam did not deny the assertion by the appellant's
representative that his name  did  not  appear  on  a  published  list.   I
appreciate it is  for  the  appellant  to  prove  his  case  but  there  is
absolutely no reason why the Secretary of State cannot help or indeed  help
undermine it.

12. The sense of vexation is enhanced by reason  of  the  bundle  containing
the documents about Mr Imam was served very soon before an intended hearing
at Hatton Cross on 7 June 2019 and the hearing was adjourned for  documents
to be considered.  It would have been the work of a  few  minutes  to  have
contacted the Sri Lanka Bar Association and the outcome of that could  have
been illuminating but as far as I know it was not done.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had to deal with the evidence relied  upon
and not the evidence that might have been produce.  I agree with Mr  Melvin
that the judge gave sufficient reasons for doubting the credibility  of  Mr
Imam.  He did not address every point that might have been addressed but he
did say perfectly clearly at paragraph 38 where he made his finding that he
was not satisfied that Mr Imam is a genuine attorney, that he had given  no
explanation for losing his identity card  or  more  importantly  explaining
where a new one could be obtained.

14. Still more significantly there was no support from the  Bar  Association
to confirm that Mr Imam was still a member.  There was evidence that he had
been admitted as an attorney in 1978.  The judge should have  commented  on
the further documents showing he was a member in good standing in July 2018
but that was not the material date.  It was the appellant's  case  that  Mr
Imam was a member in good standing.  The letter dated 24 July 2018  is  not
helpful.  It is hard to understand why a document dated 24  July  2018  was
relied upon at a hearing in September 2019 (or the flawed hearing  in  June
2019) and no explanation has been tendered for  the  appellant's  name  not
appearing on the roll of attorneys. As indicated elsewhere,  the  assertion
that it did not appear was not challenged. It  would  be  extraordinary  to
acquiesce in such an assertion if it was wrong.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been criticised  for  being  a  little
skimpy in his consideration of the evidence but  it  is  perfectly  obvious
that a more detailed consideration would  have  led  to  more  reasons  for
disbelieving  it.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   did   consider   the
explanation provided by Mr Imam in the letter of 5 June  2019.   The  judge
was entitled to note, as he did, that the appellant was living at the  same
address as his wife at a time when it is said  that  he  had  not  attended
court but it had never been suggested in earlier proceedings that there had
been any attempt to summons him to court even though his  wife  might  well
have been expected to  have  known  about  such  things.   This  is  not  a
compelling point but it points in the direction  of  the  appellant's  case
being unreliable.

16. Further it is extraordinary that the allegedly supporting  evidence  was
not raised in earlier proceedings.

17. I am dissatisfied with the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  because  the
status of  Mr  Imam  is  at  least  potentially  a  point  of  considerable
importance and neither party has distinguished itself in addressing it  but
I am satisfied that the judge reached a proper  decision  on  the  evidence
that was available to him.

18. It is of course open to the appellant to make a further  application  if
he  can  get  better  evidence  to  support  his  case.   It  may  be  that
independently obtained evidence from the Sri Lankan Bar  Association  about
the status of Mr Imam from either party could be very illuminating but that
is speculation.  If the appellant's case is sound it is something he  might
want to consider.

19. Ms Allen argued in her grounds and indeed before me that the  judge  had
applied too high a standard of proof.  That kind of  allegation  is  always
easy to make and is sometimes well-founded but I do not agree that it well-
founded here.  The judge has given proper reasons for his conclusion.

20. It is also right to emphasise that  there  were  other  grounds.   I  am
concerned about the judge's finding that the appellant had not  worked  for
the Halo Trust because that appears to be  supported  by  current  credible
documents but the grounds make no inroad in the judge's  finding  that  the
appellant would not be at risk because of anything now because of  anything
that happened then once the "summons" point fails.

21. It was the appellant's case that he had spent three  years  after  being
attacked in 2012 before coming to the United Kingdom.  There  is  no  basis
for concluding that he would be at risk now because of enemies made  during
his time with the Halo Trust or, if there  were  problems,  that  effective
protection would not be available.

22. The judge did consider the medical evidence.  The judge  did  not  doubt
it but found that it did not support his claim or add to  his  credibility.
The appellant is poorly now but not to the degree that would prevent his re-
establishing himself in Sri Lanka.  There is no  material  error  in  those
findings.

23.  Putting  everything  together  I  am  satisfied  the  judge  reached  a
conclusion that was open to him.  With the benefit of hindsight  the  judge
can be criticised for not saying more about the evidence before him  but  I
doubt if the perfect Decision and Reasons has ever been written. He was not
helped by the absence of potentially crucial information from either  party
and he did not err in law.

24. I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

25. The appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 March 2020                   |

