
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07823/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling of Counsel instructed by Barnes
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes back before the Tribunal  further  to  an  'error  of
    law' decision and directions promulgated on 29 March 2019, and  further
    directions sent on 15 May 2019.  The error  of  law  decision  and  the
    respective directions are appended hereto and  should  be  read  as  an
    integral part of this Decision.


2.   Two issues in particular detained the Tribunal and were the subject  of
    the discussion and directions in the documents to  which  I  have  just
    referred.  One of those issues related to the jurisdictional effect  of
    an arrest  warrant  issued  by  the  authorities  of  the  IKR  and  in
    particular whether such a warrant could be executed outside the IKR  in
    the rest of Iraq.


3.   The second issue related to the replacement of the CSID by a  new  form
    of national identity card - the Iraq National Identity  Card  ('INID'),
    with new procedures including the use of iris scanning technology.


4.   In the event,  although  further  materials  have  been  filed  by  the
    Appellant pursuant to the most recent Directions of  15  May  2019,  no
    further materials have been filed by the Respondent.  However Ms  Cunha
    this morning has very helpfully taken  instructions  on  the  issue  in
    relation to the arrest warrant.


5.   Ms Cunha's instructions are to the effect that the increasing level  of
    co-operation between the authorities of Iraq and the authorities of the
    IKR are such that it is reasonably likely that an arrest warrant issued
    by one administration would be executed by the other.  This is  broadly
    consistent with the opinion  expressed  by  Dr  Rabwah  Fatah  who  had
    provided an earlier report in these proceedings  and  has  provided  an
    updated report dated 3 July 2019 sent to the Tribunal  under  cover  of
    letter dated 10 July 2019.


6.   Ms Cunha restated that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  necessarily
    accept  the  primary  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   -   but
    acknowledged that those  findings  had  not  been  impugned.   In  this
    context see in particular paragraph 8 of the 'error of law' decision in
    which I set out the findings that could be  taken  variously  from  the
    Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter and the Decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal - which included the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  in
    respect of the Appellant being the subject of an  arrest  warrant  that
    had been issued in the IKR.


7.     In  the  circumstances  I  conclude  that  the  option  of   internal
    relocation is neither reasonable nor viable for the Appellant. Upon his
    return to Baghdad, or if he  were  to  seek  to  establish  himself  in
    Baghdad or elsewhere in Iraq outside the IKR, he is at risk  of  having
    the arrest warrant executed - which reasonably likely would  result  in
    him being taken to the IKR where the First-tier Tribunal Judge found he
    would be at risk of persecutory  treatment.   Given  that  an  internal
    relocation option is not available  the Appellant is  entitled  to  the
    international surrogate protection of  the  Refugee  Convention  and/or
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  For that reason I remake the  decision  in  the
    appeal by allowing the appeal on protection grounds.


Notice of Decision

8.   The appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)

                                 APPENDIX 1

  TEXT OF 'ERROR OF LAW' DECISION & DIRECTIONS PROMULGATED ON 29 MARCH 2019


Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cameron promulgated on 22 August 2018 dismissing the Appellant's appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 7  January  2018  to  refuse
    protection in the United Kingdom.

2,   The Appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  born  on  14  December  1981.   He
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 9 December 2017 and claimed
    asylum. The Appellant entered with his wife and three  minor  children,
    all of whom have been treated as dependents of his  claim.  (A  further
    child was born in the UK on 6  February  2018.)   The  application  was
    refused on 7 January 2018  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') of the same date.

3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

4.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in the  'Decision  and
    Reasons' of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron.

5.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal, which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 14 September 2018.  So far
    as is material the grant of permission to appeal is in these terms:

"It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected  himself  in  dismissing  the
appeal by failing to correctly apply the relevant country guidance  when  it
was accepted that the Appellant, for the reasons given, did not have a  CSID
card, could not obtain a laissez-passer from  the  Iraqi  Embassy  and  that
there was a reasonable risk of persecution on return to the IKR but that  it
would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant to be returned to  Baghdad.  The
relevant country guidance makes it clear that the  Appellant  would  require
to travel to his home governate to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID  card.  The
Judge's conclusion that the Appellant could obtain a new CSID card with  the
assistance of his father could assist but only  to  the  extent  of  proving
that the Appellant is a person named  on  the  relevant  page.  The  Judge's
conclusion that the Appellant could be returned without  undue  hardship  to
Baghdad was predicated entirely on finding that he would be able  to  obtain
a CSID card within a reasonable period."

Consideration

6.   Pursuant to a  helpful  preliminary  discussion  encompassing  relevant
    Country  Guidance  cases,  Mr  Kandola  accepted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not engaged in the  depth  of  enquiry  or  analysis
    required pursuant to Country  Guidance,  and  that  the  basis  of  his
    conclusions was not reasoned with manifest adequacy  or  clarity,  such
    that the Respondent acknowledged that there had been an error  of  law.
    Notwithstanding, Mr Kandola submitted that the error  of  law  was  not
    sufficiently material to justify interfering with the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal; alternatively, if the decision was to be set aside
    the decision in the appeal should be remade  without  further  hearing,
    but the appeal should  again  be  dismissed.  Mr  Spurling  necessarily
    accepted the concession in respect of error of law, but argued that the
    outcome should be that the decision should be  remade  and  the  appeal
    allowed.

7.   After careful consideration of all of the evidence, and  the  available
    country guidance decisions, in my judgement the accepted error  of  law
    is material. Essentially, it relates to the adequacy  of  consideration
    of determinative issues in the appeal. Even if it might  be  said  that
    the outcome in the appeal would be no different,  it  does  not  follow
    that the failure to go through an adequate evaluation of the facts  and
    issues is not material. Accordingly  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal requires to be set  aside  and  the  decision  in  the  appeal
    remade.

8.   To understand the basis of the Respondent's concession, and to  provide
    the context for remaking the decision in the  appeal,  I  set  out  the
    following key facts taken variously from the RFRL and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. In this context it is to be noted that neither
    party seeks to upset or displace the primary findings of fact  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. What is in dispute is the implication of those
    facts,  in  particular  in  terms  of  obtaining  identity  and  travel
    documents.

         (i) The Respondent accepted that  the  Appellant  was  Kurdish  and
    from Iraq.

             (ii) The Appellant's application for asylum  was  based  on  a
         claim that he had had a brief affair with a widow, K, who  was  the
         cousin of a member of the KDP. The affair was discovered, whereupon
         he fled in fear of K's family.

             (iii) The Respondent did not accept the Appellant's claims  in
         respect of this affair, or its consequences. In contrast, the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge did accept the Appellant's evidence as  to  the
         affair:   "Notwithstanding   that   there   were    clearly    some
         inconsistencies in  the  evidence  I  am  satisfied  to  the  lower
         standard of proof that the appellant's core claim that  he  had  an
         extramarital affair has been  made  out  to  that  lower  standard"
         (paragraph 89). In this context, and generally, it is to  be  noted
         that  the  Judge  made  references  to  the  consistency   of   the
         Appellant's evidence (e.g. paragraphs 84 and 85), and  also  stated
         in respect of the Appellant's wife "I did find her evidence and her
         emotions to be genuine  rather  than  contrived  for  the  hearing"
         (paragraph 88).

             (iv) The Appellant produced  CCTV  evidence  from  a  security
         camera showing the outside of his father's house and his own  house
         which was next to each other: see paragraphs 66-70, 74,  86-87, and
         90). The Judge accepted  that  such  evidence  showed  an  official
         arriving at the Appellant's property, and  also  a  police  officer
         arriving on a date that matched the date of a summons  produced  by
         the Appellant.

         (v) In consequence of the foregoing the judge  made  the  following
    findings:


                  "... I am satisfied to the lower standard of proof that  I
             can place weight on the  police  summons  and  the  subsequent
             arrest warrant. This therefore shows that the appellant is  of
             interest to the authorities  as  well  as  [K]'s  family.  The
             attendance of the authorities is also an indication  that  her
             family have some power in the area." (Paragraph 91)

                  "... I am satisfied that the appellant has  shown  to  the
             lower standard of proof that he entered into  an  extramarital
             affair which has brought him to the adverse attention of [K]'s
             family and to the attention of the authorities as they  issued
             a summons for him which he did not comply with and  that  they
             have subsequently issued an arrest warrant" (paragraph 94).

                  "Given the cultural position of extramarital  affairs  and
             the likely penalties faced both by way of family  members  and
             through the authorities, I am therefore satisfied to the lower
             standard of proof that the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  on
             return to his home area and given  that  there  is  an  arrest
             warrant to the IKR generally" (paragraph 95)

9.   Having made such findings  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recognised
    that the issue became one of internal relocation, bearing in mind  also
    that return would be to Baghdad: "The appellant and  his  family  would
    however be returned to Baghdad and the question therefore arises as  to
    whether or not it will be reasonable to expect  him  to  return  there"
    (paragraph 96).

10.  Further to this, the Judge acknowledged that  the  Appellant's  ability
    to obtain a 'civil status' ID document ('CSID') was "fundamental to the
    question of whether or not the appellant could be returned and is  also
    a substantial issue in relation to whether it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to relocate to in this case Baghdad away from  the
    IKR" (paragraph 103).

11.  The Judge appears to accept that although  the  Appellant  had  held  a
    CSID this had subsequently been taken (or retained) by  an  'agent'  in
    Turkey and could no longer be  accessed  by  the  Appellant:  e.g.  see
    paragraphs 82, 83, and 104. The Judge then made the following  comments
    and observations in respect of evidence  in  relation  to  obtaining  a
    CSID:

             "105. The question is whether or not  the  appellant  and  his
         family would be able to  obtain  these  documents  on  return.  The
         appellant has indicated during his evidence that  he  has  not  and
         could not obtain such documents. He states  that  he  went  to  the
         Iraqi Embassy in London and was told that  they  could  not  obtain
         such documents without having his birth certificate, Iraqi national
         ID, and Iraqi national passport.

             106. I have been provided with a statement from [SAF] dated 19
         July 2018. I am aware that she attended  the  hearing  but  due  to
         other commitments had to leave prior to the case being called.  She
         indicated that on the instructions of  the  appellant's  solicitors
         she attended the Iraqi embassy with the appellant on Wednesday,  18
         July. She states that the  appellant  was  told  that  he  was  not
         eligible to apply for Iraqi documents because he did not  have  his
         birth certificate, Iraqi national ID and Iraqi National passport.

             107. The appellant has also indicated during his oral evidence
         that he has not had contact with his family since he left Iraq  and
         in particular that his father would not support him as he feels  he
         has brought shame  on  the  family.  That  particular  attitude  is
         consistent with the societal attitude to extramarital  affairs  and
         the shame that it does bring on the family as a whole."

12.  However, the Judge noted that the Appellant's father had assisted  him,
    in particular by allowing his friend access to the  CCTV  footage  from
    home  security  cameras  that  was  obtained  to  support  the   appeal
    (paragraph 108). The Judge did not find that it was credible  that  the
    Appellant's father "would now not assist the appellant in obtaining the
    necessary  documents  from  the  local  authorities"  (paragraph  109).
    Further the  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant's  friend  'O'  -  "who
    apparently has some connections with the local police" -  had  assisted
    the Appellant in obtaining supporting documents for the appeal,  before
    concluding "there are therefore people the appellant could turn  to  to
    assist him in obtaining the relevant CSID documents"  (paragraph  110).
    The Judge reached the following conclusion:

             "I take into account the fact that the appellant was not  able
         to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi embassy  in  this  country  however
         given my findings that I do not accept that his  father  would  not
         assist the appellant and his family if he was returned to Iraq I am
         not satisfied that he would not be able to obtain a CSID  within  a
         reasonable time of his return to  Baghdad  with  the  help  of  his
         father and in fact O." (paragraph 117)

     See similarly:

             "I am not however satisfied even  to  the  lower  standard  of
         proof that the appellant would not be able to obtain a CSID  within
         a reasonable period of return to Baghdad." (paragraph 122)

13.  The Judge  took  this  finding  forward  into  his  evaluation  of  the
    circumstances if returned to Baghdad,  and  whilst  acknowledging  that
    there might be some difficulties  in  the  family  establishing  itself
    there, they would be  able  to  access  services  having  obtained  the
    "necessary" CSID (paragraph 118); the Judge found that  the  risk  from
    the family of the woman with whom the Appellant had had an  affair  did
    not extend to Baghdad (paragraph 120), and observed "there  is  nothing
    in the evidence which would indicate that the authorities  in  the  IKR
    are themselves able to take action against the  appellant  in  Baghdad"
    (paragraph 121).

14.  As may be seen from the grant of permission to  appeal  (quoted  above)
    the contentious issue that has arisen in the  challenge  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal relates to the Appellant's ability  to  obtain  a  replacement
    CSID card (including whether this would necessitate going in person  to
    his home governorate - where he is at risk of persecution). There is  a
    further associated issue as to whether the Appellant would be  able  to
    obtain documentation to travel to Iraq at all; if he cannot, the cannot
    presently access the proposed location of internal relocation - cf. the
    definition of a refugee under Article 1A(2) of the Refugee  Convention,
    which in  part  specifies  "...  unable...  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection...".

15.  In this latter regard the Appellant's Grounds  of  Appeal  submit  that
    the Judge's approach is illogical and/or inconsistent. The  premise  of
    the Judge's substantive conclusion that it would not  be  unduly  harsh
    for the Appellant to relocate to Baghdad was that he would be  able  to
    obtain a CSID within a reasonable period after his arrival  in  Baghdad
    from the UK: necessarily this reasoning was based on obtaining the CSID
    after return. However, elsewhere the  Judge  appeared  to  accept  that
    without satisfactory documentation, such as a CSID -  bearing  in  mind
    that the Appellant did not have any other identification documents such
    as his birth certificate or his passport - he  would  not  be  able  to
    obtain a laissez-passer to permit him to travel to Baghdad from the  UK
    (see paragraphs 98 and 116). In this context the Judge also appeared to
    accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been   unable   to   obtain   travel
    documentation from the embassy in the UK (paragraphs 105, 106 and 117).

16.  I accept that the Judge  does  not  appear  to  have  reconciled  these
    matters, and it is unclear on what basis the Judge concluded  that  the
    Appellant would be able to obtain the  necessary  documentation  to  be
    able to travel to the proposed place of internal  relocation  from  the
    UK. Nor is the Judge's process of reasoning  adequately  clear  in  its
    navigation of the country guidance materials as to the method by  which
    the Appellant might obtain a CSID in reasonable time after return.

17.  The Judge's exploration of  the  difficulties  the  Appellant  and  his
    family might face in Baghdad includes the following observation derived
    from paragraph 203 of AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
    (IAC):

             "It is however quite clear from  paragraph  203  that  despite
         difficulties that may be experienced in respect  of  such  matters,
         such as access to healthcare, education  and  jobs,  relocation  to
         Baghdad is safe and not unreasonable or unduly  harsh,  one  reason
         being that a person can only be  returned  to  Baghdad  if  such  a
         person has a current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez-passer.
         If such a person has  been  issued  with  the  latter,  it  can  be
         presumed that he has been able to obtain CSID." (paragraph 116)

18.  It is unclear what role this passage has had in the  overall  reasoning
    of the Judge. As noted, contextually it appears within  the  discussion
    of  the  circumstances  likely  to  be  encountered  in  the  event  of
    relocation to Baghdad. In isolation, the meaning of the passage  is  to
    the effect that if an individual is able to return to  Baghdad  because
    they can obtain a laissez-passer then that is in itself  evidence  that
    they are likely to have already obtained a CSID  -  and  therefore  are
    able to access various services  to  alleviate  the  harshness  of  the
    conditions  that  might  otherwise  be  faced.  But,  this  passage  is
    immediately followed by the Judge's acknowledgement, at paragraph  117,
    that the Appellant was not able to obtain a CSID from the Iraq embassy.

19.  I pause to note that it is also identified in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    that there appears to be a tension between the guidance in AA Iraq - to
    the effect that obtaining a laissez-passer is likely premised on having
    obtained and produced a CSID - and the guidance in AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT  00212  (IAC)  wherein  it  is
    suggested that a laissez-passer may be issued without any other form of
    ID being available.

20.  The country guidance cases of AA and AAH explore in  very  considerable
    detail the documentation processes:  e.g.  see  in  particular  AAH  at
    paragraph 100 et seq. (which incorporates quotations from paragraph 123
    et seq. of AA). As noted above it was common ground before me that  the
    Judge's analysis had not been as detailed or as thorough as required in
    this regard. However, it was a matter of dispute between the parties as
    to whether this amounted to a material error, and if it did whether the
    evidence pointed to a favourable conclusion in the appeal.

21.  I have expressed my conclusion on materiality above.  Accordingly,  the
    issue becomes one of remaking the decision in the appeal. Both  parties
    were content that this did not require a new hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal with all issues at large, but could  proceed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal on the  solid  foundation  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings of primary fact (as rehearsed above).

Remaking the decision

22.  Further to the above I turn to a consideration of two  matters,  albeit
    with the common and/or overlapping theme of documentation: obtaining  a
    CSID (whether as part of the  process  of  obtaining  documentation  to
    permit travel from  the  UK,  or  after  arrival  in  Iraq);  obtaining
    documentation to permit travel to Baghdad from the UK.

Obtaining a CSID

23.  I remind myself  of  the  observation  at  paragraph  100  of  AAH:  "a
    critical part of a decision-maker's enquiry will be what documents  the
    individual in question has, or might reasonably be expected to get. The
    first question to be asked is  whether  the  proposed  returnee  is  in
    possession of a CSID; if he is not, the second question is  whether  it
    is reasonably likely he will not be able to obtain one".

24.  I have also had regard to the  ensuing  passages  in  AAH,  which  find
    their summary in the guidance given at paragraph 135, which  is  to  be
    read as a supplement to Section C of the Court of Appeal's guidance  in
    AA. In  sum  (retaining  the  paragraph  numbering  from  the  original
    sources):

         As per AA:

              "C. The CSID
             9. Regardless of the feasibility of P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID  is
             generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
             assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
             housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family
             or other members  likely  to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
             support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
             destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P will still have no CSID.
             10. Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
             should as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the
             Civil Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an
             Iraqi passport (whether current or expired), if P has one.  If
             P does not have such a passport, P's ability to obtain a  CSID
             may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
             the book holding P's information (and that of P's family). P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P.
             11. P's ability to obtain a CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
             hampered if P is unable to go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
             Office of P's Governorate because  it  is  in  an  area  where
             Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring. As a  result  of  the
             violence,  alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar   and
             Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and  Kerbala.  The
             evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the  "Central  Archive",
             which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide  CSIDs
             to those in need of them. There is, however, a National Status
             Court  in  Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply   for   formal
             recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court
             is, however, unclear."
         Supplemented from AAH:


             "1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national  returnee
             (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances. Factors to be considered include:

                       (i) Whether P has any other form of documentation, or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


                       (ii) The location  of  the  relevant  civil  registry
                  office. If it is in an area held,  or  formerly  held,  by
                  ISIL, is it operational?

                       (iii) Are there male family members who would be able
                  and willing to attend the civil registry with P?   Because
                  the registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant
                  to consider whether the relative is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all."

25.  Further to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal,  and  generally,  I
    note the following:

             (i) The  Appellant  is  not  in  possession  of  a  CSID;  his
         previously held CSID is not available to him  having  'disappeared'
         with the agent.

          (ii)  Nor  does  the  Appellant  have  any  other   identification
    documents from Iraq.

             (iii) Because he does not  have  a  passport  his  ability  to
         obtain a CSID may depend on whether he can identify  the  page  and
         volume number of the book holding  his  information.  In  practical
         terms this may be done by utilising his father's CSID. Because  the
         system is patrilineal, the Appellant's father is likely to  be  the
         most suitable person to assist in this regard.

             (iv) Notwithstanding the Appellant's comments  in  respect  of
         his father's cooperation, the Judge found that he  did  not  accept
         that the Appellant's father would not be willing to help.

             (v) In this latter context it is also to  be  noted  that  the
         Appellant's ability to persuade the officials that he is the person
         named on the relevant page is likely to depend on  whether  he  has
         family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch  for
         him.

             (vi) The Appellant's home governorate - from  where  he  would
         ordinarily be expected to obtain a new CSID - is outside Baghdad in
         the IKR; he cannot be expected to go there because he is at risk of
         injurious action (including at the hands  of  the  authorities  who
         have issued a warrant for his arrest). As such he cannot apply  for
         a new CSID in person.

26.  Necessarily this raises the question of whether or not  an  application
    has to be made in person; and, if in the event that it may be  made  by
    proxy, the efficacy of such a process.

27.  The possibility of  applying  other  than  in  person  was  subject  of
    consideration in MK (documents - relocation) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT  00126
    (IAC), brought to my attention by Mr Kandola. As may be seen  from  the
    discussion in AA  when  it  was  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  (see  at
    paragraphs 46-49) notwithstanding that an appeal against  the  decision
    in MK was allowed by the Court of Appeal in HF (Iraq) and others v SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1276,  the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the  arguments
    directed against the country guidance  element  of  the  decision.  The
    country guidance in MK included the following, at paragraph 88(1)(b):

         "Although the general position is  that  a  person  who  wishes  to
         replace a lost CSID is required to return to  their  home  area  in
         order  to  do  so,  there  are  procedures  as  described  in  this
         determination available which  make  it  possible  (i)  for  Iraqis
         abroad to secure the issue of  a  new  CSID  to  them  through  the
         offices of the local Iraqi Embassy; (ii)  for  Iraqis  returned  to
         Iraq without a CSID to obtain one  without  necessarily  having  to
         travel to their home area. Such procedures permit family members to
         obtain such documentation from their home areas on  an  applicant's
         behalf or allow for a person to be given a  power  of  attorney  to
         obtain the same. Those who  are  unable  immediately  to  establish
         their identity can ordinarily obtain such  documentation  by  being
         presented before a judge from the Civil  Status  Court,  so  as  to
         facilitate return to their place of origin."

28.  The possibility of applying for a CSID through a  proxy  was  also  the
    subject  of  consideration  in  AA,  particularly  in  the  context  of
    obtaining a  CSID  whilst  in  the  UK:  e.g.  see  paragraphs  173-176
    recounting the evidence of an expert witness before  the  Tribunal,  Dr
    Rabwah Fatah (who also gave evidence before  the  Tribunal  in  MK  and
    AAH), and in AAH - for example at paragraph 29, again per Dr Fatah:

             "As to whether one would need to  attend  the  office  of  the
         civil registrar in person, Dr Fatah reiterated the evidence he gave
         in AA (Iraq). One could delegate the task to a relative or  trusted
         friend, assuming of  course  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the
         relevant documents and/or information.    Alternatively,  Dr  Fatah
         agreed that it was theoretically possible that one could  engage  a
         lawyer and grant him or her power of  attorney.    He  had  however
         never known  of  anyone  who  had  actually  done  that,  but  like
         everything else in Iraq, it depended on whether  you  had  contacts
         whom you could trust. Dr Fatah was asked about the  possibility  of
         attending alternative offices,  such  as  the  Central  Archive  in
         Baghdad, discussed at paragraphs 180 to  187  of  AA  (Iraq).    He
         maintained the evidence that he gave in that  case:  he  has  never
         heard of anyone obtaining a CSID from the Central Archive.  In  his
         main report Dr Fatah cites the research of  NGO  'Ceasefire  Centre
         for Civilian Rights' to the effect that IDPs attempting to  recover
         lost  documents  are  being  met  with  indifference,   corruption,
         incompetence and even sarcasm by the authorities."

29.  I have set out above the 'country guidance' passages of AAH  which  are
    to be found at paragraph 135 of the Decision. The country guidance  set
    out at paragraph 135 represents  an  almost  complete  reproduction  of
    paragraph 106, save that paragraph  106  also  contains  the  following
    preliminary sentence: "The evaluation of whether there is a  reasonable
    likelihood that an applicant will not be able to  obtain  a  new  CSID,
    either directly or by way of a proxy, must  be  assessed  against  that
    background." Thus, whilst the country guidance itself is not  overt  in
    making any reference to obtaining a CSID by proxy, the context in which
    the country guidance is given expressly recognises such a  possibility.
    As such the reference in Dr  Fatah's  evidence  before  AA  (quoted  at
    paragraph 179 of AA, and cited at  paragraph  102  of  AAH)  "that  the
    starting position is that in order to obtain a new or replacement  CSID
    a person usually had to return to the  governorate  where  his  or  her
    birth was registered and where the primary family registration book  is
    held i.e. in the local population  registration/civil  status  office",
    was not considered to require presence in person as a sine qua non.

30.  In this context  it  is  pertinent  to  restate  part  of  the  country
    guidance from AA, which  on  one  reading  might  suggest  that  if  an
    application is not made in person it has little prospect of  success  -
    "is likely to be severely hampered":

             "P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
         hampered if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of
         P's Governorate because it  is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
         serious harm is occurring. As a result of the violence, alternative
         CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established
         in Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does not demonstrate that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear."

31.  At first blush there would appear to be a tension between this  passage
    and the notion of it being possible to  apply  for  a  CSID  by  proxy.
    However,  in  my  judgement  this  tension  is  resolved  by  a  closer
    consideration of the circumstances described as  preventing  access  to
    the 'home' governorate. The guidance quoted is derived  from  paragraph
    186 of AA; the reference to  alternative  CSA  offices  picks  up  from
    paragraph 183, which in context suggests that the  'home'  offices  are
    inaccessible because they are in territory held by ISIL. As  such,  the
    difficulty for an applicant is not merely in reaching the  location  of
    the office, but that the office itself would likely not  be  under  the
    control of the national authorities. Accordingly, in context, it  seems
    to me that this particular passage in the country guidance is not to be
    read as precluding the possibility of a proxy application being made to
    a 'home' office which the applicant is not able  to  reach  in  person,
    providing that the office is at the very least still functioning.

32.  It follows that the evidence indicates that there  is  a  mechanism  in
    place by which the Appellant can apply for a CSID  by  proxy.  Further,
    absent the Appellant's assertion that his father would not assist  -  a
    matter cogently rejected by the First-tier Tribunal - the Appellant has
    not identified any reason why he could not  avail  himself  of  such  a
    mechanism.

33.  Accordingly, in my judgement - subject to two caveats -  on  a  careful
    consideration of the evidence, findings of the First-tier Tribunal, and
    case law, the Appellant has not shown that it is reasonably  likely  he
    could not obtain in reasonable time a new CSID with the  assistance  of
    his father without having to attend in person at the  civil  office  of
    his home governorate. In consequence it would not be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to internally relocate to Baghdad.

34.  The first caveats is this. It was accepted that the Appellant  was  the
    subject of an arrest warrant and was "of interest to  the  authorities"
    in the IKR. It is unclear whether such a circumstance would prevent the
    issuing of a CSID, or otherwise interfere with the process to an extent
    that it becomes impractical. It is to be noted that the CSID is  issued
    by a civil office, and it perhaps cannot  be  presumed  that  it  would
    routinely be informed of all, or  any,  arrest  warrants  or  that  its
    functions intersected with policing. Be that  as  it  may,  as  matters
    stand I do not have the benefit of any evidence on point.

35.  The arrest warrant is also  potentially  relevant  in  the  context  of
    relocation. The First-tier Tribunal Judge observed "...there is nothing
    in the evidence which would indicate that the authorities  in  the  IKR
    are themselves able to take action against the  appellant  in  Baghdad"
    (paragraph 121). The parties before me  were  not  able  to  direct  my
    attention to any evidence on point as to the 'reach' or jurisdiction of
    an IKR arrest warrant in other parts of Iraqi (including  Baghdad),  or
    the extent of any cooperation such  that  the  authorities  in  Baghdad
    might  execute  such  a  warrant  and  hand  the  subject  to  the  IKR
    authorities. Necessarily if there is a risk that the warrant  could  be
    executed in Baghdad then relocation to Baghdad would  not  achieve  the
    aim of evading the Appellant's would be persecutors.

36.  Accordingly, further to the analysis set out above it would  seem  that
    the warrant now assumes potentially determinative significance  in  the
    appeal: it is not merely relevant to risk in the IKR, but might have an
    impact on the ability to  obtain  a  CSID,  and/or  in  any  event  the
    adequacy of Baghdad as a location of internal flight.  Whether  or  not
    that is the case is really a matter for evidence. In such circumstances
    I do not consider that I should  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal
    without affording the parties a further opportunity of addressing  this
    issue which has now assumed critical  significance.  I  have  therefore
    decided to issue Directions inviting further  written  submissions  and
    evidence: see below.

37.  The second caveat is in respect of the issuing of  a  further  CPIN  by
    the Respondent: 'Country Policy and  Information  Note  Iraq:  Internal
    relocation, civil documentation  and  returns  (Version  9.0,  February
    2019)'.  Necessarily  this  document  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and was not before me at the date of the hearing -  and  so  I
    have heard no submissions on it.

38.  In so far as the latest CPIN relates to the issues herein, on  a  brief
    preliminary reading  I  could  not  readily  identify  any  significant
    changes compared with the CIG of 19 August 2016 which  was  before  the
    Tribunal (Appellant's bundle pages 628-693). However, in  circumstances
    where I  consider  it  appropriate  to  seek  further  submissions  and
    evidence from the parties in relation to the arrest  warrant,  it  also
    seems to me  to  be  appropriate  that  the  parties  be  afforded  the
    opportunity of making representations in respect of the latest  CPIN  -
    whether that be by way of emphasising anything  new  or  different,  or
    anything that particularly reinforces the preliminary analysis set  out
    above.

Feasibility of Return

39.  The current country  guidance  in  respect  of  feasibility  of  return
    remains that appended to the Court of Appeal decision in  AA  (Iraq)  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 (which is also annexed to the Upper Tribunal's
    decision in AAH). Section B is in these terms:

         "B. DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)
         5. Return of former residents of the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.
         6. No Iraqi national will  be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.
         7. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq)  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents.
         8. Where P is returned to Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.
40.  The Appellant's case in  this  regard  was  not  merely  premised  upon
    theoretical arguments in respect of the obtainability of documents, but
    was supported by his failed attempt to obtain assistance from the  Iraq
    Embassy in London. I accept that it is unclear how the Judge reconciled
    the Appellant's evidence in this regard - which he appeared to accept -
    with the conclusion that the Appellant would  be  able  to  obtain  the
    necessary documentation to travel.

41.  Necessarily this issue is closely associated with the issue in  respect
    of the Appellant's  father's  ability  to  obtain  either  a  CSID,  or
    possibly some other form of identification document such  as  an  Iraqi
    Nationality Certificate ('INC'),  which might assist the  Appellant  in
    securing a laissez-passer.

42.  In my judgement reconsideration of this issue must  be  premised  on  a
    recognition that the Judge did not accept the  Appellant's  claim  that
    his father would not offer him assistance. The Appellant  attended  the
    embassy without the benefit of any documents that his father might have
    been able to provide him. For the Appellant to succeed on  this  aspect
    of the case he cannot rely upon the notion that his father is unwilling
    to assist him, but will need to establish that his father is unable  to
    assist him in obtaining adequate proof of identity to secure a laissez-
    passer. The existence of an arrest warrant may, again, be  relevant  in
    this context. The parties are invited to make  further  submissions  in
    this regard: see Directions below. Absent this, and subject to anything
    that might be said further to the most recent CPIN, it is not  apparent
    that  the  Appellant  should  have  any  significant  difficulties   in
    obtaining a laissez-passer in accordance with the mechanisms  discussed
    in AA and AAH.



Directions

43.  Further to the above I issue the following Directions  for  the  future
    conduct of the appeal. The intention in the first instance is that  the
    parties should have the opportunity of making written  submissions  and
    filing any further evidence; the Tribunal will then consider whether it
    is possible to dispose of the appeal without the  need  for  a  further
    hearing. As such the written submissions  should  be  prepared  on  the
    basis that it is possible that there will  not  be  an  opportunity  to
    amplify them orally. I have specified working  days  in  the  timetable
    below to make allowance for the forthcoming  Easter  holidays.  I  note
    that there is no reason why the Appellant should await the  receipt  of
    the submissions and evidence from the Respondent  prior  to  commencing
    preparation of his own submissions and evidence, and accordingly permit
    only a further 10 working days after the period for the  respondent  to
    file and serve. The Appellant should file and serve any evidence within
    the specified timetable irrespective of receipt of  any  evidence  from
    the Respondent. I am also inviting the parties to correct  any  factual
    errors in the analysis set out above: this  is  not  an  invitation  to
    revisit any arguments other than those that arise in the context of the
    Directions.

44.  It is directed:

             (i) The Secretary of State is to file with  the  Tribunal  and
         serve on the Appellant within 15 working days of the date shown  as
         the promulgation date on this document:

                  (a) Any further evidence upon which he wishes to rely that
             is relevant to a consideration of  the  impact  of  an  arrest
             warrant issued by the authorities of the IKR on the ability to
             obtain a CSID, and/or the ability to obtain any other form  of
             identification in the context of obtaining  a  laissez-passer,
             and/or generally in respect of obtaining a laissez-passer.

                  (b) Any further evidence upon which he wishes to rely that
             is relevant to a consideration of whether the jurisdiction  of
             such a warrant extends beyond the territory  of  the  IKR,  or
             whether the warrant is otherwise executable in Baghdad (either
             by the authorities of  the  IKR  or  through  some  formal  or
             informal arrangement with the Iraq authorities).

                  (c) Written submissions in respect of the issues  referred
             to at (a) and (b) above - irrespective of whether any  further
             evidence is filed.

                  (d) Written submissions in respect of the  Country  Policy
             and  Information  Note  Iraq:   Internal   relocation,   civil
             documentation  and  returns  (Version  9.0,  February   2019),
             further to the discussion at paragraph 38 above, in so far  as
             it relates to obtaining a  CSID  and  or  the  feasibility  of
             return (in particular obtaining a laissez-passer).

                  (e) A written note (which may  be  incorporated  into  any
             written submissions), identifying any claimed  factual  errors
             in the body of the Decision above.

                  (f) In the event that the  Respondent  does  not  wish  to
             respond to any or all of the above Directions this  should  be
             communicated both to the Tribunal and  the  Appellant  at  the
             earliest opportunity, and in any event  within  the  timeframe
             indicated above.


             (ii) The Appellant is to file with the Tribunal and  serve  on
         the Respondent within 25 working days of  the  date  shown  as  the
         promulgation date on this document:

                  (a) Any further evidence upon which he wishes to rely that
             is relevant to a consideration of  the  impact  of  an  arrest
             warrant issued by the authorities of the IKR on the ability to
             obtain a CSID, and/or the ability to obtain any other form  of
             identification in the context of obtaining  a  laissez-passer,
             and/or generally in respect of obtaining a laissez-passer.

                  (b) Any further evidence upon which he wishes to rely that
             is relevant to a consideration of whether the jurisdiction  of
             such a warrant extends beyond the territory  of  the  IKR,  or
             whether the warrant is otherwise executable in Baghdad (either
             by the authorities of  the  IKR  or  through  some  formal  or
             informal arrangement with the Iraq authorities).

                  (c) Written submissions in respect of the issues  referred
             to at (a) and (b) above - irrespective of whether any  further
             evidence is filed.

                  (d) Written submissions in respect of the  Country  Policy
             and  Information  Note  Iraq:   Internal   relocation,   civil
             documentation  and  returns  (Version  9.0,  February   2019),
             further to the discussion at paragraph 38 above, in so far  as
             it relates to obtaining a  CSID  and  or  the  feasibility  of
             return (in particular obtaining a laissez-passer).

                  (e) A written note (which may  be  incorporated  into  any
             written submissions), identifying any claimed  factual  errors
             in the body of the Decision above.

                  (f) In the event that  the  Appellant  does  not  wish  to
             respond to any or all of the above Directions this  should  be
             communicated both to the Tribunal and the  Respondent  at  the
             earliest opportunity, and in any event  within  the  timeframe
             indicated above.


                                 ----<>----

                                 APPENDIX 2

               TEXT OF FURTHER DIRECTIONS SENT ON 15 MAY 2019


1.   An 'error of law' decision, with  accompanying  Directions  for  future
    conduct of the appeal,  was  promulgated  on  29  March  2019.  It  was
    indicated therein that upon receipt of the response to  the  Directions
    the Tribunal would consider whether it was possible to dispose  of  the
    appeal without the need for a further hearing (see paragraph 43).

2.   Although the Respondent sent an email to the Tribunal on 1  April  2019
    acknowledging receipt of the 'error of law'  decision  and  Directions,
    (and requesting a corrected version because the 'header' on a number of
    pages gave the wrong appeal reference), there has been no response from
    the Respondent to the Directions.  This  is  notwithstanding  that  the
    Directions included that  the  Respondent  should  communicate  to  the
    Tribunal and the Appellant if he did not wish to respond to any or  all
    of the Directions.

3.   The Appellant,  through  his  representatives,  has  responded  to  the
    Directions by filing a Country Expert  Report  prepared  by  Dr  Rabwah
    Fatah dated 26 April 2019. The report has been  sent  to  the  Tribunal
    under cover of letter dated  30  April  2019  which  in  material  part
    states:

         "We would respectfully point out that Dr Fatah's  opinion  is  that
         the arrest warrants issued by the IKR are valid throughout Iraq. It
         follows that there is a substantial risk that  the  appellant  will
         not be able to avoid risk of persecution in the IKR  by  relocating
         to any other area of  Iraq,  as  he  is  at  risk  from  the  state
         authorities."

     The Appellant has not provided anything further by way of  evidence  or
    written submissions.

4.   The paragraph in the covering letter purports to answer one of the  two
    key issues identified in the 'error of law' decision and Directions  as
    requiring to be addressed in the context of remaking  the  decision  in
    the appeal. (I return to this below.)

5.   In respect of the other question, Dr Fatah  has  expressed  an  opinion
    that does not benefit the Appellant's case. Dr Fatah states  that  "the
    criminal procedure in Iraq does not affect  issues  of  documentation",
    and further states that the issue of obtaining  documentation  and  the
    issue of an arrest warrant "are not related" (see paragraph 154 and 155
    of Dr Fatah's report). As such, I understand Dr Fatah's opinion  to  be
    that the existence of an arrest warrant issued by the  IKR  should  not
    impede the documentation process.

6.   I note that Dr Fatah's report raises an additional circumstance  -  not
    previously considered in  the  context  of  the  instant  appeal  -  in
    relation to national identity documents. Dr Fatah refers to the phasing
    out of the civil status  ID  ('CSID')  to  be  replaced  by  the  Iraqi
    National ID ('INID'); it is intended that the process be  completed  by
    the end of 2019; current CSIDs will continue to be valid until the  end
    of the year; persons seeking to renew or amend their CSID (for  example
    to reflect the change of status upon  marriage)  will  be  prompted  to
    apply for an INID. A CSID can no longer be obtained or renewed.

7.   It is said that the INID cannot be applied for  by  proxy  because  the
    process involves an iris scan  and  the  taking  of  thumb  and  finger
    prints. Necessarily this requires the presence of the applicant, albeit
    that arrangements can be made  for  the  document  once  issued  to  be
    collected by proxy. Dr Fatah also reports that there is no  arrangement
    in  place  in  foreign  missions  to  facilitate   iris   scanning   or
    fingerprinting as part of the application  process;  the  Consulate  in
    London has responded to an enquiry in this context by stating  "in  the
    current time obtaining the national ID  takes  place  only  inside  the
    country" (report at paragraph 82).

8.   As regards the process in Iraq, unlike the CSID it  is  said  that  the
    process for the  INID  is  centralised,  the  offices  in  the  various
    governorates  being  connected  to  Baghdad;   the   applications   are
    ultimately overseen by officials in Baghdad (report at  paragraph  72).
    Dr Fatah sets out the procedure for obtaining an INID,  which  includes
    the applicant going to the "local Office of Civil Status"; however,  it
    is unclear whether this simply means the  office  local  to  where  the
    applicant happens to be, or the office of his originating governorate.

9.    The  INID  gives  rise  to  new  matters  not  previously  raised   or
    considered, which appear to me to require some  further  clarification.
    Given also that I am not presently satisfied  that  the  issue  of  the
    jurisdiction,  or  'scope',  of  the  IKR  arrest  warrant  is  settled
    determinatively in the Appellant's favour (see below), I have concluded
    that there should be a further hearing in the appeal  pursuant  to  the
    Directions set out below.

10.  In respect of the arrest warrant the report of Dr Fatah states this  at
    paragraphs 151 and 152:

             "The Iraqi legal system contains both civil  and  Sharia  law.
         The 2005 New Iraqi Constitution secured the federalisation  of  the
         IKR with an autonomous  government.  However,  both  the  Kurdistan
         Regional Government and Government  of  Iraqi  cooperate  with  one
         another regarding both criminal and insurgent matters.

             Therefore, an arrest warrant against a person, in  either  the
         IKR or Iraq-proper, would be valid throughout Iraq. This is because
         both governments cooperate on criminal matters."

11.  I am unclear to what extent Dr Fatah's opinion is based on a matter  of
    pure inference, and to what extent it is based on actual  knowledge.  I
    am mindful that the fact of cooperation  of  two  autonomous  governing
    bodies  is  not  in  itself  inevitably  reliable   evidence   of   the
    enforceability of an instrument issued by the agents of one  such  body
    in the territory of the other.

12.  Reconvening the hearing will afford the  Appellant  an  opportunity  of
    clarifying this matter further, and will also allow the  Respondent  to
    indicate his position in this regard.  Of  course,  if  the  Respondent
    essentially accepts the opinion of Dr Fatah as to the potential for the
    arrest warrant to be executed against the Appellant  in  Baghdad,  then
    the Respondent may wish to indicate that the appeal is conceded.

13.  For the avoidance of any doubt, I note that the Appellant has not  made
    any submissions further to paragraph 42 of the 'error of law' decision,
    and there is not obviously anything apparent in the  paragraphs  of  Dr
    Fatah's report in relation  to  a  laissez-passer  that  would  suggest
    return to Iraq is not feasible. As such the outstanding issues  in  the
    appeal relate  to  the  circumstances  upon  return,  rather  than  the
    mechanism and practicalities of return itself.

14.  Accordingly the appeal is  to  be  relisted  to  consider  further  the
    issues identified above. It is open to the parties to  file  and  serve
    any further evidence upon which they wish to rely, but this  should  be
    done at least 14 days prior to the next hearing. It is a matter for the
    Appellant and his advisers as to whether or not they wish  to  call  Dr
    Fatah, or any other expert, to give live evidence. Is  not  anticipated
    that it will be necessary to hear evidence directly from the Appellant.


                                 Directions

             (i) The appeal is to be relisted for further hearing, reserved
         to me, on the first available date after 12 June 2019.


             (ii) The parties are to file with the Tribunal  and  serve  on
         the other party at least 14 calendar days prior to the next hearing
         any further evidence or written submissions upon which they wish to
         rely.

             (iii) In the event that the Respondent accepts the opinion  of
         Dr Fatah expressed at paragraphs 151 and 152 of his  report  of  26
         April 2019 to the effect that the  arrest  warrant  issued  by  the
         authorities of the IKR  against  the  Appellant  is  executable  in
         Baghdad,  and  that  the   Appellant   is   thereby   entitled   to
         international surrogate protection, this should be communicated  to
         the Tribunal as soon as possible with a view to vacating  the  next
         hearing date on  the  basis  that  the  appeal  is  to  be  allowed
         accordingly.


                                ---- END ----
