
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07783/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|20 September 2018                    |On 09 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     11 May 2018 - Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer
                    27 September 2018 - Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    11 May 2018 - Ms J Norman, Counsel instructed by
                    Sterling Law Associates
                    27 September 2018 - Ms J Norman, Counsel instructed by
                    Sterling Law Associates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Respondent
(also "the claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt
of court. I make this order because this is a protection case arising  from
the claimant avoiding military service. Publishing the claimant's  identity
could easily enhance or even create a risk to his safety in  the  event  of
his return.

2. I have already given my reasons for finding that the First-tier  Tribunal
erred in law.  My reasons were sent on 22 May 2018 and  I  append  them  to
this decision for the  purposes  of  any  possible  appeal.  Although  this
Decision and Reasons is intended to be intelligible  without  reference  to
the Reasons for Finding an Error of Law it  might  be  convenient  to  read
those reasons as an introduction to this decision.

3. As I explained more fully in the Reasons for Finding an Error of Law  the
respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", is a citizen of the Ukraine who was
born in January 1980 and who challenges the decision of  the  Secretary  of
State to refuse him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

4. It has been established that the claimant is not  a  refugee.   The  only
issue to be resolved is whether the claimant faces a real  risk  his  being
imprisoned in international unacceptable conditions.

5. As I said, or rather intended to say, at paragraph 7 of  my  Reasons  for
Finding Error of Law:

  "I can understand the judge's finding that [the claimant]  would  not  do
  the military service if required.  It is  not  made  particularly  clear,
  either in the Decision and Reasons or in the evidence,  but  the  reasons
  are [that the] claimant expressed a marked reluctance to perform military
  service and an abhorrence of the conditions that a soldier  was  required
  to endure and of the things that soldiers are required to do. The  judge,
  who had the advantage of hearing the claimant give evidence was, I  find,
  entitled to conclude that he is somebody who would not  perform  military
  service if he was required to serve."

6. Unlike the First-tier Tribunal I have  the  benefit  of  a  specific  and
detailed expert report.  The report was provided  by  Dr  Galeotti  and  is
dated 25 March 2018.  Dr Galeotti begins the  report  with  the  usual  and
necessary expert declaration including references to Part 35 of  the  Civil
Procedure Rules 1998 and the Ikarian Reefer guidelines.

7. Dr Galeotti introduced  himself  as  a  senior  research  fellow  at  the
Institute of International Relations in Prague and the head of  its  Centre
for European Security.  His career and academic qualifications are the kind
that would be expected of a person with such an appointment and include the
degree Doctor of Philosophy awarded by the London School of  Economics  and
Political Science where he focused mainly on transnational crime,  policing
and security in post-Soviet countries including  Ukraine.   Clearly  he  is
very well qualified to give the  opinion  that  he  does  and,  subject  to
argument, that opinion is entitled to a great deal of respect.

8. Importantly, he was shown copies of the  summonses  relied  upon  by  the
claimant to support his contention that he had  been  required  to  present
himself for military service.

9. Dr Galeotti explained that it did not concern him that he  had  not  seen
the originals because the documents were clearly high  quality  copies  and
the paper used by the Ukraine  authorities  was  variable  in  quality  and
appearance so it would not have been an advantage to him in determining  if
the documents were genuine to have seen the originals.  The quality of  the
paper would not have informed his decision. From the perspective of someone
used to considering documents produced by the  authorities  in  the  United
Kingdom this seems strange but this, I find, is  a  matter  where,  in  the
absence of contrary evidence, Dr Galeotti's expertise had to  be  respected
and is a complete answer to the concerns in the  Refusal  Letter  about  Dr
Galeotti not seeing the original documents on which he opined.

10. He was quite satisfied that he had been shown copies of court  documents
issued by the appropriate authorities in Ukraine.  He based that finding on
comparing the layout, font, content and style with other documents that  he
understood  to  be  original  and  his  conclusion   was   unreserved   and
unequivocal. Dr Galeotti noticed things about the numbers  identifying  the
claimant which,  consistent  with  his  case,  show  him  to  be  a  former
serviceman who is eligible  for  mobilisation  (see  paragraph  18  of  the
report).

11. Dr Galeotti described the documents as  "standard  documents  dispatched
to summon reservists and young men of conscription age to the regular draft
and also during a mobilisation". This may well be right but rather  glosses
over findings that I consider important. Although  they  do  not  show  the
"year of call up" or the "expiration of service" they do show the  claimant
to have the "military speciality" of "vehicle driver" and that he was "sent
to reserve service" on 15 April 1988. He is said to have sworn a  "military
oath" on 26 April 2000 but he was "unfit for in time of peace,  able-bodies
for limited service in time of war".

12. In a supplementary  report  sent  by  email  on  19  September  2018  Dr
Galeotti said that people whose medical condition did not  prevent  service
altogether would be sworn in and enrolled on the  reserve  register  to  be
ready in the event of future mobilisation.  He said  "this  is  quite  rare
(most potential draftees were and are either fully fit or clearly incapable
of serving) but by no means unique".

13. In short the claimant is not someone who has  ignored  conscription  but
someone who has previously had dealings with the military  authorities  but
who has now ignored mobilisation.

14. Dr Galeotti was then asked to assess the chance of  the  claimant  being
identified in the event of his return to Ukraine.  He said  that  the  "the
likelihood is considerable" that  the  claimant's  case  has  been  brought
before a court and he had been tried in absentia. There was no  documentary
evidence to support this claim. The conclusion was explained with reference
to Article 22 of the Ukrainian Constitution which  enshrines  the  duty  to
defend the country in  certain  conditions  and  Dr  Galeotti's  specialist
knowledge that since 2014 reservists of the rank of  private  and  sergeant
continue to be part of the reserve and subject to mobilisation  until  they
were 60 years old.

15. It was, he said, "normal practice" to prosecute in  absentia  those  who
had mischievously avoided either  conscription  into  military  service  or
mobilisation after conscription.  Such conduct was regarded as  inexcusable
and the conviction  was  recorded.   As  a  consequence,  he  presumed  the
claimant to have  been  considered  a  "draft  dodger"  and  to  have  been
convicted under Article 335 or 336 of the Criminal Code.  Article  336  was
the more serious offence of failing to heed a mobilisation.  It  carried  a
tariff of up to five years' imprisonment whereas the lesser offence carried
up to three years.

16. Dr Galeotti thought it "unlikely" that a  draft  dodger  could  re-enter
Ukraine without being detained or at least identified on arrival.  He  said
all arrival ports were developed to "modern standards" and had computerised
systems which scanned passports and checked against the  national  identity
base.  He supported this view  with  a  reference  to  a  decision  of  the
Australian Government Refugee Tribunal and indeed of this  Tribunal  in  VB
and Anor (draft evaders and prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT 00079
(IAC).

17. He said the usual procedure would be to identify such a  person  and  to
hold him and then transfer him to prison.  I note at paragraph 22 there  is
reference to a Ms S.  This is clearly a typographical error.

18. However, Dr Galeotti also explained that even if the claimant  was  able
to get into the Ukraine without being detected his problems  would  not  be
over.  He referred to "numerous cases" of people arrested in the course  of
random document checks conducted by police at nightclubs or similar  places
where the public gather.  He said that the claimant had  a  right  to  live
anywhere within the Ukraine but there was  still  a  national  registration
system with a database that is  used  to  identify  people  wanted  by  the
authorities.  This can be accessed by any police  officer.   Any  encounter
with authorities could lead to his being detected as someone subject  to  a
custodial sentence.  He could not avoid registration.  It was  not  only  a
legal requirement that a person be registered  but  there  were  checks  to
ensure that the law was obeyed.  Bribery was a possible solution but it was
not reliable because there would be too many occasions  when  the  claimant
might have to prove his identity.

19. Dr Galeotti accepted that there was evidence that people are not  denied
access to services that are needed because they were not registered in  the
area where they resided but that was rather a  different  point.   The  law
provided that people were entitled to services.  The implication is that in
an emergency the law would assume that a person was registered.  That  does
not alter the fact that there is an obligation to register and a failure to
register would deprive a claimant of access to medical care and he would be
unable to renew his passport or his driving licence.

20. There was also a national labour book registration database which  would
be a further means of the authorities finding the claimant.  Its scope  was
extended  in  2017  specifically  for  the  purpose  of   identifying   and
prosecuting draft dodgers and mobilisation dodgers.

21. Dr Galeotti then addressed  his  mind  to  the  prospects  of  custodial
sentencing.  He recognised that  there  had  been  widespread  practice  of
avoiding national service.  It  was  said  that  about  380,000  young  men
reached subscription age in the Ukraine  every  year  but  of  that  number
around 76,000 actually  served.   A  majority  did  not  meet  the  medical
standards of service when given their physical and  mental  examination  or
the minimum  education  requirements.   Others  were  exempted  on  various
grounds including a genuine conscientious objection  on  religious  grounds
and being the sole supporter of a widowed mother.

22. He then quoted from a report by War Resisters International saying  that
there were something like 50,000 draft dodgers every year and that over  an
eight year period 48,624 were prosecuted.  It is a raw  analysis  but  this
tends to  suggest  there  is  something  like  a  1-in-8  chance  of  being
prosecuted.

23. However, people who are prosecuted,  in  Dr  Galeotti's  judgment,  were
punished and faced "full punishment" under the law.  A UNHCR report  relied
on by the Home Office in January 2015 said that draft dodgers  had  to  pay
fines but he said this was a report based on  just  sixteen  cases  in  the
autumn of 2014.  This represented about .03% of the  year's  draft  dodgers
and he did not regard it as a sufficiently big sample to be  representative
especially  as  it  was  contradicted  by  other  accounts  and  government
pronouncements.   He  reminded  himself  that  the  Ukraine  Criminal  Code
provides for imprisonment of two years upwards  to  five  years  for  those
evading the draft or evading mobilisation and it was  a  matter  of  record
that draft dodgers had been imprisoned.

24. It was his view that changing  circumstances  meant  the  situation  was
different from 2015 and that the obligation  to  mobilise  was  taken  more
seriously by the government, in fact "much more seriously"  than  had  been
the case.  As a consequence of this, it is harder to avoid responsibilities
by bribing officials who were less willing to be bribed and therefore those
who are able to  take  bribes  demand  a  higher  fee.   In  the  immediate
aftermath of the Euromaidan Revolution and the Russian intervention  people
were more willing to serve.  That seems to be no longer the  case  but  the
expectation that they do serve is still high.   The  government  takes  the
view  that  the  undeclared  war  on  Russia  continues  and  it  takes  an
"increasingly dim view" of draft dodging.  In January 2015 a "blogger"  was
charged with treason for issuing calls to boycott a military mobilisation.

25. According to the Home Office Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  on
Ukraine: Military service of November 2016 the offender  was  sentenced  to
three and a half years' imprisonment.  It is said that in August 2015 there
were some 400 draft dodgers already in prison.

26. He was not aware of any specific research on the point  but  anecdotally
it appeared that people convicted  in  their  absence  tended  to  be  more
seriously punished than those who had faced the  courts.   Further  in  his
opinion the claimant's failure to pay fines or carry out community  service
"may well" have resulted in sentences  that  had  been  imposed  have  been
converted to a custodial term.  He cited the appropriate provision  of  the
Criminal Code that provided for that eventuality.

27. There was also evidence that draft dodgers were regarded with  ill  will
by prison officials and other inmates  and  were  at  the  "bottom  of  the
pecking order".

28. He then turned his mind to whether the claimant  would  be  required  to
engage in acts contrary to international law.

29. In short, Dr Galeotti regarded this as something that was  possible  but
unlikely.  It was possible because there was clear evidence of the  Ukraine
security  forces  being  involved  in  internationally  unlawful   conduct,
particularly abuse of human rights including torture,  but  although  these
things undoubtedly happened they were described as  "relatively  uncommon".
There was nothing to suggest that the claimant would be  more  likely  than
anyone else to be required to do such activities.   Nevertheless,  he  took
issue with the view of this Tribunal in  PS  (prison  conditions;  military
service) Ukraine CG [2006] UKAIT 00016 which found there was "no  question"
of a person in military service being required to perform  such  acts.   He
said that decision failed to acknowledge the present  war  in  the  Donbas.
The international situation was different, the  government  was  different,
and it was wrong to assume that the values of 60 years  ago  were  relevant
now.

30. Disobedience to orders would attract prolonged periods  of  imprisonment
particularly three to seven years if the disobedience was  in  battle.   In
February 2015 punishments were made  more  harsh  in  a  climate  of  "mass
violations of military  discipline".   Problems  were  with  desertion  and
alcoholism and simple disobedience.

31. The abuses tended to be carried out by the National  Guard  rather  than
the regular  military  but  the  regular  military  were  not  immune  from
criticism and the government had not shown any ability to  prevent  further
abuses.

32. Ms Norman  summarised  her  case  with  a  skeleton  argument  dated  19
September 2018.

33. This explains that the claimant is a Ukrainian national who  arrived  in
the United Kingdom in 2004.  He has not undertaken formal military  service
but he has a military card and is a reservist.  She said  that  it  is  his
case he is liable for mobilisation until the age of 60.

34. When the claimant was in the United Kingdom in 2004 conflict  broke  out
in the Ukraine and the claimant was sent a number of call-up  notices  from
the Ukraine on different dates between 2014 and 2017.  He  made  an  asylum
claim which he put forward on a "sur place" basis.  He said that  he  would
have to choose between performing his military service  and  thereby  being
required to engage  in  conduct  contrary  to  international  standards  or
experiencing internationally unacceptable punishment.

35. Ms Norman said there were three things for  the  Tribunal  to  consider.
First, has the claimant been called up?  Second, is there a  risk  of  pre-
trial detention on return?  Third, even if not prosecuted is there  a  real
risk of being required to take part in any internationally condemned acts?

36. She submitted that the background evidence shows that  a  reservist  can
be mobilised up until the age of 65.  She  submitted  that  the  claimant's
military call-up papers are genuine and in support of that  she  relied  on
the expert opinion of Dr Galeotti.  She drew  attention  to  Dr  Galeotti's
explanation in the supplementary  report  that  being  unfit  for  military
service would not result in being excused from military service but, in the
case of minor medical problems, of being sworn in and enrolled and required
to register to be ready for future mobilisation.  This is the  category  in
which the claimant says he comes and the expert evidence to this is  "rare"
but "by no means unique". This evidence, I find, answers the concerns about
the chronology raised  in  paragraph  42  of  the  Refusal  Letter.  It  is
believable that the claimant was due to be mobilised in 2014 and 2015 as  a
former soldier even though his service was nominal. I do  not  accept  that
his claim to have contacted the Ukrainian authorities in London in December
2016 to obtain an emergency travel document discredits his  claim  to  have
been called up in 2017 when he was known to be in  the  United  Kingdom.  I
have no reason to assume that the Ukrainian authorities have the  necessary
efficiency or, even if they did, that his presence in  the  United  Kingdom
would stop his being "called up" even if he was  unlikely  to  attend.  The
apparent failure to mention the 2017 "call up" when he was  interviewed  on
21 July 2017 is detrimental to is case but has to be  considered  with  the
evidence that the documents are  genuine.  His  case  does  not  depend  on
renewed interest in 2017.

37. She relied on Dr Galeotti's view that he  would  be  almost  certain  to
face detention in the event  of  return.   This  is  because  he  would  be
detected when he passed through any kind of passport control.

38. She then relied on the decision of this Tribunal in VB and  Others  that
any form of detention would be contrary to his rights under  Article  3  of
the European Convention on Human Rights.

39. The skeleton argument is more expansive in  support  of  the  contention
that if called to do military service there would be a requirement to  take
part in internationally condemned behaviour.

40. She relied on the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Krotov  v  SSHD
[2004] EWCA  Civ  69  to  identify  the  kind  of  conduct  that  would  be
unacceptable and then drew attention  to  background  evidence  which,  she
said, said that is the kind of conduct with the Ukraine forces are engaged.
  She  then  referred  to  other  material  suggesting  that  the   Ukraine
authorities were complicit.  Dealing with Dr Galeotti's evidence  she  that
it was "possible, albeit unlikely" that the claimant  would  have  to  take
part in such activities  Ms  Norman  submitted  (at  paragraph  27  of  the
skeleton argument) that if there was a possibility of  the  claimant  being
expected to take part in them it was inherently more likely that  he  would
be associated with them.  I have to say I do not understand  that  argument
and do not find it attractive.

41. Mr Whitwell's submissions, appropriately, concentrated  on  the  Refusal
Letter.  In particular, I was referred to paragraph 56 and 57.  This  shows
that there were "currently hundreds of cases" open in the courts for  draft
evasion.  The majority of people were  released  on  probation.   The  only
detected prison sentence was "postponed" and did not come into force.  This
chimes completely with the decision of the Tribunal in VB and  Anor  (draft
evaders and prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017]  UKUT  00179  (IAC)  which
found "at the current time it is not reasonably likely that a draft  evader
avoiding conscription or mobilisation in Ukraine  would  face  criminal  or
administrative proceedings for that act, although if  a  draft  evader  did
face prosecution ..." he  could  expect  a  sentence  less  than  a  prison
sentence.

42. He then referred to the country policy in its notes from April 2017  but
I did not find those arguments helpful.  I agree with Ms  Norman  that,  as
explained in VB, it is unclear what the  source  quoted  at  5.3.1  of  the
Country Policy and Information Note Ukraine: Military  service  April  2017
actually meant when  it  referred  to  notices  being  "hand-delivered  and
require the signature of a recipient".  We are all familiar with the use of
recorded delivery in the United Kingdom where letters  can  and  frequently
are "signed for" by a person  other  than  the  intended  final  recipient.
Further, it would make little sense of Dr Galeotti's evidence about  people
being convicted in absence if they had to have actual  rather  than  deemed
knowledge of a hearing in the criminal  courts.   Following  VB  I  do  not
accept that there was any inconsistency between that snippet  of  evidence,
properly understood, and the evidence in this case.

43. Mr Whtiwell relied on the Refusal Letter

44. The claimant did not give evidence before me.  There was  little  point.
His case is clearly understood and he was not going  to  retract  from  it.
What matters is the quality of the  evidence  about  what  will  happen  on
return and that is expert  evidence  rather  than  the  claimant's  opinion
however sincerely held.  I am satisfied  that  the  documents  seen  by  Dr
Galeotti are genuine and this includes the document  showing  the  claimant
has been summoned to court.  Dr  Galeotti  has  given  proper  reasons  for
finding them persuasive and there have been no reasons given  for  doubting
them.  They are part of a plausible story and are right on their own terms.

45. It follows that I deal with this case on the basis  that  this  claimant
is someone not only who, like many other, has been required to do  military
service but has not done it and whose case has been brought before a court.
 I find Dr Galeotti's reasoning that a person in such  circumstances  would
be noticed in the event of return to be wholly irresistible.

46. It is one of the many distinctive features  of  this  jurisdiction  that
"fact-finding" is more to do with predicting what might happen in the event
of a contingency than actually deciding what did happen.  The simple  truth
is I do not know what will happen if this man is returned.  I do  not  know
that I have been told the truth by the claimant.   I  am  satisfied  it  is
reasonably likely that the core of his story, namely that he does not  want
to do military service, that he is being required to  do  military  service
and that his refusal to be mobilised has led to his prosecution is right.

47. I am also satisfied that it is a reasonably likely consequence  of  that
firstly that he would face a prison sentence but even if he did not that he
would face detention in unlawful conditions  while  the  matter  was  being
resolved.  This is explained fully by Professor Galeotti and is  sufficient
reason to allow his appeal on Article 3  grounds,  which,  having  reminded
myself that it is sufficient if the claimant proves his case to  the  "real
risk" standard, is what I do.

48. This is not in any way to go behind the decision in  VB.   That  remains
good guidance but subject to the obvious limitations that it  is  based  on
the evidence before it and the  international  situation  had  deteriorated
since then, it may be that the position is worse but this  is  not  what  I
have decided.  I have decided that this particular claimant has shown  that
he is somebody who is at risk for particular reasons in his case. In  short
it was decided in VB that draft and mobilisation evaders are not usually at
risk of prosecution. This claimant has persuaded me that is at risk.

49. I do not see any point in engaging at great length with  the  additional
submissions about the claimant having to  do  internationally  unacceptable
acts.  For  what  it  is  worth  I  accept  at  face  value  Dr  Galeotti's
observations that the claimant could be subject to that sort of requirement
because those things go on but it is unlikely and I would not have  allowed
the appeal for that reason.

50. Nevertheless, I allow it for the reason that I have.

Decision

51. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside  its  decision  and  I
substitute a decision allowing the claimant's appeal on Article 3 grounds.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 July 2019                    |



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA 07783 2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 May 2018                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Norman, Counsel instructed by Sterling Law
                    Associates, Solicitors
                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing on asylum grounds but allowing on Article  3
grounds the appeal of the respondent (hereinafter "the  claimant")  against
the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  him   international
protection.

2. Certain things are clear.  The  appeal  was  unequivocally  dismissed  on
asylum grounds and there is no cross-appeal.  It is also an accepted  fact,
and I have checked with Mr Walker for the Secretary of State that this  was
not an error, that if the claimant does go  prison  then  he  risks  facing
conditions so severe that they would contravene his rights under Article  3
of the European Convention on Human Rights.

3. The appeal  on  asylum  grounds  was  dismissed  because  the  First-tier
Tribunal did not believe the claimant's evidence of his involvement in anti-
Government political activity.

4. Neither did the First-tier Tribunal accept the claimant's  evidence  that
he had been "called-up"  into  the  armed  services  and  did  not  accept,
therefore, that there was any risk of  the  claimant  being  identified  on
return as a person who had been evading the draft.  It is  plain  from  the
evidence that a lot of people who receive call-up  papers  do  not  respond
responsibly and many are prosecuted, although custodial sentences  seem  to
be very rare.

5. The reasons for allowing the appeal emerge in paragraphs  54  and  55  of
the Decision and Reasons. The judge was satisfied that the  claimant  would
refuse to perform military service and would risk  Article  3  severe  ill-
treatment as a consequence.  This is not the same  as  a  finding  that  he
would be in trouble for avoiding the draft. It goes further than  that.  It
is a finding that he would not do his military service  and  refusal  would
create the risk of imprisonment.

6. The challenge in the Secretary of State's grounds is that it  is  unclear
how the judge moved from disbelieving much of the claim to finding that the
claimant is somebody who would be expected to do military service,  and  if
he was expected to do military service the findings that he is somebody who
would refuse to carry out that service if required.

7. I can understand the judge's finding that he would not  do  the  military
service if required.  It is not made  particularly  clear,  either  in  the
Decision and Reasons or in the evidence, but the reasons are.  The claimant
expressed  a  marked  reluctance  to  perform  military  service,  and   an
abhorrence of the conditions that a soldier was required to endure  and  of
the things that soldiers are  required  to  do.  The  judge,  who  had  the
advantage of hearing the claimant give evidence was, I  find,  entitled  to
conclude that he is somebody who would not perform military service  if  he
was required to serve.

8. What I cannot work out is how the judge concluded that  the  claimant  is
somebody who would face a real  risk  of  being  required  to  do  military
service.  The judge found that the claimant has  not  being  called-up  and
that he is not somebody in a  category  of  people  who  were  particularly
likely to be called up. Rather he is past the age  when  persons  are  most
likely to be of interest and I simply do not understand what supports  that
finding.

9. I hesitate because it is unattractive to tell  somebody  that  an  appeal
that they thought had been successful is not, and I can only do it if there
is a clear error of law.

10. Nevertheless, I have to say, having reflected on  the  case  and  having
had considerable assistance from Miss Norman  and  Mr  Walker,  that  I  am
satisfied that this finding that the Applicant faces a real risk  of  being
made to do military service is perverse, at least to the extent that it  is
wholly unexplained.

11. I therefore set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  insofar
as it relates to the Article 3 claim.

12. Having heard submissions from the  parties  I  am  satisfied  that  this
decision has to be remade.  I remind the parties that, as the pleadings now
stand, there is only room to argue the Article 3 point.  I  have  indicated
that finding that if the claimant is obliged to perform military service he
will refuse and will be at risk of unlawfully severe treatment  is  lawful.
The only issue to be resolved is whether the claimant is at  real  risk  of
having to do that service.

13. I know that there is a new expert report which has been served with  the
permission of the Upper Tribunal, but that  does  not  of  itself  open  up
issues beyond those that I have indicated above.

Notice of Decision

14. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision to  allow
the appeal with reference to article 3 of the European Convention on  Human
Rights. The case will remain in  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  me  for  re-
determination on the point. The  appellant  may  want  to  give  additional
evidence to explain why he would have to do military service.  In addition,
the expert may be invited to provide an additional supplementary report.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 16 May 2018                   |
|Judge                                |                                     |

