
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07474/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th August 2018                           |On 26th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    J S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson (Counsel), instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M
Davies, promulgated on 11th January 2018, following a hearing at Manchester
Piccadilly on 19th December 2017.  In the determination, the judge
dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently
applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

The Appellant is a male, a citizen of China who was born on 27th July 2000.
 He appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated 20th July 2017,
refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian protection, pursuant
to 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he left China in November 2015
and flew to Hong Kong using his own passport, and then flew on to France
utilising a false visit visa supplied by a snakehead.  He states that he
stayed in France for a one month before flying to Spain using a fake Hong
Kong passport.  He stayed in Spain and then he stayed subsequently in Italy
using the same fake Hong Kong passport for two months.  He then flew to
Dublin and stayed there for one night, before leaving to come to the United
Kingdom.  He claims to have been trafficked.  He was referred to the
National Referral Mechanism (NRM) on 9th May 2006 and to Social Services
and the police subsequently. The decision of the NRM was that the Appellant
had not been trafficked.

The Judge's Findings

The judge held that the Appellant had come to the UK because "he would have
a brighter future in England" and that he "wanted to make and earn decent
money and make a life for himself" (paragraph 73 of the determination),
given that this is what he had himself expressed in his statements for
consideration.  The judge held that "that evidence indicates that he was
not targeted by a trafficker but left China voluntarily because he believed
his prospects outside China would be improved" (paragraph 73).  The judge
went on to say that the Appellant himself provided an additional photograph
to the agent which was going to assist him to leave China and that the
Appellant was able to leave China and go to Hong Kong using his own
passport.  This was indicative of the fact that he, despite his young age,
was reasonably likely to have acted voluntarily and not under duress when
he left China (paragraph 74).

The judge proceeded then to note that, "even taking into account the
Appellant's age, that he is naï¿½ve and vulnerable as the witness Mr Mi Lap
Sing claims", the claim could not be accepted as being a viable one.  The
judge considered the evidence that the Appellant, if returned to China, was
likely to fall in with the "wrong sort of people", but rejected this on the
basis that the Appellant, on his own testimony, did not fall in with the
wrong sort of people when he lived in China (paragraph 77).

Consideration was finally given by the judge to the evidence contained in
the expert's report about the attitude of the Chinese authorities to the
victims of trafficking (paragraph 79) and it was concluded that, having
taken into account the Appellant's age, and the fact that he was a
vulnerable witness, the claim could not succeed (paragraph 79).



Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge had erred in a number of
important material respects.  First, there was the issue of the Appellant's
credibility itself.  The way in which the judge has regard to this had
distorted the recorded evidence.  It had been taken out of context.  What
the Appellant had said was not consistent with how the judge had recorded
the evidence.  What the judge recorded (at paragraph 73) was that:

"The Appellant sets out in clear terms in his first witness statement why
he wanted to leave China because 'he would have a brighter future in
England'.  He 'wanted to make and earn decent money and make a life for
himself'.  That evidence indicates he was not targeted by a trafficker but
left China voluntarily because he believed his prospects outside China
would be improved" (paragraph 73).

However, the grounds make it clear that the actual evidence in the
Appellant's witness statement, together with what he said during his
screening interview, was rather different because in his statement on 28th
June 2016 the Appellant had made it clear that he did not have enough
money.  He met a man through a friend whom he had arranged to meet in a
restaurant and any comments that the Appellant had made were made in the
context of having been lured and seduced to the idea of going to the UK by
the trafficker, and that was after having been targeted and tempted by the
opportunity to leave.  This is clear from the screening interview (at
Respondent's Bundle page A4).  Here the Appellant had said that, "in China,
he met someone who told him he would get a job, better life when he came to
UK.  After he left China he realised they only asked him to work for
nothing".

Second, there was the evidence of the expert, Dr Jackie Sheehan, and she
recorded that there were a number of factors in the Appellant's account
which were typical of cases of recruitment for trafficking out of China.
The judge, however, contended that the Appellant's evidence itself
demonstrated that he lacked credibility.  It is only after the judge came
to that conclusion that he began to consider the expert's report (at
paragraph 78) and this was the wrong way of approaching expert evidence,
which had to be looked at from the outset and in the entirety of the
evidence as a whole.

On 19th April 2018 permission to appeal was granted on this basis.  It was
also stated that the parties should address at the hearing the case of SSHD
v MS (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 594.

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 20th August 2018, Mr Nicholson, appearing on
behalf of the Appellant, raised two further additional matters.  First, he
referred to the fact that there was now a letter dated 19th June 2018 from
the Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit, which was requesting a further
NRM on the Appellant in the light of new evidence, which, it was stated,
would demonstrate that the Appellant had indeed been trafficked.  Mr
Nicholson took the matter no further, save to say that this was something
that was being looked at.

Second, he drew attention to the case of MS (Afghanistan) itself.  However,
he also additionally added that there had been a recent decision which
required consideration.  After citing the decision in AUJ (Trafficking - no
conclusive grounds decision) [2018] UKUT 200, Mr Nicholson submitted that
he would place reliance upon paragraph 62(ii).  This refers to an
Appellant's claim that he was trafficked or was a victim of modern slavery
in the past.  The Tribunal here explained that this may be relevant in
reaching a decision in a statutory appeal as to whether the Appellant's
removal would be in breach of the United Kingdom's obligations under the
Refugee Convention.

What was particularly important about this provision was its statement
that,

"in cases in which the Competent Authority has reached a negative
'Conclusive Grounds decision' but the Appellant continues to rely (in his
statutory appeal) upon evidence that he has been a victim of trafficking or
modern slavery, the judge should decide, at the start of the hearing and
before oral evidence is given, whether the decision of the Competent
Authority was perverse or irrational or not reasonably open to it.  At this
stage, evidence subsequent to the decision of the Competent Authority must
not be taken into account.  If (and only if) the judge concludes that the
Competent Authority's decision was perverse or irrational or one that was
not reasonably open to it, that the judge can then re-determine the
relevant facts and take account of subsequent evidence" (see paragraph
62(ii)).

Finally, Mr Nicholson went on to say that the judge had failed (at
paragraph 77) to refer to the evidence of the social worker, who was not
referred to at all, although there was a reference to the evidence of Mr Mi
Lap Sing at paragraph 77.  The foster carer was also not referred to.  Mr
Nicholson indicated that he had a concern (see the Appellant's bundle at
page 23) with respect to the reference to the Appellant as being a
"streetwise 16 year old" because this appeared to indicate that the
Appellant was not being treated as a "child" but was being treated as an
adult, who had become streetwise.  This was an erroneous impression to
create in the determination.  The Appellant remained a child to all intents
and purposes whether or not he was a "streetwise 16 year old".

For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the judge did engage with the
evidence.  He did recognise that the Appellant was a 16 year old before
him.  He did recognise that he was vulnerable.  This was repeated
throughout the determination.  Yet, the following factors could not be
overlooked.  First, the Appellant's evidence was that he had obtained a
passport himself long before being approached by a trafficker.  He always
had the intention of going abroad.  Second, he states that he was seduced
into travelling abroad but the evidence is contrary to this.  He had
stopped attending school.  He had obtained occasion employment.  He had not
been forced to leave China.  He had made the decision to leave China
himself.  He had left on his own passport.  It is against this background
that the judge made the factual findings that he did.  Those findings were
not erroneous.  They were open to the judge.

In reply, Mr Nicholson referred to the fact that the substantial aspect of
the Appellant's claim was set out at pages 59 to 68 and this had not been
referred to by the judge at all.  Secondly, at page 22 of the Appellant's
bundle there was no suggestion that the Appellant had actually had a
passport.

Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved the
making of a material error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such
that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.  My reasons
are as follows.

First, the judge has not considered the evidence on the basis on which it
was presented by the Appellant, which is manifest from the Appellant's
statement of 28th June 2016 (in the Respondent's bundle from D1 to D7),
where he makes it clear that he actually was "young and inexperienced and
it was impossible for me to get a decent job" when he was lured into
travelling abroad and ended up working for nothing.  This is also borne out
by what he has said in the screening interview.

Second, the evidence of the expert, Dr Jackie Sheehan, was that the
Appellant came across as typical of cases of recruitment for trafficking
out of China, but her evidence is referred to by the judge only after the
conclusion is reached by the judge (at paragraph 78) that the Appellant did
not succeed in his appeal.  It is only after that , that the judge goes on
to then deal with the expert report (at paragraph 79).

Third, the case of AUJ [2018] UKUT 200, although a decision that was not
available at the time of original judge's decision, is relevant in that,
against the background of a case such as this, it is important that the
deciding authority should make a decision, before oral evidence is given,
as to whether the decision of the competent authority was perverse or
irrational or not open to it (see section 62(ii) of AUJ).  Insofar as MS
(Afghanistan) is concerned what that decision made clear is that in
circumstances where a negative trafficking decision by the competent
authority had not been challenged by way of judicial review, the First-tier
Tribunal may only entertain an indirect challenge to such a decision if the
trafficking decision is demonstrated to be perverse or irrational or one
which was not open to the competent authority.

In MS (Afghanistan) what Flaux LJ had said was that there is a two stage
approach.  First, a determination whether the trafficking decision is
perverse or irrational or one which was not open to the authority and
second, only if it is, can the Appellant invite the Tribunal to re-
determine the relevant facts and take account of subsequent evidence since
the decision of the authority was made (see paragraph 69 of the judgment of
Flaux LJ).  The two decisions are consistent.  In MS (Afghanistan) the
decision that was appealed to the First-tier Tribunal was a decision under
Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  What MS (Afghanistan)
makes clear in the judgment of Longmore LJ (at paragraphs 17 to 18) is that
First-tier Tribunal Judges are competent to consider whether the Secretary
of State has complied with her policy in relation to trafficking; if asked
to consider that question, they should then decide whether she has in fact
complied with her policy since that is (or may be) relevant to her removal
decision.  In this context it is important to be aware that a decision to
refuse asylum is not itself an immigration decision appealable pursuant to
Section 82(2) of the 2002 Act (any more than a trafficking decision is such
a decision).  The relevant immigration decision is the decision to remove
the Appellant under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act.

Decision

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the original judge was an
error of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision
of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is
allowed to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal,
to be determined by a judge other than Judge Davies pursuant to practice
statement 7.2(b).

There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing, and
typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the system,
before promulgation.

This appeal is allowed.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019




