
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07585/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2018                          |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Hughes, Counsel instructed by E & E Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public  to  identify  the  Respondent.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the case concerns the welfare of children who are entitled to
privacy and whose interests may be harmed by publicity.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the
claimant", against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  him
leave to remain on human rights grounds.

3. The claimant initially challenged a decision by the  Secretary  of  State
to refuse his protection claim but the point  was  not  argued  before  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge who dismissed the appeal on "protection"  grounds
and that part of the decision has not been challenged.

4. By way of introduction, in outline the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
appeal because, although the claimant was subject to deportation, the judge
was satisfied that the effect of deportation on the  claimant's  child  was
unduly harsh. It is the Secretary of State's contention that  that  finding
was not open to the judge on the evidence.

5. I begin by considering carefully the  decision  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

6. He noted that the claimant was born in 1951 and is a  citizen  of  Sierra
Leone.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom in May 1987  as  a  visitor.
In October 1988 he was still in the United Kingdom and he was arrested  and
charged with obtaining  mortgages  by  deception.   The  offence  was  more
serious because he claimed,  untruthfully,  to  be  a  solicitor.   He  was
sentenced to three years' imprisonment in 1989 with  a  recommendation  for
deportation.  He appealed against the sentence and it  was  varied  to  the
limited extent that the recommendation for deportation  was  removed.   The
deportation order had been made but was then revoked.  In 1992 he  went  to
Sierra Leone but returned shortly afterwards in January  1993  in  a  false
identity.  In March 1994 he was convicted  of  handling  stolen  goods  and
sentenced to four months' imprisonment.

7. Notwithstanding this history in February 1996  he  was  given  indefinite
leave to remain in the United Kingdom  largely  as  a  consequence  of  his
relationship with a British citizen whom he married in February 2000.   The
claimant and his wife have a number of children.  One of whom, S  was  born
in July 2002 and so  was  not  quite  16  years  old  when  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision was promulgated in June 2018.  The judge noted that the
claimant had asked on several occasions to  be  naturalised  as  a  British
citizen but the application  was  refused  because  of  his  character  and
conduct. The claimant's wife and children are British citizens.

8. In June 2015 the claimant was in trouble again, this time  for  providing
immigration advisory services unlawfully and he was  sentenced  to  fifteen
months' imprisonment.  He was served with a notification of  his  liability
to deportation and a protection claim was refused.  That  is  the  decision
that gave rise to these proceedings.

9. The claimant appealed but did not give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  The judge regarded this as no more  than  sensible  because  the
merits of his case, if any, lay in the  claimant's  relationship  with  his
children and the effect on the children of removal.  The important evidence
was not anything the claimant could say but the evidence of a social worker
supplemented with evidence of family members. Be that  as  it  may  if  the
claimant had given evidence it may be that some of the "loose ends" in  his
account could have been tied.

10. The judge reminded himself of leading cases on deportation and  referred
several times to the strong public interest in removing foreign  criminals.
The judge  particularly  had  regard  to  Section  117B  and  117C  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

11. There was also evidence that the claimant is unwell.   He  is  suffering
from prostate cancer, hypertension,  kidney  problems  and  coronary  heart
disease.  The claimant has no  money.   He  is  paying  off  a  substantial
compensation order in the sum of ï¿½500 a month.  His wife works full-time as
a nurse and pays the family bills.

12. The judge found there was no question of the claimant's  son  S  or  the
claimant's wife removing to Sierra Leone.  The son needed  his  mother  and
had no experience of life outside the  United  Kingdom.   Neither  did  the
judge have any difficulty concluding that S's best  interests  lay  in  his
father remaining in the United Kingdom and supporting him.

13. It is a feature of the case that however  discreditable  the  claimant's
conduct may have he has reason to be proud of his children.  None  of  them
have been convicted of any criminal offence and those who  are  old  enough
have obtained good employment and contribute to society.

14. Paragraph 27 of the Decision  and  Reasons  is  particularly  pertinent.
There the judge said:

    "I have little difficulty in finding that S's  best  interests  lie  in
    allowing the [claimant] to remain with him and his mother in the United
    Kingdom.  It was quite rightly not suggested during submissions that it
    would not be unduly harsh to expect S and his mother to give  up  their
    lives in the United Kingdom and  move  to  Sierra  Leone.   As  already
    indicated both representatives focussed on whether it was unduly  harsh
    to expect S and his mother to remain in the United Kingdom without  the
    [claimant].  I find for the reasons outlined above  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect S to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  his
    father.  The consequences of the [claimant's] deportation are more than
    merely uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable,  unwelcome  or  merely
    difficult and challenging.  They are in my judgment excessively  severe
    and bleak.  I accept the social worker's concerns that the  deportation
    would have a serious and possibly  irrevocable  impact  on  the  mental
    health of both S and his mother.  S, has lived since  his  birth,  with
    his father and throughout that period S has been a British citizen  and
    his father, the [claimant], has been here  lawfully  and  settled  with
    indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The  jurisprudence  makes  clear  that
    children should not be punished for the sins of their  parents  and  on
    the particular facts of this appeal I find the unduly harsh  impact  on
    the [claimant's] wife and youngest son,  S  justify  finding  that  the
    deportation of the [claimant] would  be  disproportionate  despite  the
    seriousness of the index offence and the historic  offences  which  the
    [claimant] has committed.

15. In the subsequent  paragraph  the  judge  made  it  clear  that  he  was
balancing the public interest in removal against the effect of  removal  on
the claimant's wife and S and the judge concluded that it would "be  unduly
harsh" for them to remain in the United Kingdom without  the  claimant  and
"unduly harsh" for them to remove with the claimant to Sierra  Leone.   The
judge allowed the appeal.

16. The grounds contend, in effect, that  the  decision  is  perverse.   The
judge is not criticised for identifying incorrect legal tests.   Rather  it
is said that he has not explained how the finding that deportation would be
"unduly harsh" is right and there is  nothing  in  the  evidence  that  was
before him that would support such a conclusion.

17. I agree with the judge  that  it  would  be  wrong  to  give  "excessive
weight" to the historic offences.  Although the claimant's  past  behaviour
has been seriously wrong and led to prison sentences the fact that  he  was
subsequently given indefinite leave to remain makes it  hard  to  say  that
they are weighty matters in determining the present public interest in  his
removal.

18. However the most recent conviction leading  to  a  sentence  of  fifteen
months' imprisonment was after a trial which indicates  that  the  claimant
took no responsibility or showed no remorse for his  behaviour.  This  most
recent sentence is quite sufficient  to  justify  his  removal.   He  is  a
foreign criminal and it is the public interest that foreign  criminals  are
removed.

19. There are matters here which I find should not have impressed the  judge
in his balancing exercise.

20. The fact that the claimant is unlikely to get into  further  trouble  is
of minimal if any relevance.  He is subject to deportation by reason of the
crime and the sentence that was imposed.  The fact that he  seems  unlikely
to reoffend means there is not a further aggravating  factor  arising  from
the risk of further misbehaviour but it is not a point in his favour.   The
expectation of future good behaviour has  not  particularly  impressed  the
judge but it should not have impressed him at all.

21. There can be no criticism in the finding that it would be  unduly  harsh
to expect the appellant's wife or son to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
United Kingdom is their country of nationality and is where they have  made
their home.  Nothing turns on that.  Neither should much weight be given to
the difficulties the claimant might have in the event of his return.  He is
clearly a resourceful man.  He can be expected to find a way of maintaining
himself in Sierra Leone.  The judge did not suggest otherwise.

22. However the judge was clearly impressed by the social  worker's  report.
The judge said at paragraph 25:

    "The social worker  is  particularly  concerned  about  the  inevitable
    impact the [claimant's] removal would have upon S.  S is aware  of  his
    father's immigration status, which keeps him awake  at  night.   He  is
    depressed about the possibility of his father  being  deported  and  is
    burdened by the concerns of potentially  losing  his  father.   He  has
    feelings of worry and hopelessness that his father will not be  allowed
    to support him in his education and his budding football career  as  he
    develops into an adult.  S's mother, the [claimant's] wife  (the  wife)
    states she is currently at breaking point.  As the male role model, the
    [claimant] keeps an eye on S, who as a 15 year old is  at  a  difficult
    and suggestible age, ensuring that he does not get involved with a  bad
    crowd and does not have any kind  of  involvement  in  youth  crime  or
    antisocial behaviour."

23. Given the claimant's own  criminality  this  would  seem  a  rather  rum
remark but credit has  to  be  given  to  the  undisputed  facts  that  the
claimant's other children seem to have grown up to be responsible people.

24. At paragraph 27 the judge clearly had his mind on whether or not it  was
unduly harsh for the claimant to be deported.  The judge said that "for the
reasons outlined above" he would find it unduly harsh to expect S to remain
in the United Kingdom without his father.

25. Although I have read the decision I cannot see what those  reasons  are.
What we have is a 15 year old young man living in a nuclear family with the
father who has committed criminal offences.  It does  not  need  very  much
experience of life or human decency to appreciate that removing the  father
is likely to be a bad thing for his son.   Of  course  there  are  families
where removing a parent is a way of easing pressure and creating peace  but
they are probably quite rare and this is not such a case.   Deportation  is
nasty.  Very often a person who is deported will have to adapt  to  a  much
poorer lifestyle with less state protection and less opportunity that would
be available in the United Kingdom. Deportation is  also  often  harsh  for
those who love the person removed.  Families used to be seen  as  essential
social building blocks and breaking up the nuclear family is not  something
to be done lightly.  Rather it should send a shiver of reluctance down  the
spine of any enforcement agency.  It should be expected  to  harm  children
and frustrate partners. It is a harsh thing to do.  However it is sometimes
a necessary thing to do.  Sending a person to prison is probably a paradigm
example of such behaviour being necessary. I do not have to ask myself  why
it is in the public interest for the claimant to be  deported.   Parliament
says that it is.  That is established.  Where  the  claimant  is  a  father
living in a nuclear family it is going to be a  bad  experience  for  those
close to him and that is likely to mean a bad experience for  children.   I
note S's age but there is no good age to lose a  father.   Another  way  of
looking at it is that this is a young man not very far away from adult life
who will soon make  his  own  decisions.  Further,  although  appropriately
dependent on his father, there are other men in his life.

26. I will consider the social worker's report in some detail.   The  report
relied on is the work of  one  Azra  Jabbar  who  the  First-tier  Tribunal
recognised as an appropriately qualified social worker able to give  expert
evidence.  Ms Jabbar qualified as a social worker in 2003  and  obtained  a
degree in social work in 2015.  She has over ten years' experience  working
with families and children.  She made plain that she understood her duty as
an expert to assist the Tribunal rather than  the  party  instructing  her.
She noted that the claimant lived with his wife and three children,  a  son
born in 2006 aged 11, the child S and a son aged 20.  There is another  son
"F," who is not the son of the claimant and his wife and does not  live  at
the same address as the others.  Although he  has  some  contact  with  the
father the claimant the social worker had not seen him because he  was  not
available when the assessment was made.

27. I  have  difficulty  reconciling  the  social  worker's  observation  at
paragraph 11 that  the  claimant  "resides  with  his  wife  Mrs  F,  three
children, F, T and S and Mrs F's mother" with the observations at paragraph
12 that "F was not available at the  assessment  as  he  resides  with  his
mother at a separate address".

28. According to the claimant's witness statement which does not  appear  to
be dated, the youngest child F lives in Manchester with  his  mother.   The
social worker's report is dated 20 December 2017 and  not  only  does  this
refer to F living with the claimant and the claimant's wife and  two  other
children and the claimant's wife's mother but it  refers  to  the  claimant
taking  S  and  F  to  school  every  day  in  Camberwell,  London.   Maybe
circumstances have changed but I find this all rather puzzling.

29. The social worker concentrated on the claimant's  relationship  with  S.
Certainly she picked up on S's sense of worry and anxiety.  The report says
much about the importance of keeping  together  nuclear  families  wherever
possible.  She expresses the  view  that  it  would  "be  inappropriate  to
disrupt the bonds, links and attachments that  S  and  F  have  with  their
father".  What I cannot see in that report is anything that lifts this case
into an unusual category.

30. Judges must be very careful when reading the reports of  social  workers
not to be swept along by the  use  of  professional  language  to  describe
family relationships and the likely effect of removal.  I mean  the  report
no disrespect or discredit when I say that all the social worker  tells  us
is that removing the father from day-to-day contact of the  nuclear  family
with a 15 year old boy is a bad thing to do from the point  of  the  child.
We know that.  Parliament knows that.  No doubt this is  why  the  relevant
test is one of being "unduly harsh".  The  point  is  that  deportation  is
likely to have harsh consequences on people other than  the  person  to  be
removed.  That is anticipated.  I cannot find anything in that report which
justifies the conclusion that removal would be unduly harsh.

31. I have  more  than  a  little  sympathy  for  the  judge  if  I  may  so
respectfully.  The miserable consequences of deportation on the boy and  to
the lesser extent to the wife were explained fully at the hearing and it is
understandable that he was reluctant  to  endorse  the  decision.   However
although he set out to apply the correct test he  identified  nothing  that
satisfied it.  This is not a case where the extra  elements  that  make  it
something unduly harsh can be identified.  That is  because  they  are  not
there.  This appeal should not have been allowed.

32. Further this is not a case  where  a  Rule  24  notice  is  given  other
reasons for the appeal being allowed in accordance with the decision in  EG
and NG (UT Rule 17: Withdrawal; Rule 24: Scope) Ethiopia  [2013]  UKUT  143
(IAC).  Neither was anything said in argument before me to suggest that the
appeal ought to have been allowed for other reasons.

33. It follows that I not only set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal but I substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.  That  must  be
the consequence of my decision which  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision was perverse.

Notice of Decision

34. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside its  decision  and  I
substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal against the decision
of the Secretary of State.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 16 May 2019                    |



