
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/07727/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2021                     |On 12 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    S N R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr T Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, aged 36.  She  has  permission
    to appeal to the  UT  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Buchanan,
    promulgated on 21 April 2020.  Her grounds are set out in an attachment
    running to 28 paragraphs over 17 pages.

 2. The hearing took place by remote means.  There were a  few  periods  of
    poor  audio  quality,  requiring  some  repetition,   and   two   brief
    interruptions of connection.  Parties agreed that all  submissions  had
    been conveyed.

 3. Mr Ruddy adopted  the  grounds,  and  in  his  further  submissions  he
    identified the points most relied  upon.   He  said  that  despite  the
    length and detail of the decision, and (consequently) of  the  grounds,
    the claim was straightforward.  He argued  that  together  the  grounds
    showed recurrent oversights and errors, such  that  the  decision  made
    little sense as an overall explanation of why  the  claim  failed,  and
    that it should be set aside.

 4. Mrs Pettersen argued that none of the grounds  disclosed  any  material
    error, and that collectively they amounted only to disagreement on  the
    facts.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. The appellant was employed in management of an hotel in  Colombo,  part
    of a major international chain.  She says that a Sri Lankan politician,
    B, had an apartment there.  Her claim is that she was at a  promotional
    cocktail event in the hotel in September 2018 when B invited her,  with
    his secretary and bodyguards, to his apartment.  He told the others  to
    leave, then made unwelcome physical advances to her.   She  pushed  him
    off and ran away to her office on another floor.   There  she  met  her
    friend and immediate supervisor, A, and told him what had happened, but
    she was unwilling to tell higher management.  She returned  briefly  to
    the function.  Her husband, M, was away from home  because  his  father
    was seriously ill.  She did not tell him.  She stayed for a few  nights
    with A.  B made telephone calls to her, but she did not answer.  On  an
    evening in October, she was driving home with her husband when  another
    vehicle blocked their way.  The men from that vehicle  were  armed  and
    wore the usual dress of politicians' security personnel.  They beat her
    husband unconscious and dragged her towards  their  vehicle.   A  crowd
    gathered and the  men  ran  away,  issuing  threats  to  kill.   M  was
    hospitalised for several days.  In her statement  to  the  police,  the
    appellant disclosed the  earlier  incident.   She  also  now  told  her
    husband.  She believed the assailants to be  B's  bodyguards.   Towards
    the end of  November  2018,  several  men  attacked  the  home  of  the
    appellant and her husband at night, but they escaped to  a  neighbour's
    house.  Again, she  suspected  B's  bodyguards,  and  reported  to  the
    police.  The appellant and her husband did not feel safe at  home.   In
    late December 2018 and in January 2019 men, again suspected to  be  B's
    bodyguards, tried to locate the appellant at the house of her husband's
    parents, and at the house of her parents, where they had been  staying.
    They threatened the appellant's mother, with a gun to her head, over  a
    newspaper article concerning  the  appellant  and  B.   This  was  also
    reported to the police.  She believes they took no action, due  to  B's
    position of influence.  The appellant and her husband travelled to  the
    UK, with visas, on 11 - 12 February 2019.   She  sought  asylum  on  12
    March 2019.

 7. I deal with matters by  reference  to  the  grounds  (G),  followed  by
    reference to the decision (D).

 8. G1, D10 -  10.8.   This  ground  blandly  disagrees  with  the  judge's
    analysis that the claim does  not  fall  within  a  Refugee  Convention
    category, but it does not arrive at error on a point of  law.   In  any
    event, such error would not be material, unless error is found also  in
    the adverse credibility findings.

 9. The rest of the grounds are directed against the credibility findings.

10. G2, D9.2.  The judge  observes  (accurately)  that  the  expert  report
    describes numerous cases against B, but not of the present nature.  The
    ground says that does not detract from credibility, and that the  judge
    "appears to be making an  assumption  that  absence  of  such  previous
    conduct ... means that B could not be guilty of  such  conduct  towards
    the appellant".

11. The grounds read something into the decision  which  is  not  expressly
    stated at 9.2; but the passage appears under the heading,  "Conclusions
    on the facts: ... summary"; which does suggest  that  a  conclusion  is
    drawn.

12. At D11(1) under a further heading, "Conclusion", the judge states  that
    the appellant's allegations are not shown to be of the same  nature  as
    other complaints against B and his bodyguards.

13. It might be thought that evidence of other wrongdoing by B, and of  his
    impunity, tends at least to some  extent  to  support  the  appellant's
    account.  The decision leaves the impression that absence  of  evidence
    of wrongdoing of the same specific nature is not  merely  negative  but
    actively adverse to the appellant's credibility.

14. G3, D9.3 [and 9.4].  This ground, around the appellant and  her  mother
    giving their home addresses to  the  police,  complains  of  the  judge
    making assumptions and of lack of fair notice. The judge  thought  that
    reporting to the police was "not illustrative of a fear of persecution"
    from the state or non-state actors,  who  might  readily  access  those
    addresses.

15. This was not a matter raised by the respondent in the refusal letter or
    in submissions.

16. I do not see that the appellant had anything further of  importance  to
    say about it.  However, while unfairness is not established,  there  is
    force in the appellant's argument that it is not much of  a  basis  for
    rejecting credibility.

17. Any report to the police inevitably required noting of  addresses.   It
    seems unlikely those addresses would have been  hard  for  a  prominent
    politician with a large and loyal staff to discover, whether stated  in
    police reports or not.

18. To found adversely on this point goes rather far, when  the  background
    evidence and expert report were to mixed effect.  There  is  corruption
    and impunity, but action does follow on some complaints.

19. The decision lacks a basis for finding that reporting  matters  to  the
    police was adverse to credibility.

20. G4, D9.6, debates the finding that allegedly taking refuge with  family
    and friends was adverse to credibility, because of the ease with  which
    the appellant and her husband might be traced.  The  ground  says  that
    this overlooks the escalating chain of events, and affordability.

21. G5, D9.8 and 9.21, debates the judge's view that it was adverse that  A
    in an email would not mention the risk to him.

22. G6-8,  D9.10  (and  other  grounds)  allege  failure  to  consider  the
    appellant's explanations.

23. G10, D9.15 debates the judge's view that the appellant's assailants  in
    the alleged incident of October 2018 would not so readily have desisted
    from her attempted kidnap.  The appellant's account is said not  to  be
    "beyond the realms of possibility".

24. That may be so; but it does not identify an error on a point of law.

25. G11-14, D9.17-19,  debate  the  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's alleged disclosure to the police.

26. G15, D9.20, debates the availability of hospital records.

27. G16-18, D9.22-31, debate the judge's finding on  the  alleged  ease  of
    escape from the incident in November 2018.

28.  G19-20, D9.32-34,  allege  misinterpretation  of  the  evidence  about
    reporting to the police, and possible discovery by B.

29. G21, D9.35-37, allege that the judge overlooked evidence explaining how
    the appellant knew about the incident in December 2018.

30. G22, D9.39, debates the finding about the January 2019 incident.

31. G23, D9.41-46, says that the judge overlooked the appellant's  evidence
    explaining why  she  produced  no  evidence  of  an  alleged  newspaper
    article.

32. G24, D9.47-50 argues that the judge's views  about  bodyguards  wearing
    identifiable uniforms placed "too high an onus on the appellant".

33. G25, D9.62-67, argues that the expert report should have been found  to
    be more supportive of the case.

34. G26, D9.68, adds nothing.

35. G27 says the judge overlooked evidence about delay  in  claiming  after
    arrival in the UK; but the appellant has specified nothing which  might
    place the judge's assessment outside his lawful scope.

36. G28 is a summary.

37. No decision on a claim such as this, no matter how meticulous, can ever
    close off all debate on the facts. Mr  Ruddy  fairly  stated  that  the
    decision was a notably thorough attempt  to  analyse  the  claim.   The
    decision does not overlook the appellant's evidence  and  explanations.
    Rather, it is largely concerned with evaluating them.

38. G4-28, in my view, do not rise above re-argument and a demand for  ever
    greater detail.  They  disclose  no  errors  on  points  of  law.   The
    findings reached are of varying strength, but that is inevitable.

39. G2 and G3 are established.  The extent to  which  that  undermines  the
    decision as a whole is a matter of degree.   Although  the  judge  gave
    several other reasons, he found  both those matters of some importance.
     It cannot safely be said that the outcome must have been the same.

40. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  Parties agreed that if  so,  the
    case should be remitted for a fresh hearing, not before Judge Buchanan.

41. An anonymity direction remains in place.



        Hugh Macleman

      23 March 2021
      UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




