
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07338/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2019                            |On 16 December 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court
directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

This is the appellant's appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Brookfield promulgated on 17 September 2019 dismissing his appeal
against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 18 July 2019 to refuse
his protection claim made on 16 June 2015 on the basis of being the victim
of trafficking from Nigeria to the UK and being at risk from the Black Axe
cult, of which he was a former member.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to appeal on
29 October 2019.

For the reasons I set out below, I find there was an error of law in the
making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to
be set aside and remade.

In granting permission, Judge Grant-Hutchison considered it arguable that
the judge erred by making inconsistent findings as to the effect of fear of
black magic; made no findings on the claim that the appellant had reported
his trafficker to the police; finding it not credible that the appellant
would be pursued to repay a debt to his trafficker; making no clear
findings on whether the appellant was involved in the murder of the
governor's son; failing to consider the medical evidence as to the
appellant's mental health; and failing to attach any weight to the evidence
of Mrs Higiro that the appellant would not be able to live independently,
being the accepted victim of trafficking and in receipt of counselling for
that reason.

The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the judge.  It is not
an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much weight
to a relevant factor unless the exercise is irrational.  Nor is it an error
of law for the judge to fail to deal with every factual issue of argument,
provided that all relevant material has been considered and taken into
account. Disagreement with the judge's factual conclusions and the
appraisal of the evidence or the assessment of credibility or the
evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error per se, nor is it
necessary to consider every possible alternative inference consistent with
the truthfulness.  However, if a point of evidence of significance has been
ignored or misunderstood, that may be a failure to take into account a
material consideration.

With regard to the issue of the appellant's mental health only am I
satisfied that there is an error of law.  In relation to the other grounds,
I am not satisfied that they disclose any material error of law, because it
was open to the judge on the evidence to conclude that there was an
inconsistency between the claimed fear of harm from his trafficker and yet
he continued to meet with him voluntarily in the UK so that the judge found
no credible fear on return to Nigeria.  That finding is adequately reasoned
and, in my view, the grounds in this regard are no more than disagreement.

At paragraph 10 of the decision the judge had explained that she had taken
into account all the evidence before reaching any of her findings.  The
appellant claimed to have reported his trafficker to the police in
Manchester, which was argued to be an indication of his fear.  Whether he
had or had not reported the matter to the police in Manchester was
contested at the hearing.  However, the claimed reporting seems to me to be
inconsistent with the very argument that was advanced as to why he
continued to meet with the person - because he feared that black magic
would be used against him.  The grounds complain that no finding was made
either way.  In effect, the dispute was left unresolved, neither favouring
nor adverse to the appellant's credibility.  However, in comparison to the
other findings, I am not satisfied that this is at all material because the
judge also found that there would be a sufficiency of protection in
returning to Nigeria.  In the circumstances, that issue was not material to
the outcome of the appeal.

Neither do I consider that there was a mistake of fact or inconsistent
findings at paragraph 10(iv) of the decision, as claimed in the grounds.
On the lack of evidence, the judge was entitled to conclude that the
appellant had failed to discharge the lower standard of proof to
demonstrate that his trafficker, a man referred to as James, was part of a
syndicate in Nigeria that pursued the appellant with paying the alleged
debt he incurred in bringing him to the UK.

It is also correct that the judge made no finding one way or the other as
to whether the appellant was involved in the murder of the governor's son
but at paragraph 10(vi) of the decision, and elsewhere, the judge gave
reasons why, even if he was involved, he would not in fact be at any real
risk of harm on return to Nigeria for that reason.  In particular, the
judge indicated that she considered that the risk arose from a video
recording which, if it exists, that she doubted would be disclosed but even
if it were to be disclosed, the judge considered it would be apparent from
the video that the appellant was coerced.  Again, given the other findings
in the decision, including that of the reasonableness of relocation
elsewhere, given that Nigeria has a vast population and a huge landmass,
the lack of finding on that issue is not, in my view, material because the
judge considered the appellant's case on the basis of his claim taken at
the highest on that issue.

However, it is clear that despite the matters set out above that the judge
does not address the mental health issues that were raised, in respect of
which the witness gave evidence before the Tribunal.  Whilst the fact of
the witness is mentioned in the decision, there is no reference to the
evidence of that witness within the findings or reasons and the fact that
she gave evidence was barely mentioned.  The evidence is, I accept,
relevant to whether the appellant would be able to function independently
on return to Nigeria and therefore is relevant to the question of return or
indeed relocation within Nigeria.  Before me, both Mr Tan and Mr Greer
agreed that that amounts to an error of law and that it is relevant and
material so that the decision itself is in error of law.

When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside, Section
12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions or it
must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The scheme of the Tribunals, Courts
and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of primary fact-
finding to the Upper Tribunal.  I have given anxious consideration as to
whether this is a case that could be retained in the Upper Tribunal, given
that I have found no error of law in relation to the grounds other than
that in relation to the mental health.  However, I consider it would be
very difficult to deal with the case without reconsidering all matters and
on that basis, the best venue for that is the First-tier Tribunal.  In all
the circumstances and indeed at the invitation and request of both parties,
I relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on the
basis that it falls within the Senior President's practice statement at
paragraph 7.2, the effect of the error has been to deprive the appellant of
a fair hearing and the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which
is necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate
to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal
afresh.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law such that it should be set aside.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal in
accordance with the attached directions.




                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 11 December 2019

Consequential Directions

   1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at
      Manchester.

   2. The estimated length of hearing is three hours.

   3. No interpreter will be required.  The appellant and one witness will
      give evidence.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further alternative directions
      as deemed appropriate.


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award  because  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  remains  to  be
decided.




                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 11 December 2019
