
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08014/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                             |On 29 October 2018            |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   Mr A E
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Turkey aged 36.  The appellant appealed to
the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent, dated 19
June 2018, to refuse the appellant's protection claim.  In a decision
promulgated on 6 August 2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet
dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

The appellant appeals on the following grounds:

Ground 1:

It was submitted that the judge made negative credibility findings in
isolation from the medical expert evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
which had confirmed, inter alia, that the appellant had scars consistent
with the nature of assault and suffered from PTSD.  It was argued that the
Tribunal had erred in terms of the guidance given in Mibanga [2005] EWCA
Civ 367.

Ground 2:

The First-tier Tribunal failed to make findings in respect of the
appellant's claimed account of his three detentions and appeared to reject
the appellant's credibility due to his failure to claim asylum in the
Netherlands, without making findings on the appellant's reasons for not
doing so.  It was further submitted that the non-attendance of the
appellant's relatives was an insufficient reason for a negative credibility
finding on the core of the appellant's claim.

Ground 3:

It was submitted that although the First-tier Tribunal appeared to conclude
that the appellant was a low level supporter of the HDP (as had been
conceded by the respondent) although the findings were unclear, the First-
tier Tribunal failed to adequately assess the background country
information and the country guidance of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA)
Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312.

Discussion

The respondent's bundle at D78 to D93 contained a psychiatric report from a
consultant psychiatrist, Dr Hajioff.  This included consideration of the
appellant's scarring, which the expert confirmed was assessed and evaluated
in line with the Istanbul Protocol.

The expert found one of the appellant's scars to be typical of a laceration
from a sharp instrument and the smaller scars on his left hand the expert
found to be consistent with injuries from uneven objects.  The expert
reminded himself that all the scars could come from other causes but noted
that the appellant indicated that he could recall no significant injuries
from work and/or sporting activities.  The expert also found the age of the
scars to be consistent with the appellant's evidence and although the
expert could not rule out self-harm by proxy, in the expert's findings the
appellant's injuries were not, in his experience, typical of self-harm.
The consultant psychiatrist also stated, in conclusion, that the appellant
was suffering from depression and chronic PTSD and that there was evidence
of injury consistent with the appellant's account.

The First-tier Tribunal, at [11], listed the evidence including the medical
report from Dr Hajioff.  At [18] the Tribunal indicated that the appellant
takes medication for his depression and the Tribunal referenced the report
from the expert.  Finally, at [40], the Tribunal took into account the
appellant's medical condition and the fact that he had been diagnosed with
depression and PTSD and was taking antidepressant medication.

However, Mr Melvin was unable to point to any other consideration of the
medical report.  There were no adequate findings, or indeed any findings,
as to why, if that was the case, the First-tier Tribunal rejected that
evidence, which was supportive of the appellant's account, including of
being detained and mistreated.  Although Mr Melvin did not concede the
appeal he did not defend the decision with any real force, particularly, in
his submissions, in light of the guidance in Mibanga.

That must be correct.  There is an absence of adequate reasoning in the
findings of the First-tier Tribunal both in relation to the medical report
and in relation to the appellant's claimed detentions in Turkey.  Although
the judge listed the appellant's alleged detentions at [31], [32] and [33],
the judge failed to engage with whether those alleged detentions were
accepted and if they were not accepted why the appellant's evidence was
specifically rejected including when considered in light of the background
country information and the appellant's expert report, which gave some
support to his claimed detention and ill-treatment.

Although there may be some force in Mr Melvin's argument that the judge was
entitled to find it preposterous that the appellant would be relying on the
fact that his own cousin had obtained asylum on the basis of his membership
of the ECP yet his cousin was not present at the hearing to give evidence
and that his brother-in-law, who had also been granted asylum on the basis
of membership, had returned to Turkey on a visit and was therefore not
present at the hearing, leading the judge to conclude that the appellant
could do likewise, that does not obviate the need of the First-tier
Tribunal to make findings on the evidence before it, central to the
appellant's claim.  That is so, even if the judge was correct in his
finding in relation to the appellant's family (which is in some doubt given
that there is no indication of any evidence before the judge about the
return of the family to Turkey and in what circumstances that took place).


Although the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take into account the
appellant's failure to claim asylum in a safe country, prior to coming to
the UK, again there were no adequate findings as to why, if that indeed
were the case, the judge rejected the appellant's explanation for that
failure including his evidence that this was related to his PTSD (which, as
already noted, the consultant psychiatrist's report confirmed the appellant
suffers from).

The judge went on to consider the appellant's activities in the UK but did
not find that these went to the appellant's risk on return and also found
that the appellant could relocate.  The judge went on to find that the
appellant was lacking in credibility and that even if the claim was
accepted at its highest the appellant was a low level "member/supporter"
and would not be at risk on return, applying the guidance in IK [2004].

The findings are inadequately reasoned.  Without further, the non-
attendance of the appellant's relatives could not justify the negative
credibility findings, even taken in conjunction with the appellant's
failure to claim asylum in Holland.  It is also unclear what evidence the
judge accepted as the findings in relation to whether or not the appellant
was a supporter of HDP, as conceded by the respondent, are inadequate.

Although the judge went on to state that taking the appellant's account at
its highest he was a low level member or supporter, the appellant's account
at its highest was in fact that he has been detained and mistreated, those
detentions taking place on three occasions in 2013, 2016 and 2017.  It is
the appellant's evidence that he was asked to become an informer.  It is
also not disputed that the appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.

Although Miss Nnamani accepted that IK (Returnees) is a country guidance
case of some vintage, in her submissions (including as set out in her
skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal) the background country
information did not support any departure from IK (Turkey).

The Tribunal in IK (Turkey) adopted the findings of the court in A (Turkey)
at paragraph 14 of IK (Turkey) and considered the potential risk factors,
which include whether an appellant has ever been arrested or detained and
if so in what circumstances.  It may be relevant to note how long ago the
arrests or detentions took place (and I note in this appellant's case the
most recent detentions were in 2016 and 2017).

Relevant considerations also include whether circumstances of an
appellant's past arrests and detentions indicate that the authorities did
in fact view them as a suspected separatist and it is the appellant's
account that he was accused of being a PKK terrorist.  In addition, the
degree of ill-treatment to which an appellant was subjected in the past
must be considered together with whether an appellant has any family
connections with a separatist organisation.  Further factors are an
appellant's Kurdish ethnicity and Alevi faith and whether an appellant has
been asked to become an informer.  Actual or perceived political activities
abroad are also relevant.

Although these factors are not exhaustive and there are other factors in IK
(Turkey) which are not relevant to this appellant it was incumbent on the
judge, given that the appellant appears to have a number of relevant risk
factors, to give adequate reasons for finding, as he did at [38], that the
appellant was not at risk on return.  A bare finding that he was 'applying
the guidance in IK' was inadequate given the evidence before the First-tier
Tribunal.

Mr Melvin submitted that if I was not with him, given what was said in
Mibanga, the appeal would have to be remitted for fresh findings of fact.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law such that
it is set aside.  Given the failure of the First-tier Tribunal to engage
with the expert evidence or make adequate findings in relation to the core
of the appellant's claim, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
to be heard de novo, other than before Judge Sweet.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  22 October 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.



Signed                                  Date:  22 October 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



