
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08553/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2020                      |On 1st July 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     YA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr C Proudman, instructed by Krisinth Solicitors
                    (written submissions)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies to both the
appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 18 May 1983.  The
appellant entered the United Kingdom on 29 April 2015 with a visit visa
valid until 27 May 2015.  After that date, the appellant remained in the UK
as an overstayer.

On 1 March 2018, the appellant claimed asylum.  She claimed to fear her
husband (who had beaten her in January 2015) and the Indian police who,
because of her suspected connections with an LTTE activist in Sri Lanka,
had detained her in April 2015 for 3 days and beaten her.  On 23 August
2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims for asylum,
humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
promulgated on 17 December 2019, Judge Wilsher dismissed the appellant's
appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was
granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bristow) on 17 February 2020.

Deciding without a Hearing

In directions dated 20 March 2020, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Smith) issued
directions in the light of the COVID-19 crisis indicating her provisional
view that the error of law issue could be decided on the papers without a
hearing.  The parties were invited to make written submissions on that
issue and also on the substantive error of law issue.

In response, the appellant's legal representatives filed, without any
further elaboration, a copy of the grounds of appeal upon which permission
to appeal had been granted.  On behalf of the respondent, Ms Aboni
submitted a combined Rule 24 response together with a response to the UT's
directions of 20 March 2020.

Both sets of submissions deal with the error of law issue.  The submissions
made on behalf of the appellant raise no objection to the error of law
issue being determined without a hearing.  The respondent's submissions
specifically invite the Tribunal to determine the error of law issue
without a hearing.

Having taken into account the submissions, and in the absence of any
objection, I consider it just and fair to determine the error of law issue
without a hearing under Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

The Appellant's Claim

Before the judge, the appellant claimed to be at risk on two bases.

First, she claimed to be at risk from her husband and his family.  She
claimed that they had married in September 2003.  However, their marriage
had not been a happy one and had deteriorated over time.  This had
culminated in 2014 with the appellant's husband, on a joint visit to the
UK, continually accusing her of cheating with a Tamil man ("K") who was
active in the LTTE and with whom she had formed a relationship earlier in
her life.  When they returned to India on 31 January 2015, the appellant
claimed that after an argument her husband beat her and scolded her in very
derogatory terms.  She left the home and went to live with her mother in
her mother's house in Trichy.

The appellant claimed that, after she came to the United Kingdom in April
2015, she and her husband had cut off contact for a number of years.
However, in December 2018 and January 2019, she had again spoken to her
husband when they had begun to initiate divorce proceedings.  She said that
although he had initially wanted her to return to the marriage, he changed
his mind.  Her claim was that, in the village (Trichy) where her mother
lived, and where members of her husband's family also lived, his family had
spoken badly about the appellant in the temple.  She claimed that, although
he had not threatened her since she came to the UK, she was afraid and felt
that she would be in danger on return.

Secondly, the appellant claimed to fear detention and ill-treatment by the
Indian police/authorities.  This claim arose because of, she claimed, her
perceived involvement with the LTTE.  This arose because of her friendship
with the young Tamil man, K.  She claimed that he had been active in the
LTTE.  She claimed that, after she returned to India from the UK on 31
January 2015 with her husband, and after she had moved to live with her
mother following her husband's assault upon her, she had received
information from a friend of K's that he had been arrested by the Sri
Lankan police.  Realising that she still had a romantic attachment to him,
she decided to go and help him and went to Colombo in Sri Lanka.  She had
tried to locate him but had been unsuccessful.  She claimed that on 12
March 2015, she was arrested by the Sri Lankan police while she was staying
at her hotel.  She was detained, held in a small cell for five days.  She
claims that she was interrogated about her connections with the LTTE and
with K.  She claims that during her detention she was seriously ill-
treated, including being burnt with an iron rod on her right hand, hurt on
her left hand where she still had a scar and she was abused and raped by
three police officers.  She claims that she was released after a bribe was
paid through the involvement of her cousin's brother.  She was warned that
she should not stay in Colombo and she left immediately.

At the end of March 2015, having spent two weeks in Sri Lanka after her
release, the appellant returned to India.  She claims that on 4 April 2015
she was arrested by Indian police officers at her family home in Trichy.
She says that she was held at a police station for three days and
questioned about K.  She explained to the police that she had gone to meet
one of her cousins in Colombo and not K.  However, she says they did not
believe her and she was beaten.  After three days she says that she was
released when a lawyer had attended the police station.  She left India at
the end of April 2015 using her own passport and with a visit visa to the
UK which she obtained.

The appellant fears that if she returns to India she would be at risk of
arrest, detention and ill-treatment by the Indian police because of her
perceived LTTE connections.

The Judge's Decision

The judge found the appellant to be a credible witness.  He accepted her
evidence concerning her claimed past ill-treatment by her husband, by the
Sri Lankan authorities and by the Indian police.

However, the judge did not accept that the appellant's husband had any
continuing interest in her such that she would be at risk on return from
him or his family.  The judge also did not accept that the Indian police
would have any continuing interest in the appellant such that she would be
at risk from them on return.  In any event, the judge found that, at least
as regards any threat from her husband, she could safely internally
relocate to another major town in India.

As regards his finding that the appellant's husband would have no interest
in her on return the judge's reasoning is found at paras 7 and 8 of his
determination.  At para 7 the judge said this:

"I find that her husband has not made threats against her because she did
not put that in her case.  She said that her mother lived in the same
village as his family and that bad things were said about the appellant at
the temple.  That is not the same thing as saying her husband has
threatened her.  Her mother has not been threatened.  I find that her
husband has now agreed to a divorce although he was reluctant to do so
before that.  The divorce process has not yet completed and it is not clear
when that would happen.  I find however that her husband has not posed a
threat to her since her arrival in the UK because there is no evidence of
that.  Her evidence was that he had in fact been cooperating with her more
recently as regards the divorce."

Then, at para 8 the judge said this:

"I find that the appellant does not face a well-founded fear of serious
harm in her hometown of Trichy.  Her husband has agreed to a divorce and
though he was violent on one occasion in January 2015, there was no
evidence of a history of domestic violence against the appellant.  The
appellant's husband has his family in Trichy but again I find there is no
evidence from her mother that any threats have been made against her and
that she would therefore be able to safely return to Trichy without fear of
being attacked.  The fact that her husband has now agreed to a divorce
suggests that this is now a situation that he has accepted is over and he
no longer harbours ill will against her to suggest violence might result."

In relation to the issue of whether the Indian police would have any
interest in the appellant the judge's reasoning is found at paras 7 and 10
of his determination.  At para 7 he said this:

"I also find that she was detained in India in April 2015 for three days
and suffered a beating in respect of her connection with [K].  There was no
arrest warrant issued in her case and she was not charged.  She was not
bailed on condition and I find there is no outstanding interest in her.  I
say this because there was no evidence from a lawyer to suggest that the
authorities have been looking for her in India and her mother has not
provided any evidence to that effect either.  I find therefore that this
was an isolated arrest that was connected with her trip to Sri Lanka but is
not indicative of any broader interest the Indian authorities have in her."

Then at para 10 the judge considered what, if any risk, the appellant would
face on return from the Indian police/authorities:

"I turn to the issue of threats directly from the authorities which was not
strongly pressed at the hearing.  As I note above the appellant was
released without charge upon representations of her lawyer and her mother
in April 2015.  There is no suggestion that she was on bail or that there
have been any further attempts by the Indian police to locate her since her
departure.  Given the delicate situation with Sri Lanka it is no doubt an
interest of the South Indian police authorities in interviewing people who
have been to Sri Lanka.  However the evidence I have heard and factual
findings I have made indicates that the Indian authorities are satisfied
that the appellant is not engaged in any serious active support by the
LTTE.  They would otherwise no doubt have not allowed her to leave the
country on her own passport and/or would have followed her up at her
mother's house to ensure that she was not engaged in any further subversive
activities.  For all these reasons I find that she would be able to return
to India without being detained by the authorities on account of her past
visit to Sri Lanka and support for the LTTE through provision of storage
facilities in her home."

In the light of these two findings, the judge found that the appellant had
failed to establish a real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment on
return.

However, in para 9 the judge went on to consider, on the basis that there
would be a risk at least from her husband in the local area, whether
internal relocation was an option.  He found that it was.  His reasons were
as follows:

"In any event I find that, even if there were a threat from her husband in
the local area, she has an internal relocation alternative in any of the
other major towns in India.  I find that the appellant has worked as a
money transfer agent for a number of years and is relatively educated and
middle class.  She was married to a wealthy man.  She was educated up to
college level.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal in AR and NH (lesbians)
India CG [2016] UKUT 66 (IAC) indicates that in such circumstances a woman
would be able to relocate to another area in India and take up employment
and secure accommodation and services.  Although she might have to provide
her father's or husband's name to access these that itself does not make
such relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.  I say this in the light of
the fact that I have not found that her husband would cause her serious
harm if returned to Trichy.  He would not seek her out if she moved away.
It is also said by the appellant that her husband had some links to the
police in India but that was a matter of pure speculation on her part and
there is no evidence to suggest that he has sufficient influence or
knowledge to be able to find her in any other part of India.  That is the
case even if he were looking for her to cause her harm, which I find he is
not."

Accordingly, the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

The grounds of appeal (replicated in the appellant's submissions in
response to the UT's directions) raise three points.  Reordering them they
are as follows.

First, there is an irreconcilable contradiction in the judge's finding that
(a) the appellant's case is credible and as such the appellant has suffered
persecution at the hands of state authorities on political grounds and (b)
the judge's finding that the Indian authorities are satisfied that the
appellant is not engaged in any serious active support for the LTTE and
that they would not have allowed her to leave the country and would have
followed up with her mother if there was a continued interest in her.

The ground places reliance on para 339K of the Immigration Rules (HC 395
(as amended)) and, that past persecution having been accepted by the judge,
that was clearly an indicator that the appellant was at risk in the future.

Secondly, the judge's finding that the appellant could internally relocate
wrongly placed reliance on the case of AR and NH as that case was primarily
concerned with internal relocation by women who are lesbians whereas the
appellant's case is that she would be a single heterosexual woman who might
suffer threats from her husband and other people within her community and
would be required to live away from her husband and family.

Thirdly, the judge erred in not accepting the appellant's evidence that her
husband had links with the police in India and that he would therefore be
able to trace her.  The judge failed to explain why, having accepted the
appellant as credible, he did not accept this part of her evidence also.

The Respondent's Case

In the combined Rule 24 response and submissions made in response to the
UT's directions, Ms Aboni on behalf of the Secretary of State contended
that the judge's decision was a sound one.  She submitted that the judge
had given adequate reasons, despite accepting the appellant's account and
her credibility, why it was not established (1) that her husband posed any
continuing threat to her; (2) that the Indian authorities had no ongoing
interest in her; and (3) why, in any event, it would not be unreasonable or
unduly harsh to relocate.

Although the case of AR and NH factually concerned relocation by lesbian
women in India, Ms Aboni submitted, it applied to whether a lone woman
would be able to relocate.  The judge had found that the appellant was
middle class, relatively educated and had previously worked in India and,
on that basis, the finding that it would not be unreasonable or unduly
harsh for her to relocate was properly open to the judge.

Discussion

I will take each of the three points raised on behalf of the appellant in
turn.

The first is concerned with the claim that the judge irreconcilably
contradicted himself by accepting the appellant's credibility, and the fact
that she had suffered past persecution at the hands of state authorities,
and his finding that the Indian authorities would have no continuing
interest in the appellant.

The grounds refer to para 339K of the Immigration Rules which is as
follows:

"The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution or serious
harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or such harm, will be
regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-founded fear of
persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are good
reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will not be
repeated."

The underlying point, which is a common sense one, set out in para 339K is
that if an individual establishes that they have been subject to past
persecution that is some indication, unless there are good reasons to
contradict it, that the individual will be at risk in the future.

The judge accepted that the appellant had been detained, seriously ill-
treated and tortured including being raped whilst in detention in Sri
Lanka.   The appellant's grounds, in part, rely upon that very serious ill-
treatment but it cannot assist the appellant's claim.  It is not past
persecution by the Indian authorities (whom she claims to fear).  It cannot
be any indication of whether the Indian authorities would have a continuing
interest in the appellant and, if so, how they would treat her on return.


The serious ill-treatment that is relevant, as regards the Indian
authorities, is the fact that she was detained for five days in April 2015
when she was questioned about her LTTE involvement and beaten.  The judge,
of course, accepted that had happened.  However, he went on to give reasons
why, despite that having happened, the appellant would be of no interest to
the Indian police on return.  His reasons are set out at paras 7 and 10 of
his determination and which I quoted above.  She was released without
charge and not on bail.  She was released as a result of representations
from her lawyer and mother.  She subsequently left India on her passport
without any difficulty.  There was no evidence that the Indian authorities
have shown any interest in her, by for example visiting her mother, since
the appellant left India in 2015.

In my judgment, it was open to the judge to find that the appellant had no
established that Indian authorities would have any further interest in her
and that, following her visit to Sri Lanka shortly before, they were
interested in her but had released her for the simple reason that they had
accepted her account and that she was not engaged in any serious active
support of the LTTE.

The evidence, together with the sustainable findings made on the basis of
it, amounted to "good reason" within para 339K such that any implication of
future interest of the appellant due to her past persecution by the Indian
authorities was displaced.  The judge's reasons were adequate and
sufficient for his conclusion that the Indian authorities would have no
continuing interest in her and therefore she would not be at risk of being
detained and subject to persecution by them on return to India.  That
finding was, in my judgment, plainly a rational one based upon the
evidence.

Turning now to the other points raised by the appellant in her grounds and
submissions, these relate to the judge's finding that the appellant could
internally relocate to India.  In fact, given that the judge's finding that
the Indian authorities would have no interest in the appellant (which as I
have found is entirely legally sustainable) and that the judge's finding
(unchallenged in the grounds) that the appellant's husband has no
continuing interest in her, the appellant's asylum and humanitarian
protection claims necessarily failed because she had failed to establish a
real risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment either from the Indian
authorities or from her husband and family.  The appeal was inevitably, and
correctly, dismissed as a result.

As I noted above, the grounds do not challenge the judge's finding that the
appellant had not established that her husband has a continuing interest in
her and therefore that she would be at risk from him.   I should add that I
am unable to see any basis upon which that finding could successfully be
challenged.  The judge's reasons, which I have set out above, are in paras
7 and 8 of his determination.  He properly took into account that the
appellant's husband had agreed to a divorce and, although there was some
'badmouthing' of the appellant by the husband's family at the temple in her
hometown, there had been no continuing threats from him or his family.  The
judge found, entirely rationally in my judgment, that there was a single
incident of domestic violence and that, in effect, the appellant's husband
now, in accepting that he and the appellant should be divorced, no longer
harboured any ill will towards her which would suggest any future risk of
violence on return to India.

Even though the internal relocation finding was immaterial to the outcome
of the appeal, I will, nevertheless, consider the other two points raised
in relation to it given that the judge dealt with it at some length in para
9 of his determination and the grounds raise two points in respect of it.

The first point is that the judge was wrong to find that the appellant as a
lone woman returning to India- on the assumption that she would be at risk
from her husband - could reasonably and without it being unduly harsh
relocate to another major city in India.  It is said that the judge was
wrong to rely on AR and NH which was concerned with internal relocation by
a lesbian woman rather than as is the appellant a single heterosexual
woman.

Principally, of course, the Upper Tribunal in AR and NH was concerned with
internal relocation by a lesbian woman who would otherwise be at risk in
her home area in India.  The headnote records the Tribunal's guidance on
that issue as follows:

"In general, where there is a risk of persecution or serious harm in a
lesbian woman's home area, for educated, and therefore 'middle class'
women, an internal relocation option is available.  They are likely to be
able to relocate to one of the major cities in India and are likely to be
able to find employment and support themselves, albeit with difficulty, and
to live together openly, should they choose to do so.  In general, such
relocation will not be unduly harsh."

The Tribunal's approach is, however, applicable to a woman relocating
within India even if her sexual orientation is not the issue.  Of course,
that issue may give rise to a risk in itself in the place of proposed
relocation   However the Tribunal's reasoning, that on a fact-sensitive
assessment of all the factors, it will generally be reasonable and not
unduly harsh for an educated and therefore "middle class" woman to relocate
to a major Indian city, because they would be likely to find employment and
be able to support themselves, is an approach applicable to the appellant.


The judge found that the appellant had worked as a money transfer agent for
a number of years, was relatively well-educated and was middle class.  She
had been educated up to college level.  In those circumstances, absent any
risk to her from her husband and his ability to trace her whether through
the police or otherwise to her place of relocation, it was open to the
judge taking into account the guidance in AR and NH to find that this
appellant's relocation to a major Indian city would be reasonable and not
unduly harsh on the evidence before him.

Of course, whether the appellant could safely live in another city turned
upon, if the claimed risk was from her husband, whether he would have a
continuing interest in her and whether he might be able to find her in her
place of relocation.

As regards the latter, the judge found that he was not satisfied that the
appellant's husband (even if he had an interest in the appellant which he
found her husband did not) would have the ability, as was claimed, through
connections with the police to trace the appellant to her place of
relocation.  That finding is challenged in the third point raised in the
grounds and appellant's submissions.  It is contended that the appellant
gave evidence that she feared her husband would trace her and, given the
judge's positive credibility finding, it was not properly open to him to
reject her evidence and to reason that it was "a matter of pure speculation
on her part and there is no evidence to suggest that he has sufficient
influence or knowledge to be able to find her in any other part of India."

The grounds do not set out the appellant's evidence which is relied upon,
and which it is said that the judge should have accepted given his
otherwise positive credibility finding.  The appellant raised the issue in
her witness statement dated 3 October 2019 (a few days before the Tribunal
hearing) in para 9 where she says this:

         "I also wish to state that my husband will somehow track me with
         the help of his friends and also the police and punish me."

The appellant gave no explanation why that is her belief.  Even if the
judge accepted that was the appellant's belief, that did not necessarily
establish as a fact that her husband had the ability to trace her to her
place of relocation as she claimed.  Without further evidence, the judge
was, in my judgment, entitled to conclude that the appellant's belief was
"speculation".  There is nothing in the evidence, and nothing was drawn to
my attention in the grounds and submissions, that provides any evidential
basis for the appellant's belief.

In my judgment, even accepting that was the appellant's belief, the judge
was entitled to find, for the reasons he gave, that it had not been
established that in fact the appellant's husband had connections and the
ability to find the appellant which was her belief.  Consequently, I reject
the contention that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for his
finding that it was not established that the appellant's husband would have
the ability (through links to the police) to trace the appellant and that
his finding was not inconsistent with his acceptance of her credibility.

Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.  That
decision, therefore, stands.

Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                19 June 2020
