
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08480/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2020                    |On 15 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Abdullah, Hazelhurst Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. The appellant claims to be an undocumented Bidoon, with date  of  birth
    in Kuwait given as 6.7.86. This is her appeal against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik promulgated  16.10.19,  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  20.8.19,
    to refuse her application for international protection made on 20.5.19.



 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 16.12.19. However, when the application was renewed to
    the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan granted permission on
    12.1.20. In granting permission, the judge considered it arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by  treating  as  damaging  to  the
    appellant's  credibility  points  which,  arguably,  could  not  be  so
    considered  as  damaging.  However,  Judge  Sheridan  warned  that  the
    arguable  errors  identified  may  not  be  material  to  the   judge's
    appropriate application of Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -  Extra-
    territorial Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKAIT 00702.

 3. The error of law appeal  was  heard  at  Manchester  CJC  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan on 17.3.20. In the decision  promulgated  on
    7.4.20, Judge O'Callaghan concluded that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and  set  the  decision
    aside to be remade at a resumed hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    sole issue "whether the appellant  possesses  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on the ground that she is an undocumented  Bidoon  able  to
    rely upon the country guidance decision of NM  (documented/undocumented
    Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC)."

 4. The appellant claimed that as an undocumented Bidoon she never attended
    school, is in consequence illiterate, and has never possessed  a  birth
    certificate or Kuwaiti identity documents. Her husband, HSNA, with whom
    she has three children, is a failed asylum  seeker  in  the  UK,  whose
    appeal was dismissed in April 2019, the  judge  finding  him  to  be  a
    wholly untruthful witness. At the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  hearing,
    the appellant's brother MAHA gave evidence  in  support.  He  had  been
    recognised by the respondent as an undocumented Bidoon.

 5. Judge O'Callaghan noted at [11] of his decision that  the  respondent's
    representative conceded that the judge's  reasoning  between  [42]  and
    [44] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, which found  both  the
    appellant and her brother not credible, was  unsustainable,  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge agreeing that the reasoning materially erred in law.

 6. However, the respondent resisted the  first  ground  of  appeal,  which
    raised concerns with the approach the judge  took  to  the  appellant's
    asylum claim which had  been  based  on  her  husband's  and  brother's
    alleged political activities in Kuwait, and as to the weight placed  on
    evidence given by the appellant that was contradictory to that given by
    her husband during the course of his appeal hearing.  At  [14]  of  his
    decision, Judge O'Callaghan found no  error  of  law  in  this  regard,
    finding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to commence her
    consideration in the light of the guidance in Devaseelan and to rely on
    contradictions between his account given at his appeal and her  account
    in her appeal.

 7. At [15] of his decision, whilst deciding that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal had to be set aside,  Judge  O'Callaghan  concluded  that
    certain findings from the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  were  to  be
    preserved. The findings rejecting the appellant's  husband's  purported
    history of persecution as the motivation for  the  appellant  to  leave
    Kuwait must stand. Judge O'Callaghan also found no error in the judge's
    reliance on contradictions  between  the  appellant  and  her  husband.
    However, whether or not she is an undocumented Bidoon and  possesses  a
    well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  that  reason  remains  to  be
    resolved.  In  that  consideration,  Judge  O'Callaghan  accepted  that
    "particular care should be given to an assessment of MAHA's credibility
    as he has been recognised as a refugee by the respondent and an adverse
    credibility finding may impact  upon  his  ability  to  secure  settled
    status. I accept that fairness requires that he be  permitted  to  give
    oral evidence before the judge undertaking the resumed hearing." In the
    circumstances, at [17] of the decision Judge  O'Callaghan  agreed  that
    the scope  of  the  resumed  hearing  "could  properly  be  limited  to
    consideration as to the credibility and  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    evidence of MAHMA, in conjunction with  the  appellant's  evidence,  in
    establishing as to whether the appellant is an undocumented Bidoon  who
    can rely upon the country guidance decision of NM."

 8. At the outset of the hearing before  me,  I  confirmed  the  restricted
    ambit of this appeal with both legal representatives.

 9. No new materials were supplied  or  relied  on  by  either  party;  the
    bundles are as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  October
    2019. In addition to the bundles prepared for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, under cover of an email  dated  4.10.19,  shortly  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing,  the  respondent  adduced  further
    evidence, including: Annex E,  Laissez  Passers  from  Greece;  MAHMA's
    screening and substantive asylum interviews; MAHMA's  appeal  decision,
    appearing as Annex  D;  and  the  respondent's  bundle  in  his  appeal
    (PA/01058/2019). The respondent also relies on AC (Witness with refugee
    status - Effect) Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00124.

10. At the hearing before me, the appellant and her brother MAHMA both gave
    oral evidence with the assistance  of  an  interpreter.  I  then  heard
    submission from Mr Tan and  Mr  Abdullah.  A  full  note  of  the  oral
    evidence and submissions was taken by me and it  is  not  necessary  to
    recite that evidence or  those  submissions  in  this  decision.  Where
    appropriate, I have supported my findings with that evidence, either  a
    direct quotation or as a summary of points made.

11. Before reaching any findings, I have carefully considered  all  of  the
    evidence, documentary and oral, in the round  in  the  context  of  the
    whole, together with the submissions of the two representatives. I have
    made particular allowance for the  fact  that  the  appellant  and  her
    brother  gave  evidence  though  an  interpreter,   which   can   cause
    difficulties of understanding. I have also borne in mind that both  the
    appellant  and  her  brother  state  that  they  are   uneducated   and
    illiterate.

12. In relation to the evidence of the appellant's  brother,  I  take  full
    account of the fact that he has been  granted  refugee  status  by  the
    respondent. Mr Abdullah urged me  to  give  this  considerable  weight.
    However, the respondent relies  on  AC  (Witness  with  refugee  status
    -effect) Somalia  [2015]  UKAIT  00124,  which  pointed  out  that  the
    decision to grant refugee status is quite a different decision from one
    taken by a judge, which is a reasoned decision after  hearing  evidence
    in an adversarial investigation where that evidence  has  been  tested.
    Whilst some weight is to be given and it must be considered as part  of
    the overall evidence, such a decision is not to  be  treated  with  the
    same deference as a reasoned decision following a contested hearing.  I
    take the fact of the grant  of  refugee  status  into  account  to  the
    limited extent I am able but also bear in mind that  his  evidence  has
    now been tested in the hearing before me.

13. I also have to bear in mind the decision and findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal in April 2019, rejecting the asylum claim of  the  appellant's
    husband, where he was found to be a "totally  untruthful  witness"  and
    the judge was not satisfied that he was an undocumented  Bidoon  as  he
    and the appellant claimed. In rejecting his account  as  not  credible,
    the First-tier Tribunal questioned how a  person  without  any  visible
    means of support was able to support a wife  and  three  children,  and
    then arrange for himself and them to leave Kuwait, a relevant  question
    to the present enquiry, the answer to which has not been satisfactorily
    explained. The judge considering the husband's  appeal  concluded  that
    these facts demonstrated that he was not a destitute Bidoon. The  judge
    concluded that, far from being a genuine asylum seeker, the husband was
    an  economic  migrant  seeking  a  better  life.  The  judge  found  it
    reasonably likely that he left Kuwait legally  using  the  passport  to
    which he was entitled, which fact was inconsistent  with  his  being  a
    stateless and unregistered Bidoon.

14. All of this is, of course, relevant to the appellant's own claim. As Mr
    Tan submitted, not only has her  account  of  her  husband's  political
    activity also been entirely rejected, but that finding  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in  this  appellant's  appeal,  together  with  the
    rejection of the husband's account by  a  different  judge,  inevitably
    tends  to  seriously  undermine  the  appellant's  overall  or  general
    credibility. She had claimed that she saw her  husband  being  arrested
    twice in Kuwait, that her father-in-law was also questioned,  and  that
    the authorities were searching for her husband. None  of  this  account
    has been accepted as truthful. Similarly, her claim  that  her  brother
    was arrested in a demonstration has been rejected. On this  appellant's
    account, both her husband and her  brother  had  a  remarkably  similar
    experience, having attended the same demonstration in  2014.  Both  had
    been detained in February and released in March, and both spent exactly
    the same amount of time in Kuwait before leaving in September 2015. The
    judge at the First-tier Tribunal disbelieved that this almost identical
    factual matrix was a mere  coincidence.  I  also  find  the  remarkably
    similarity between the two claims incredible.  It  is  also  remarkable
    that neither the husband nor the brother made any mention of the  other
    in their various asylum interviews, which the judge found not  credible
    and that finding has also been preserved. I also find it  not  credible
    that when the appellant was questioned, she made no  reference  to  her
    brother having been arrested. I found her explanation, because she  was
    told to only answer the questions asked of her and not to  mention  her
    brother, entirely incredible.

15. Given that the core claim of this appellant and  her  husband  was  the
    same, I have to take the findings as  to  the  husband's  claim  as  my
    starting point in considering whether she is  an  undocumented  Bidoon,
    whilst bearing in mind that each case must be  considered  on  its  own
    merits. I also have to bear in mind that where there are contradictions
    it is possible that one and not the other has been untruthful, or  that
    both are in their individual accounts  untruthful.  The  fact  remains,
    however, that the findings in the husband's case have a  clear  bearing
    on this appellant's claim to be an undocumented Bidoon, as  given  that
    has been found by the Tribunal not to be  a  stateless  Bidoon,  it  is
    rather difficult to see how his wife could  be.  However,  I  have  not
    approached the evidence in this case through that prism but rather have
    considered it as one of several other factors to be taken into  account
    in the overall assessment of the evidence. It is to be noted  that  the
    husband did not attend the appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal  before
    me and, therefore, I  could  make  no  independent  assessment  of  his
    credibility.

16. However, the oral evidence taken before me highlighted some significant
    contradictions between  the  appellant's  evidence  and  other  various
    accounts on the one hand and her brother's claim and oral  evidence  on
    the other.

17. I  have  serious  concerns  as  to  the  appellant's  credibility  when
    considering her inconsistent account of dates and  her  assertion  that
    they do not celebrate  birthdays.  She  claims  to  be  uneducated  and
    illiterate and yet she was able to provide the Greek  authorities  with
    apparently precise dates of birth of her children,  claiming  first  in
    evidence that she recalled the month she  had  given  birth  and,  when
    challenged as to how she recalled the date of the month, claiming  that
    she also recalled the precise day of the month. The judge at the First-
    tier Tribunal was troubled by the fact that both the appellant and  her
    brother were able to recall their own dates of birth and yet had  never
    had or seen a birth certificate. Whilst Judge O'Callaghan considered it
    plausible that parents would inform their children of  their  dates  of
    birth and the judge's concern strayed into conjecture, this  issue  has
    to be seen in the context of the appellant's account as a whole,  which
    includes that her parents were also uneducated and  that  birthdays  do
    not have any particular significance for the appellant her  family  and
    are not celebrated.

18. The appellant was at times precise in dates provided but at other times
    inconsistent or vague. For example, she stated  in  evidence  that  her
    daughter was born at the end of 2014 in hospital but has  not  produced
    any documentary evidence in confirmation, stating in evidence that this
    was because she used a false name in hospital, and  that  the  cost  of
    this was paid for by a friend of her mother. The date of birth she gave
    in evidence is different to that she gave  to  the  Greek  authorities,
    stating that the child was born on 1.1.14,  not  the  end  of  2014  as
    stated in her oral evidence. Her husband stated in interview that  none
    of their children were born in hospital.  Asked  in  oral  evidence  to
    explain the discrepancy, she said she  was  not  in  contact  with  her
    husband at the time of her daughter's birth and did  not  get  back  in
    contact with him until 2016. She wasn't sure if she had told  him  that
    their youngest child had been born in  hospital.  I  found  the  entire
    account to lack any credibility.

19. In his evidence, the appellant's brother was challenged as  to  why  he
    had stated in interview that before he left  Kuwait  he  lived  in  his
    parents' home with his siblings, including the appellant. Challenged on
    this, he said this was not correct and that before he left  his  sister
    had married and was living with her husband, not at her parents'  home.
    He could not recall when she had married and claimed he thought he  was
    asked how many siblings he had. It  is  clear  from  the  question  and
    answer that he was asked who he lived with at the address he last lived
    at in Kuwait.  I  found  the  explanation  for  the  contradiction  not
    credible and indicative of a willingness on the brother's part  to  say
    what suited him rather than being truthful.

20. The brother's loose association with the truth  got  him  into  further
    difficulties in his oral evidence trying to justify his statement  that
    he was not sure if the appellant had  ever  had  medical  treatment  in
    Kuwait but thought her daughter was born in hospital but at a time when
    he had left Kuwait. However, in the screening interview he said he left
    Kuwait on 5.1.16. It was pointed out that the child was born  in  2014,
    before he left Kuwait. Challenged on this,  he  flatly  denied  leaving
    Kuwait in January 2016, stating that it was on  23.9.15  when  he  left
    Kuwait. Asked how he knew, he  said  he  was  told  the  date  and  had
    remembered it, which I found incredible. When it was pointed  out  that
    on any version of the date of the child's birth  he  would  still  have
    been in Kuwait, he denied that,  stating  that  he  recalled  being  in
    France when he heard that she had given birth. He was  relying  on  his
    alleged absence from Kuwait to justify previously stating that  he  was
    not in Kuwait when the child was born, as  explanation  for  not  being
    sure whether the child was born in hospital or  not,  and  why  he  was
    unaware as to how her treatment was paid for. I found the  witness  was
    evasive and willing to change his account to try and extricate  himself
    from difficulties he had put himself in as to  dates.  The  appellant's
    own account was also contradictory to her interview  account  that  her
    children were not born in a hospital but a house. However, I note  that
    later in the same interview she said she was taken to hospital  for  an
    operation because she was bleeding and gave birth there. This  was  but
    one  of  a  number  of  internal  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    accounts.

21.  There  were  other  difficulties  in  the  brother's  evidence,  being
    discrepant with the appellant's own evidence in  several  regards.  For
    example, she stated that the family moved from the desert in the  1980s
    to Sulaibiyah before she was born and that this was because the  person
    her father worked for as a farmer offered them a house  in  Sulaibiyah.
    Asked how they could afford this, she said they would  maybe  pay  half
    and at other times charities and the person her father used to work for
    helped out. The brother's explanation for the move from the  desert  to
    Sulaibiyah was rather different, stating that it was  because  everyone
    was moving from the desert and they also moved in order to register  as
    Bidoons. He made no mention of a house being offered  by  his  father's
    employer or  of  any  assistance  from  charity.  When  asked  how  the
    accommodation was paid for, he said they  paid  the  monthly  rent  and
    could afford that because his father was working as a  farmer,  one  of
    his brother's worked  in  a  supermarket  and  this  witness  was  also
    working. It was pointed out that he would have been a child at the time
    of the claimed relocation from the desert.  To  that  he  had  no  good
    answer other than to repeat that his father was working as a farmer.  I
    found his evidence on this issue not believable and concluded that  the
    account of relocating from the desert had been invented.

22. Similarly, the brother  stated  in  evidence  that  his  parents  never
    received medical treatment. In evidence,  the  appellant  was  reminded
    that in her interview she said that her parents are diabetics and  that
    they sometimes go to the medical centre. Asked in  interview  how  they
    afforded this, she said they only  go  once  or  twice  for  emergency.
    However, in oral evidence she denied that they  ever  received  medical
    treatment, asserting that when they went to the clinic they were  asked
    for medical documents which they  could  not  provide  and,  therefore,
    received no treatment. Whilst brother and sister might be considered to
    be consistent in oral evidence that no medical treatment was  received,
    their oral evidence on this issue is clearly inconsistent with what the
    appellant had stated in interview.

23. After confirming that she remained in regular contact with  her  family
    in Kuwait, Mr Tan asked the appellant why  she  had  not  produced  her
    marriage certificate which she said had been issued by  the  Sheikh  at
    the ceremony. She first denied having  any  documents,  which  was  the
    account she had given in interview, although  her  husband  had  stated
    that a  paper  was  provided  with  their  names  and  details  of  the
    witnesses. The judge at the First-tier  Tribunal  noted  her  interview
    account was that no marriage document of any  kind  had  been  provided
    found  the  appellant  inconsistent  with  her  husband's  account.  In
    evidence the appellant admitted that a document had been  provided  but
    then insisted that it was not an official certificate, only one  issued
    by the mosque. Asked why nevertheless she had not asked  for  it  or  a
    copy to be sent to her, she said it was 'just a normal paper' they gave
    to her husband. Whilst I accept that corroboration is not required, the
    explanation for not producing the document was  not  credible  and  the
    inconsistency between accounts and with  her  husband's  accounts  also
    served to undermine her credibility.

24. As indicated above, I am also troubled by the account  as  to  how  her
    husband, brother, herself, and her three children were financed to come
    to the UK if, as claimed, the family is destitute and have always  been
    been as undocumented Bidoon. She denied that this had been financed  by
    her family, who didn't pay anything, but stated that other  people  had
    helped, including a person referred to as 'Massif'. She stated  in  the
    screening interview that she had been provided with a  forged  passport
    and that the whole trip was organised by her  husband's  boss  and  her
    father's friend. The  whole  account  presented  to  the  Tribunal  was
    shrouded in vagueness lacking particularity, and  it  remains  entirely
    unclear how this was financed, all of which  tended  to  undermine  the
    credibility of not only the entire  account  of  how  the  escape  from
    Kuwait was managed but the very claim to be undocumented Bidoons.

25. Other difficulties include the  claim  that  none  of  the  family  was
    educated or received medical treatment when, as Mr Tan has pointed  out
    from NM, that prior to 1993 all Bidoons received  free  healthcare  and
    that prior to 1987 all Bidoons received free  education  at  government
    schools. The appellant claims to have been born in 1986 so may not have
    had any  schooling  if  an  undocumented  Bidoon,  but  she  has  older
    siblings, one of whom she claimed was 10-15 years older  than  her.  In
    the circumstances, it is not credible  for  her  to  assert  the  older
    siblings had not received any education. No  credible  explanation  has
    been provided to support the assertion that none of the children of her
    parents received any education. Neither is it credible that her parents
    were unable  to  obtain  any  medical  treatment  when  this  had  been
    available to all Bidoons until 1993. As stated above, in interview  she
    stated that her parents had received medical treatment for diabetes.

26. All of the above  concerns,  taken  together  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole, rather suggests that both the  appellant  and  her
    brother have not been truthful with  the  Tribunal  and  have  been  at
    pains, trying rather too hard, to deny  education  and  literacy  in  a
    concerted effort to maintain that they are from a  family  of  deprived
    undocumented Bidoons, to the point that their evidence taken as a whole
    is not only implausible  but  in  fact  incredible.  In  assessing  the
    evidence in the round, I am prepared to make allowances for one or  two
    discrepancies or one or two  implausible  aspects,  which  individually
    would be insignificant  and  insufficient  to  reject  the  appellant's
    claim, but it is on consideration of the account taken  together  as  a
    whole that I am driven to find it not credible even applying the  lower
    standard  of  proof.  The  convoluted  and  inconsistent   explanations
    undermine the credibility of the claim so significantly, that I  cannot
    accept that  either  the  appellant,  or  indeed  her  brother,  is  an
    undocumented Bidoon. I find that the likelihood is, as the judge  found
    in relation to the appellant's husband, the appellant is no  more  than
    an economic migrant who has contrived to  come  to  the  UK  seeking  a
    better life. I find that she has been deliberately untruthful with  the
    Tribunal, and not merely the account of an uneducated person, not  only
    in relation to the previously rejected political involvement claim  but
    also in relation to the claim to be  an  undocumented  Bidoon.  I  have
    taken into account that  her  brother  was  accepted  as  such  by  the
    respondent but  I  have  to  make  an  independent  assessment  of  the
    evidence, applying the lower standard of  proof.  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion after careful consideration of the evidence taken as a whole
    that the claim to be an undocumented Bidoon is a fabrication, one which
    has fallen apart when critically examined.

27. The remainder of the claim falls away as part of the preserved findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal decision, including  the  dismissal  of  the
    human rights claim.

Decision

28. For the reasons set out above, I  find  that  the  appellant  does  not
    possess a well-founded fear of persecution or is at any  real  risk  of
    serious harm on the ground that she is an undocumented Bidoon  able  to
    rely on the Country Guidance of NM.

29. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.

     Signed DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 5 October 2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
