
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08692/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th October 2020                 |On 6th November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WELSH


                                   Between

                                    'MB'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     The appellant represented himself
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Powell (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 11th December 2019, by
which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal
of his protection and human rights claims.

Background

The appellant, an Algerian national, entered the UK unlawfully, claiming to
have done so on 30th August 2004, and as later recorded by the FtT in his
decision, was convicted of wounding with intent at Blackfriars Crown Court
on 23rd September 2014, following which he was sentenced to three years and
four months imprisonment.  Following his conviction, he was served with
notice of liability to deportation.  He was subsequently deported on the
basis of a false assumed identity to France but returned when the French
authorities discovered his true nationality.  He applied for asylum in 2015
and by virtue of his offence, the respondent certified the appellant's case
under section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as he
had been convicted in the UK and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
at least two years, so it was presumed that he had been convicted of a
particularly serious crime and remained a danger to the community of the
UK.

The appellant had claimed asylum and asserted that his removal to Algeria
would breach his rights under articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR') on the basis that he was a former
member of the Algerian army, having left Algeria in 2002 and was likely to
attract the adverse attention of Islamist terrorist groups in Algeria,
particularly in his home area.  He also feared persecution because of the
relationship between a family member and an ex-Islamist leader, in his
family neighbourhood.  The issues before the FtT were therefore whether the
appellant had rebutted the presumption under section 72 of the 2002 Act and
whether the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution or his removal
risked a breach of his rights under articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

The FtT's decision

The FtT considered a potential language barrier to the appellant
participating in the hearing before him, dealing with this at �[18] of his
decision, which we set out in further later in these reasons. In summary,
the FtT was satisfied that the appellant understood everything that was put
to him and that everything was translated via an interpreter "efficiently,
effectively and accurately".

The FtT upheld the respondent's certification of the appellant's claim
under section 72, (�[46]), regarding it as "finely balanced" in light of
the appellant's previous good character, no previous convictions and no
further offences, as well as the fact that the appellant had not been
charged with any offences arising from his assumption of a false
nationality.  Nevertheless, the FtT took into account the Parole Board
decision that the appellant posed a medium risk of serious harm.

Having upheld the certification, the FtT concluded at �[47] that he need
not consider whether the appellant faced a real risk of persecution in
Algeria, and at �[48], for the same reasons, the appellant was precluded
from relying on articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  However, the FtT went on to
consider whether the appellant was at risk of persecution or serious ill-
treatment or harm if returned to Algeria.  The FtT concluded that he had
not shown, to the lower standard of proof, that there was such a risk of
persecution or ill-treatment or harm.  At �[54], the FtT noted that the
appellant was one of many who completed national service and had not been
engaged in any particular activities against Islamist groups or other
terrorist groups.  There was nothing to suggest that he would attract the
adverse attention of terrorist groups in Algeria.  At �[55], the FtT
recorded that the appellant had remained in Algeria for around two years
after his military service, during which time he was bullied and whispered
about, but had not come to any harm nor had he received any threats.  He
had lived openly, and the bullying and whispering did not amount to
treatment of such seriousness so as to engage article 3 ECHR.  The
appellant's brother had also served in the military, as recorded at �[56],
a few years earlier and the brother had not experienced any difficulties.
The appellant had family in Algeria living in the same area and there was
no evidence to show that they had been alerted to potential difficulties
for the appellant.

Considering also the objective country evidence, the FtT concluded that the
appellant would not be risk of persecution or serious ill-treatment and
that even if he would, it would not be unduly harsh him to relocate
internally within Algeria.

In relation to the appellant's rights under article 8, the FtT noted that
the appellant did not have any family life in the UK. He was not married
and had no partner.  He had no children and while there was reference to
another brother in the UK, he was present illegally.  The FtT analysed the
appellant's private life at �[65].  He had not been lawfully resident in
the UK.  The FtT was not satisfied that there were very significant
obstacles to the appellant's integration into Algeria where he had been
born and raised and educated and where he had spent the majority of his
life.  He therefore dismissed the appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which essentially relate to the
quality of interpretation during the hearing before the FtT.  The appellant
asserted that he had requested a North African Arabic translator and
asserted that the translator was not proficient in North African Arabic but
was instead Sudanese.  He referred to his evidence before the FtT, which he
asserted had been misrecorded or misunderstood, with which we deal below.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria granted permission on 14th January 2020,
regarding it as at least arguable that factual errors may have resulted
partly or wholly due to difficulty in interpretation, noting the authority
of TS (Interpreters) Eritrea [2019] UKUT 00352 (IAC).  The grant of
permission was not limited in its scope.



The hearing before us

At the beginning of the hearing, we identified two arguably 'Robinson
obvious' points (see: R (Robinson) v SSHD [1998] QB 929), namely there is
readily discernible an obvious point of Convention law which favours the
appellant although he has not taken it.  The first was the FtT's reference
to paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules at �[31], and his suggestion
that because a person would be excluded from a grant of humanitarian
protection, he would be ineligible for a grant of humanitarian protection
"in respect of articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR".   In addition, at �[48], the
FtT concluded that because he had upheld the appellant's certification
under section 72 of the 2002 Act, the appellant was "precluded from relying
on articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR."

Both statements conflate humanitarian protection, as a concept, with rights
under articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, which are separate rights.  It does not
follow that by virtue of exclusion from humanitarian protection, that a
person's rights under articles 2 and 3 ECHR are similarly excluded.

The second arguable error was at �[47], which stated:

"As such, having upheld the section 72, it follows that I must dismiss the
appellant's appeal without needing to consider whether he faces a real risk
of persecution in Algeria."

It appeared to us that if the section 72 certification applied, then absent
any further issue, the appellant became a 'refoulable' refugee.  On the
basis of Essa (Revocation of protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT 00244,
even where section 72 certification was upheld, and where, as a result, the
FtT was obliged to dismiss the appeal under section 72(10), the FtT needed
to go on to consider whether the appellant nevertheless had status as a
refugee, albeit a 'refoulable' one, as this could have important practical
implications for the appellant.

We nevertheless needed to consider whether any such obvious errors were
material on the basis that the FtT had considered both the refugee claim
and the claims under articles 2 and 3 in the alternative (�[51] to [62]
onwards).

Preliminary issue - translation

The appellant raised the question of whether the interpretation for the
hearing before us was sufficient.  Ms Al Ashi, an accredited interpreter,
translated between English and Arabic.  The appellant raised the issue that
in two previous hearings, the interpreter had not been competent; in one
earlier hearing, the interpreter was from Iraq; in the hearing before the
FtT, from Sudan. The latter had been unable to understand when the
appellant switched from Arabic to French, which was natural for people from
Algeria.  He felt more comfortable speaking in a combination of the two,
although he accepted that he had not asked for an interpreter in both
Arabic and French.

Ms Al Ashi disclosed to us that she was from a Palestinian background, but
had lived in Algeria from some ten years, and had no difficulty in
understanding the appellant. She could not translate French.

We reminded ourselves of the guidance set out in the authority of TS
(Interpreters) Eritrea. We asked the appellant a series of questions and
monitored his answers, checking throughout the hearing that he had
understood the matters and whether he wished to add anything.  The
appellant was able to answer all of the questions, at length and with
detailed elaboration.  He himself explained to us that his understanding of
Ms Al Ashi was excellent and indeed his English was good enough that he
usually understood what was said by the Tribunal before it needed to be
interpreted.  Where the difficulty had been with the FtT was that he would
sometimes naturally start speaking French and the interpreter had been
unable to interpret some of those comments without referring to a mobile
phone translation.  He was therefore worried that what he had said had not
been conveyed fully but he also explained to us candidly that some of the
issues that worried him, for example working in the logistics department of
the army, which he regarded as particularly relevant, had not been issues
he had in fact raised before the FtT, not because of a difficulty in
translation but because he had not had legal advice and did not believe
them to be important.  That is, of course, a different matter from not
being able to express evidence because of a deficiency in translation.

We were entirely satisfied that in the hearing before us, the appellant was
able to answer a series of complex questions with detailed and factual
answers and indeed in answering those questions, he did so at length for
nearly an hour.  On two brief occasions he began speaking French, typically
in relation to numbers, but was able to re-express these in a way that
could be interpreted to us.  We are therefore satisfied that he was able to
participate effectively in this appeal before us.

Discussion and conclusions

The appellant had referred to the following grounds where he identified
concerns about the conduct of the hearing:

      1. at �[42], the FtT had referred to a Parole Board decision of 2012,
         when it was in fact in 2018.

      2. At �[38], the FtT had referred to the appellant not appealing
         against his sentence following his criminal conviction or
         complaining about his solicitor.  The appellant explained he had
         not done so, because of his limited access to a lawyer whilst in
         prison.

      3. At �[55], the FtT had not remained in Algeria for two years after
         completing his military service, but instead only for 15 months.

      4. At �[56], the appellant's brother had been referred to as having
         served in the Algerian military a few years earlier. He had in fact
         served in the military in 1978.  This was prior to the start of the
         civil war in Algeria.

      5. In relation to the appellant's private life at �[64], the FtT had
         not referred to the appellant's three cousins who are British
         citizens, as well as his many friends.

      6. Finally, the appellant referred to an unnamed person who had been
         seated behind the appellant during his hearing before the FtT,
         which the appellant found uncomfortable, and his lack of legal
         representation because solicitors had refused to take on his case.

The Law

We considered the well-known authority of TS (Interpreters) Eritrea [2019]
UKUT 00352 (IAC) and set out below relevant headnotes, in relation to
difficulties with interpreters:

         "(1) An appellate tribunal will usually be slow to overturn a
         judge's decision on the basis of alleged errors in, or other
         problems with, interpretation at the hearing before that judge
         (Perera v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA
         Civ 1002). Weight will be given to the judge's own assessment of
         whether the interpreter and the appellant or witness understood
         each other.

         (2) Such an assessment by the judge should normally be undertaken
         at the outset of the hearing by the judge (a) putting questions to
         the appellant/witness and (b) considering the replies. Although he
         or she may not be able to speak the language of the
         appellant/witness, an experienced judge will usually be able to
         detect difficulties; for example, an unexpected or vague reply to a
         specific question that lies within the area of knowledge of the
         appellant/witness or a suspiciously terse translation of what has
         plainly been a much longer reply given to the interpreter by the
         appellant/witness. Non-verbal reactions may also be factored into
         the judge's overall assessment.

         (3) Where an issue regarding interpretation arises at the hearing,
         the matter should be raised with the judge at the hearing so that
         it can be addressed there and then. Even if the representatives do
         not do so, the judge should act on his or her own initiative, if
         satisfied that an issue concerning interpretation needs to be
         addressed.

         (4) In many cases, the issue will be capable of swift resolution,
         with the judge relying upon the duty of the parties under rule 2(4)
         of the Procedure Rules of both of the Immigration and Asylum
         Chambers to help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective
         of dealing with the case fairly and justly.

         (5) A challenge by a representative to the competence of a Tribunal-
         appointed interpreter must not be made lightly. If made, it is a
         matter for the judge to address, as an aspect of the judge's
         overall duty to ensure a fair hearing. Amongst the matters to be
         considered will be whether the challenge appears to be motivated by
         a desire to have the hearing aborted, rather than by any genuine
         material concern over the standard of interpretation.

         (6) It will be for the judge to decide whether a challenge to the
         quality of interpretation necessitates a check being made with a
         member of the Tribunal's administrative staff who has
         responsibility for the booking of interpreters. Under the current
         arrangements for the provision of interpreters, it may be possible
         for appropriate enquiries to be made by the administrative staff of
         the Language Shop (a quality assurance service run by the London
         Borough of Newham in respect of the Ministry of Justice's language
         contract), as to whether the interpreter is on the register and
         whether there is any current disclosable issue regarding the
         interpreter. The initiation of any such enquiries during a hearing
         is, however, a matter for the judge. In practice, it is unlikely
         that it would be necessary or appropriate to take such action. In
         most cases, if the standard of interpretation is such as seriously
         to raise an issue that needs investigating, the point will probably
         already have been reached where the hearing will have to be
         adjourned and re-heard by a different judge (using a different
         interpreter).

         (8) On an appeal against a judge's decision, even if it is
         established that there was or may have been inadequate
         interpretation at the hearing before the judge, the appeal will be
         unlikely to succeed if there is nothing to suggest the outcome was
         adversely affected by the inadequate interpretation. This will be
         the position where the judge has made adverse findings regarding
         the appellant, which do not depend on the oral evidence (Perera,
         paragraphs 24 and 34)."

The appellant's submissions

The appellant reiterated the FtT's reference to the incorrect date for the
Parole Board decision; the FtT's reference to the incorrect period of time
after leaving the military that the appellant had lived in Algeria; he
showed us a list of friends in the UK which had been ignored by the FtT; he
explained again his reasons for not appealing his sentence, the gist of
which was that he was advised that his prison sentence might be increased;
the fact that he had served in the logistics section of the Algerian Army,
which was particularly sensitive, although he accepted that he had not
referred to this matter before the FtT.  He also explained the reasons for
delaying leaving Algeria, because of difficulties in obtaining a visa.  He
referred to the sixteen years between 2004 and 2020 in which he had lived
in the UK and the friendships and family that he had established in the UK
in that period.  Having checked with the appellant each of the items in the
grounds of his appeal, we were satisfied that he had had every opportunity
to provide any additional comments he wished to make.

The respondent's submissions

In brief submissions, (without any criticism of Mr Tufan), in summary, to
the extent there were any initial errors identified in relation to the
conflation of articles 2 and 3 ECHR and humanitarian protection, and the
reference to not needing to consider these articles, or the protection
claim in the event that certification was upheld, they were not material.

We should be slow to overturn any First-tier Judge because of difficulties
in interpreting, (see headnote [8] of TS (Interpreters)). Unless we
identified any adverse effect on evidence, any appeal was unlikely to be
successful.  Mr Tufan then went to deal with each of the points in the list
of the appellant's grounds, each of which essentially related to the lack
of relevance or materiality.

Decision on error of law

We conclude that there are no material errors of law in the FtT's decision.
 Our reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

First, as Mr Tufan readily accepted, while there had been errors in the
FtT's reference to not needing to consider refugee status and articles 2
and 3 in light of the upholding the section 72 certificate, what is clear
is that the FtT fortunately then went on to consider in detail those very
same risks at �[51] to [60] of his decision.  As a consequence, whilst we
accept that they were clear errors, we are satisfied that they did not
render the FtT's decision unsafe, such that it should be set aside.

Dealing with the next issue of difficulties in interpretation, we
considered the FtT's reference at �[18] of his decision.  The FtT had
resolved this, in our view, in an exemplary way, as follows:

"At the beginning of the hearing I enquired of the appellant if he
understood the interpreter.  He told me he was having some difficulty
because the interpreter was not using North African Arabic.  The
interpreter explained that he had lived and worked with North African
Arabic speakers and was confident there was no real problem.  The appellant
agreed.  It was also apparent that the appellant spoke English to a degree.
 I kept a careful eye on the interpretation throughout the hearing and I
was satisfied that there was a fluent narrative between the appellant and
his interpreter.  The appellant raised no concerns at all about the
interpreter and I am entirely satisfied that the appellant understood
everything that was put to him and that the interpreter translated his
evidence to me efficiently, effectively and accurately."

In essence, the FtT in our view applied the authority of TS (Interpreters)
in a flawless way, checking and monitoring the appellant's understanding.
Moreover, considering headnote [8] of TS (Interpreters) and in particular
that an appeal would be unlikely to succeed if there was nothing to suggest
that the outcome was adversely affected by the inadequate interpretation,
even if, for one moment, we accept the criticism of interpretation (for
which there is no evidence), we conclude that there has been no adverse
effect in this case before the FtT, by reference to the grounds listed by
the appellant, as set out below.

The FtT's reference to the Parole Board decision in 2012 at �[42] is
clearly a typographical error in light of the FtT's earlier reference to
the conviction in 2014 (�[3]).  Nothing turns on the date of the decision
in the FtT's analysis, noting at �[43] that he accepted that the appellant
was a man of previously good character.

The appellant's reference to the FtT considering that the appellant had not
appealed against his criminal sentence was something which, despite his
assertions of an inability to do so, the FtT was unarguably entitled to
take into account.  Put simply, the FtT could not go behind the fact of a
criminal conviction, in the absence of an appeal, whatever the reason for
not appealing might be.

The challenge to the FtT's reasons at �[55] is similarly unsustainable, on
the basis that the appellant says that he had remained in Algeria for one
year and five months, but he says that the FtT had referred to two years.
The FtT clearly refers at �[55] to the period of 'about two years' and
there is no suggestion that it was exactly two years.  Nothing, in our
view, turns on the additional six months.

We similarly regard the challenge to the FtT's reference at �[56] to the
appellant's brother serving 'a few years earlier' as opposed to a specific
reference to his military service in 1978 as not beginning to undermine the
FtT's findings on the protection claim, when there was no distinction in
that claim between those who had completed military service in the early
part of this century, as opposed to in the late 1970s.  In reality, the
appellant's real complaint is that he had wished that he had referred to
having worked in the logistics corps of the Algerian Army, but accepts that
he had not raised this with the FtT because of the lack of legal
representation.  The FtT cannot be criticised for that.

At �[64] the FtT was unarguably entitled to take into account the fact that
the appellant did not have family life for the purposes of article 8 ECHR.
We distinguish family life for the purposes of article 8, with the wider
sense of family life such as, for example, with adult cousins who are
British citizens, and the FtT was clearly considering in this case in the
context of section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
and whether there was a qualifying partner or children.  In those
circumstances, the lack of reference to adult cousins is one that clearly
would have made no difference and the FtT is not obliged to refer to every
piece of evidence or relationship in their decision.

Two final points arise.  The first is the appellant's unease about an
unidentified person being present during his hearing before the FtT.  As Mr
Tufan rightly points out, hearings of this nature are typically ones which
are held in public and the FtT cannot be criticised for continuing the
hearing in public when there had been no request, nor would it be usual,
for the hearing to be held in private.

Finally, reference is made by the appellant stating that he would like more
time to get solicitors but as he candidly admits now, he has sought to get
legal representation but does not have the financial means to do so.  In
these circumstances, there cannot be any criticism of the FtT for
proceeding with the hearing simply on the basis that the appellant would
ideally wish to be able to afford legal representation.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of any
errors of law such that the decision is unsafe and should be set aside.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal stands.

The anonymity directions will continue to apply



Signed J Keith                  Date:  4th November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
