
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08523/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th December 2018                     |On 09 January 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Muzira, solicitor, Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a citizen of Iran whose appeal (that he required
international protection) was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes
in a decision promulgated on 3rd October 2018.

The judge noted that the Appellant was involved in a land/property dispute
in Iran and she placed very significant weight on expert evidence provided
by Mr Kakhki.  As a consequence of that, she did not consider the two
documents relied upon by the Appellant in respect of the claimed
allegations made by a Mr Yaghoubi to be reliable.  The judge went on to
find that the claimed accusations by Mr Yaghoubi against the Appellant were
fabricated by the Appellant (paragraph 56) to found a protection claim.

In assessing the risk on return, the judge noted that the Appellant had not
shown that allegations of anti-Islamic behaviour and/or activities had been
made against him or that he had ever come to the attention of the Iranian
authorities for any reasons.  It was not suggested that he had ever
converted to Christianity.  He had never been involved in any political or
religious movement, organisation or activities that would be considered to
be against the Islamic State of Iran.  He stated in live evidence
(paragraph 62) that he did not attend the mosque whilst living in Iran and
that religious practice was something personal in Iran and nobody notices
who practises and who does not.  The judge noted that this was consistent
with the background country information relied on by the Appellant.

The judge noted that there was no suggestion in this case that the
Appellant had ever been or intended to be publicly pro-atheist or anti-
Islamic or that he wished to express any such views publicly.  Indeed, from
his evidence it was apparent that he has no real interest in religious
beliefs.  The judge went on to refer to HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 and RT
(Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38, which were pleaded in support of his claim.
However, the judge noted that this was not a case in which the Appellant
would be expected to conceal any belief or characteristic on return.  There
was nothing he would have to conceal.  He had never had to feign religious
beliefs previously in Iran.  He did not attend a mosque or take any
positive steps to seek to demonstrate that he was a practising Shia Muslim.
 He had not come to the attention of the authorities because of this and
from the background information it was clear that there are many other
Iranians who are in the same position as him.  For those reasons the judge
went on to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

Grounds of application were lodged and it was submitted that the judge had
misunderstood the essence of the Appellant's claim that he would be at risk
on return because he was agnostic.  He had said in paragraph 38 of his
statement that it was against his fundamental human rights to require an
agnostic like himself to "pretend to be a religious believer" in order for
him to avoid persecution at the hands of the authorities.  Although the
judge had referred to some background evidence at paragraph 63 of the
decision that same background evidence did indicate that it was illegal to
identify as atheist or non-religious and that Iran was a country where
being an atheist was punishable by death.  On the facts of this case the
Appellant did identify as atheist and being non-religious and therefore
arguably fell into the category of those who would be at risk on return.
Reference was made to HJ (Iran) and RT (Zimbabwe).

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey, who
noted that the judge had said that there was nothing he would have to
conceal and arguably she had fallen into error in her assessment of the
application of the principles of HJ (Iran) and RT (Zimbabwe) to a person
(like the Appellant) who holds no beliefs.

A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Home Office, saying that the decision
was a very well-reasoned one and the judge had accepted the expert evidence
concerning the documents.  It was said that the judge had dealt in some
detail with the HJ (Iran) point and it was submitted that the challenge was
no more than a disagreement with the valid and reasoned findings of a Judge
of the First-tier Tribunal.

Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.  Before me, Ms Muzira
relied on her grounds.  While the judge had found that a part of the
Appellant's claim was a fabrication this was in fact a two-limbed approach
being taken by the Appellant and the judge had conflated the limbs and made
an error in law.  As such, it was appropriate to set the decision aside and
remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the narrow issue of risk on
return caused by the fact that the Appellant was undoubtedly an agnostic.

For the Home Office, Mr Walker relied on his Rule 24 notice.  There was no
error in the judge's approach, who had dealt with all matters, and the
decision should stand.

I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

The judge noted that the Appellant had provided various documents from
civil court proceedings, which he claimed were related to land he owned in
Northern Iran.  He obtained an expert report from Mr Kakhki, who was asked
to comment on the authenticity of the documents.  Much of the decision of
the judge is concerned with the property dispute and the documents which
were provided by the Appellant to support his account that he would be at
risk on return because of that.  However, as noted above, Mr Kakhki did not
accept that all the documents concerned were reliable and the judge
concluded that the accusations put forward by the Appellant were fabricated
by him (paragraph 56).

There is no challenge to those findings that the Appellant has fabricated a
very significant part of his claim.

The judge dealt with the risk on return at paragraphs 60 to 68 inclusive.
The judge noted that Iran was one of thirteen countries in the world where
being an atheist was punishable by death.  Importantly, in paragraph 65 the
judge noted that there was no suggestion in the case that the Appellant had
ever been, or intended to be, publicly pro-atheist or anti-Islamic or that
"he wishes to express any such views publicly.  Indeed, from his evidence
it is apparent that he has no real interest in religious beliefs."  The
judge did not accept that allegations had been made against him in court
proceedings by Mr Yaghoubi and because of that did not consider that there
was a serious possibility that he would come to the attention of the
Iranian authorities as an apostate or one who is expressing anti-Islamic
beliefs.

It may be that the judge went further than was prudent in concluding that
this was not a case in which the Appellant would be expected to conceal any
belief or characteristic on return and noting that there was nothing he
would have to conceal but, against that, the judge did say that he had
never had to feign religious beliefs previously in Iran.  He did not attend
a mosque or take any positive steps to seek to demonstrate that he was a
practising Shia Muslim.  He had not come to the attention of the
authorities because of this and from the background information it was
clear that there are many other Iranians who are in the same position as
him.

The essence of the Appellant's account was that he faced persecution
because of the land dispute and the accusations made against him by Mr
Yaghoubi. However, those accusations were found to be fabricated by the
Appellant.  I repeat that the core of his claim has been based on the
proposition that he faces persecution in Iran because of his land dealings
and the accusations by Mr Yaghoubi, which have been proven to be unsound
and untrue.

On the second limb of his claim namely that he is an agnostic the judge
addressed this issue and found correctly - and contrary to what was said by
the Appellant in paragraph 38 of his witness statement mentioned above -
that he had not been required to pretend to be a religious believer. In
that witness statement the Appellant says (paragraph 10) that his problems
in Iran as a result arose of accusations that he was promoting Christianity
which the judge found to be a fabrication. His witness statement
concentrates on his property dispute and the false allegations taken
against him; there is no detail in his witness statement to the effect that
he is prevented from expressing an opinion because, as an agnostic, he has
a fear of persecution.  His evidence, as found by the judge, is that he has
no interest in any of these matters.

The judge dealt more than adequately with the risk on return and for clear
and coherent reasons concluded that there was no such risk. In so doing the
judge took the full profile of the Appellant and his evidence into account
and in my view, was entitled to find as she did.

As such, there is no error of law in the judge's decision, which must
stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed     JG  Macdonald                                Date  19th  December
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
