
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08935/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 16 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     J L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Griffiths, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  Appellant's  appeal
    following my error of law decision promulgated on 27  August  2019,  in
    which I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred  in
    law.  While setting the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  aside,  I
    specifically preserved all relevant findings of fact.   The  First-tier
    Judge had found the Appellant to be an entirely credible  witness.   In
    addition,  I  stated  that  the  medical  evidence   which   had   gone
    unchallenged throughout was to be assessed on that basis when a resumed
    hearing took place.

 2. In preparation for the resumed hearing I issued  directions  that  both
    parties were to  file  and  serve  skeleton  arguments.   Both  parties
    complied. I am grateful to both  representatives  at  the  hearing  for
    their assistance.

 3. By way of very brief summary, the Appellant is a  gay  man  of  Mexican
    nationality.  It is right to say that he has had  horrific  experiences
    during the course of his life in various places that he has  sought  to
    reside.  His experiences have been at the hands of both state and  non-
    state actors.  On any view this man has  suffered  serious  persecution
    for simply being who he is.



The hearing

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  Although  he  did  not  give  oral
    evidence, I confirm that I was treating his evidence as a whole in  the
    context of him clearly being a vulnerable individual within the meaning
    of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note 2 of 2010.

 5. In addition, the hearing was held in camera, in light of the  sensitive
    nature of the issues arising in this case.

 6. Ms Holmes, who in my view has adopted an entirely fair position in this
    case, sought to rely on the Respondent's skeleton argument (prepared by
    another Senior Home Office Presenting Officer) and confirmed  that  she
    had nothing further to add.

 7. Ms Griffiths relied on her detailed skeleton argument and elaborated on
    certain matters arising therefrom. At my invitation, she also responded
    to issues arising from the  Respondent's  skeleton  argument.   All  of
    these submissions are set out fully in the Record of Proceedings.



Findings and Conclusions

 8. I begin by re-stating the important fact of the  complete  preservation
    of the First-tier Tribunal's credibility assessment of  the  Appellant.
    He was found to have given a  truthful  and  accurate  account  in  all
    respects.

 9. I adopt the positive credibility assessment  for  the  purposes  of  my
    remaking decision. Amongst other matters, the  Appellant's  experiences
    include the following:

           i. he was abused by his alcoholic father from a very young age;

          ii. he was then rejected by his father and then by his mother;

         iii. having been sent to an orphanage and then a  refuge,  he  was
              abused by other residents;

          iv. having lived  elsewhere  for  a  time,  he  returned  to  his
              original home area of Mexicali but was arrested by police  at
              his uncle's request. The police threatened him with rape;

           v. having then moved to Tijuana, he was sexually abused by men;

          vi. he then went illegally to the United States. Having formed  a
              relationship with a man there, before returning to Mexico;

         vii. the Appellant was forced to live in a  building  occupied  by
              drug users and dealers. When he  complained  to  the  police,
              they harassed him. He was assaulted by  other  residents.  He
              tried to get into the United States once again, but failed;

        viii. he was picked up  by  the  Mexican  police  and  taken  to  a
              location where he was raped by drug users;

          ix. the Appellant was subsequently tricked by a doctor, had money
              confiscated by the United States authorities when  trying  to
              enter country again, was abused public when back  in  Mexico,
              and was arrested by the police again  for  complaining  about
              his treatment

           x. he has been  the  subject  of  abuse  whilst  in  the  United
              Kingdom.

10. In addition, as is made clear in my error of law decision, the body  of
    medical evidence was unchallenged before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    nothing by way of adverse comment was raised by the Respondent  at  the
    error of law hearing (I shall  say  something  about  the  Respondent's
    skeleton argument on this issue, below).

11. Having regard to the medical evidence as a whole, placed in the context
    of the Appellant's credibility and having regard to the qualifications,
    methodology, and clear compliance with the duties  of  an  expert  when
    providing evidence, I place very significant weight upon the report  of
    Dr Rachel Thomas. In summary, she concludes that the Appellant  suffers
    from   moderate/severe   is   of   Major   Depressive   Disorder    and
    moderate/severe PTSD. In addition, Dr Thomas remarks on the following:

           i. exaggerated startle responses;

          ii. submissive posture and demeanour;

         iii.   appearing   very   childlike,   indicating    psychological
              vulnerability;

          iv. frequently biting his nails with  anxiety  and  stroking  his
              face in a dazed, self-soothing manner.

12. In Dr Thomas's view, an individual  with  the  Appellant's  history  of
    abuse and exploitation is  significantly  more  vulnerable  to  similar
    experiences in the future.

13. I place similar weight upon the evidence  from  Dr  Nick  Larbalestier,
    Consultant Physician at Guy's and  St  Thomas's  Hospital,  London.  He
    confirms the Appellant's diagnosis of HIV. As at January 2019, the  CD4
    count was 259, although upon presentation in September  2017  that  had
    been just 45 (with a normal  count  being  over  500).  They  had  been
    "profound damage" to the Appellant's immune system. The  letter  states
    that although the Appellant was beginning to respond to  antiretroviral
    therapy, it was "extremely important that he remains on  antiretroviral
    therapy" and that if the relevant  treatment  stopped,  the  CD4  count
    would "crash" in a matter of "weeks", with  a  life  expectancy  of  as
    little as 1-2 years. The author confirms  that  the  Appellant  is  "at
    immediate and ongoing  risk  of  both  "life-threatening  opportunistic
    infections and also malignancy". He does have some baseline  resistance
    in his  virus."  In  Dr  Larbalestier's  view,  the  Appellant  is  "an
    extremely vulnerable individual."

14. As to the country report from Steven Beckert, I  find  that  he  is  an
    individual eminently qualified to provide expert evidence on the issues
    that he has (he is currently the Culture Program Consultant and  Gender
    Focal Point at the UNESCO Country  Office  in  Mexico,  and  has  wide-
    ranging experience in gender  and  sexuality  matters).  I  place  very
    significant weight upon his evidence. In summary, Mr Beckert  concludes
    that there is serious and widespread discrimination against members  of
    the LGBT community in Mexico, including the capital city.  He  provides
    evidence on the availability of HI the treatment, concluding that  this
    is limited.



Risk in the home areas

15. The first issue to be dealt with is that of risk in the home area.   In
    this particular case, and this  is  of  some  significance,  there  are
    effectively two home areas, the first being  Mexicali  and  the  second
    being Tijuana.   It is  self-evidently  the  case  that  the  Appellant
    suffered very serious persecution in both of these locations.  This ill-
    treatment related to both actual harm and very  serious  discrimination
    and emanated from both the authorities and members of the public.  With
    the past experiences in mind, having regard to paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the expert report from Mr Beckert, and  in  view  of
    the relevant country information referred to in Ms Griffiths'  skeleton
    argument, it is highly likely  that  the  Appellant  would  once  again
    suffer persecution by reason of his sexuality if he were to  return  to
    either of those two home areas.

16. I say this of course in the context of the  very  important  principles
    set out in HJ (Iran) [2010] 3 WLR 386, namely  that  the  Appellant  is
    entitled to live as an openly gay man and it is abundantly  clear  that
    if he were to try and conceal this it would be simply in order to avoid
    the awful treatment that he has suffered in the past.

17. It is equally clear that  he  would  be  unable  to  obtain  sufficient
    protection from the authorities.  This is  in  light  of  what  he  has
    experienced in the past (when he suffered abuse having  approached  the
    police) and the current situation as set out in the expert  report  and
    country information.

18. It is right to say that the Respondent has not put up  any  substantive
    opposition to the existence of risk in the home area.

19. On the same factual matrix, the Appellant's removal would place  an  ad
    real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3.



Risk elsewhere in Mexico

20. The second issue for me to address is that of the existence of  a  risk
    elsewhere in Mexico, specifically Mexico City, where it is said by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant could find a safe haven.

21. In assessing  this  issue,  I  have  regard  to  the  Appellant's  past
    experiences in a number of locations within Mexico.  It  is  of  course
    the case that there may be a risk in another part of the  country  that
    does not emanate from the same people who have persecuted  him  in  the
    past.  I take into account once again the expert report from Mr Beckert
    (in particular, paras 65-81), the country information referred to in Ms
    Griffiths' skeleton argument, and the principles set out in HJ  (Iran).
    The fact of past persecution is also relevant to future risk elsewhere.
    Of significance too is the fact, as I find it to be, that the Appellant
    is a particularly vulnerable individual, given both  his  physical  and
    mental health problems, both of which are, on any view,  very  serious.
    This vulnerability is not simply by virtue of  the  way  in  which  the
    Appellant sees himself and his place in the world, but also how he will
    be perceived by others.

22. The Respondent's skeleton argument at paragraphs 5 and  6  are,  in  my
    view, highly generalised, include  certain  matters  which  are  either
    irrelevant or misplaced, and do not include a proper  analysis  of  the
    Appellant's actual circumstances when taken on a cumulative basis.  For
    example, laws relating to same sex marriage, LGBT-friendly  venues,  or
    events such as gay pride marches simply do  not  have  any  significant
    bearing on the  issue  of  risk  to  this  particular  individual.   In
    addition, whilst formal measures seeking to prohibit discrimination  on
    the basis of sexuality may exist, the expert evidence indicates that in
    reality they have little material effect. Furthermore,  the  particular
    facts  relating  to  the   Appellant's   past   experiences   and   his
    circumstances  on  return  make  it  extremely  unlikely   that   anti-
    discrimination laws have any positive bearing on him.

23. On the facts of this case, I conclude that there will be  a  risk  from
    the police in Mexico City. I base this in part upon the  fact  of  past
    persecution as an indicator of future risk, in  light  expert  evidence
    from Mr Beckert, and the Appellant's particular vulnerability, which is
    likely to make him what could crudely be described as an easy target.

24. It is quite apparent that the Appellant would  not  receive  sufficient
    protection from the Mexican authorities in respect of what I considered
    to be the  reasonable  likelihood  of  risk  emanating  from  non-state
    actors. His past experiences clearly show that the authorities have not
    simply  declined  to  assist  him,  but  have  on   occasion   actively
    participated in causing him harm.

25. On return, his overall circumstances would if anything  be  worse  than
    they had been in the past (bearing in mind  his  serious  physical  and
    mental health problems) and it is highly likely that what had  befallen
    him in the past would be repeated.

26. Taking all relevant matters into account I conclude  that  there  is  a
    risk of either actual harm or very serious discrimination amounting  to
    persecution in Mexico City.

27. Therefore, the Appellant is a refugee.

28. On the same  factual  matrix,  the  Appellant  succeeds  on  Article  3
    grounds.



Internal relocation

29. If there is no risk to the Appellant in Mexico City, I turn to consider
    the alternative issue of internal relocation to the capital.  In  doing
    so I apply all of the relevant factors as summarised helpfully  by  the
    Court of Appeal in the recent decision of AS (Afghanistan) [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 873.  I take into account what is said in the report of Mr Beckert,
    the country information, and the medical reports from Dr Thomas and  Dr
    Larbalestier. I then have regard to all  of  the  Appellant's  relevant
    characteristics, including the following:

           i. his sexuality;

          ii. his wish to live openly as a gay man;

         iii. what has happened to him in the past;

          iv. the "rampant" homophobia in Mexico City;

           v. the effect of this discrimination  on  the  ability  to  find
              legitimate employment and to access reasonable accommodation;

          vi. the prevalence of serious attacks against members of the LGBT
              community in the capital;

         vii. his lack of education;

        viii. his serious physical and mental health problems;

          ix. his lack of any social or familial support network;

           x. his significant  overall  vulnerability  and  the  manifestly
              severe impact upon him having to attempt to establish himself
              and then to move on a day-to-day basis;

30. Taking  all  of  these  individual  characteristics  into  account  and
    combining them with expert evidence  (both  medical  and  country),  it
    would clearly be unduly harsh for this Appellant to relocate to  Mexico
    City.

31. On this alternative basis, the Appellant is a refugee.

32. The absence of an internal relocation option means that  the  Appellant
    is able to succeed on the Article 3 as well.



The Article 3 medical claim

33. It is quite clear that the Appellant's physical  health  constitutes  a
    very serious matter and the same applies to his mental health.   It  is
    apparent to  me  that  the  Respondent  has  effectively  analysed  the
    Appellant's case by artificially separating these two issues, at  least
    to a large extent.  In my view they must be viewed  cumulatively,  with
    the effect of one on the other  being  of  central  importance  to  the
    overall assessment of this aspect of  his  case.   In  particular,  the
    overall impact on both aspects of his health on return as that  relates
    to: (a) his ability to actually  access  any  treatment  which  may  in
    theory be available; (b) maintain even a reasonable existence  anywhere
    in Mexico with regard to functioning on  a  social  level;  (c)  having
    access to legitimate employment, public services and accommodation.

34. There is a further issue, which is the  ability  of  the  Appellant  to
    maintain access to treatment over the course of time.   To  put  it  in
    rather crude terms, simply being able to walk through  the  door  of  a
    clinic on one occasion and potentially obtain some  medication  is  not
    enough.  The Appellant needs  significant,  appropriate  and  long-term
    help for both aspects of  his  health  conditions.   In  light  of  his
    overall circumstances,  such  as  they  are  very  likely  to  be,  the
    Appellant's ability to access initially and then  maintain  appropriate
    treatment for his serious mental and physical conditions is  remote  in
    the extreme.

35. With respect to the Respondent's skeleton argument, the points made  in
    paras 7 and 8 are in my view misconceived. First  they  do  not  engage
    with the combined effect of the Appellant's overall medical and  socio-
    economic circumstances upon return to Mexico. For example, it is highly
    likely that the Appellant's mental health will rapidly deteriorate upon
    return simply as  result  of  that  state  of  affairs.  Second,  this,
    combined with his sexuality and lack of social and/or familial support,
    will  significantly  undermine  his  ability  to   find   work   and/or
    sufficiently fixed accommodation. Therefore, even on  the  Respondent's
    own arguments arising from  the  fairly  thin  evidence  cited  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter (which is itself subject to what I  consider
    cogent criticism by Ms Griffiths  in  her  skeleton  argument),  it  is
    really very  unlikely  indeed  that  the  Appellant  will  be  able  to
    initially access and then maintain treatment appropriate  to  his  HIV.
    These same set of circumstances  will  also  effectively  preclude  the
    Appellant from accessing and then maintaining appropriate treatment for
    his mental health. In this way, there is highly likely to be a downward
    spiralling of his overall health.

36. This is a rare case which reaches the very high  threshold  established
    in N is met. It is highly likely that the Appellant would face  a  very
    serious and rapid deterioration in his mental  health.  This,  combined
    with consequent inability to generate financial  resources,  is  highly
    likely to lead to, at very least, a material interruption  in  his  HIV
    treatment. In turn, he will be exposed to  life-threatening  infections
    and his CD4 count is likely to plummet.

37. There is also an issue arising  out  of  Paposhvili  41738/10  and  now
    Savaran 57467/15 regarding  procedural  safeguards.   The  Respondent's
    response to the Appellant's medical  claim  has  been  generalised  and
    inadequate.  References  to  the  potential  availability  of   certain
    medications has been stated in, for example, the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, but there clearly  had  been  no  individualised  and  specific
    attempts to obtain assurances of one sort or another in respect of  the
    particular type of treatment required by  this  individual  as  regards
    both his physical and mental health conditions.

38. The evidence produced by the Appellant, at the very least,  presents  a
    strong claim to reach the Article 3 threshold.  The  absence  from  the
    Respondent  of  any   individualised   assessment   and/or   assurances
    (including whether or not this particular Appellant would  be  able  to
    access the appropriate treatment in Mexico) need me  to  conclude  that
    the Appellant is entitled to succeed  on  this  alternative  Article  3
    basis.



Suicide risk

39. The next issue is that relating to the  risk  of  suicide.   The  first
    point to make on this issue is that I do not regard  there  to  be  any
    contradiction within the report of Dr Thomas.  As I  read  her  report,
    specifically the passages referred to in para 12  of  the  Respondent's
    skeleton argument, the author is at one stage stating  that  she  could
    not specify the extent of a deterioration  in  the  Appellant's  mental
    health, whereas latterly she confirms that she  was  clear  that  there
    would be a crisis were he to be forcibly removed.  These two statements
    are compatible.  A crisis can  of  course  involve  varying  levels  of
    severity, and all Dr Thomas is saying is that she is unable to  predict
    that level. However, in light of the evidence as a whole it  is  highly
    likely that there would be a crisis.  That crisis would have to be seen
    in the  context  of  the  Appellant's  experiences  in  the  past,  the
    objectively justified  perception  that  he  would  find  it  extremely
    difficult  to  secure  appropriate  work  and/or  accommodation  and/or
    receive  other  public  services  and/or  have  access  to  appropriate
    treatment for one or other or both of his  health  conditions.   It  is
    also of course important that, on my findings, the Appellant's fear  of
    persecution (or at the very least pervasive  discrimination)  is  well-
    founded.

40. Having regard to the criteria set out in  J  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629,  I
    conclude that this is an exceptional case in  which  the  risk  of  the
    Appellant taking his own life is sufficiently high for him  to  succeed
    on this basis.



Para 276ADE(1)(vi)

41. The final matter is that relating to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The threshold of very significant  obstacles  is  a
    high one as stated in Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -
    compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC)  and  in  assessing
    the issue of integration I undertake a broad,  evaluative  judgment  in
    line with the guidance in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at  paragraph  14.
    The relevant factors have been set out earlier in my  decision  and  do
    not need to be repeated. The Appellant is an individual  who  has  been
    ostracised and persecuted by  Mexican  society  when  he  last  resided
    there.  Problems have emanated from both  members  of  the  public  and
    state authorities.  He has  very  serious  health  conditions.   It  is
    extremely likely that he will be perceived in a way that will  attract,
    at the very least, serious discrimination.   I  conclude  that  on  any
    legitimate review the Appellant would not be seen  as  an  insider  and
    would not be able to make himself an insider into Mexican society if he
    were to be returned.  It is highly likely that he  will  be  forced  to
    live  on  the  periphery  of  society  and  be  subject  to   harm   or
    discrimination that would prevent him from living anything  approaching
    a reasonable existence in that country.

42. The Appellant is able to succeed on this final basis as well.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and  it  has
been set aside.


I remake the decision by allowing the  Appellant's  appeal  on  the  grounds
that the Respondent's refusal of his protection claim  is  contrary  to  the
United Kingdom's obligations under  the  Refugee  Convention  and  that  the
Respondent's refusal of the human rights claim is unlawful under  section  6
of the Human Rights Act 1998.




Signed   [pic]         Date: 13 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08935/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     J L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Griffiths, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckwell ("the judge"), promulgated on 8 March 2019,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 7 July 2018, which in turn had refused his  protection  and
    human rights claims.

 2. In summary, the basis of those claims was that the Appellant, as a  gay
    man, had suffered persecutory treatment in Mexico at the hands of state
    and non-state actors.  He had encountered  these  problems  in  various
    places within his home country  and  was  in  fear  of  similar  events
    occurring should he be returned there.  In addition, due to  particular
    health conditions, he claimed that his return to Mexico  would  violate
    Articles 3 and/or 8 ECHR.



The judge's decision

 3. The judge found the Appellant's account of past events to  be  entirely
    credible.  However, he did not regard the Appellant's past  experiences
    as amounting to persecution, either on the part of the  state  or  non-
    state actors.  Without making a specific finding on whether there would
    be a risk in the Appellant's home area, the judge dealt with the  issue
    of internal relocation, concluding that there was a viable option  open
    to the Appellant in respect of Mexico City.

 4. In respect of the medical issues, the  judge  considered  the  evidence
    from various professionals (all of which was unchallenged  before  him)
    but concluded that the high threshold in respect of Article 3  had  not
    been met and that there would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration  into  Mexican  society  with  reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal was duly dismissed.



The grounds and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of challenge make the following points.   First,  that  the
    judge had failed to carry out a holistic assessment of the  Appellant's
    particular  circumstances  when  considering  the  issue  of   internal
    relocation.  Second, that the judge's  conclusion  that  the  treatment
    metered out to him in the  past  did  not  constitute  persecution  was
    irrational.  Third, that the judge had failed to engage with  and  make
    findings on the country expert report.   Fourth,  that  the  judge  had
    failed to give any or any  adequate  reasons  in  respect  of  material
    matters relating to, amongst other points, the country information, the
    various elements of the medical claim and the issue of very significant
    obstacles. Fifth, that the judge had failed to  take  relevant  medical
    evidence into account and/or  conduct  a  holistic  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's healthcare needs.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  on  25
    June 2019.



The hearing

 7. At the hearing before me Ms Griffiths relied on the grounds  of  appeal
    and her skeleton argument.  She emphasised the fact that the judge  had
    not made any clear finding on the risk in the home area, but  that  the
    conclusion that there had not been persecution of the Appellant in  the
    past was erroneous and this was  relevant  to  that  issue.   She  also
    emphasised the Appellant's own  evidence  that  he  had  suffered  harm
    wherever he had gone, both within Mexico and indeed when he  had  lived
    in the United States for some time.  The harm had  emanated  from  both
    state and non-state actors.

 8. For the Respondent, Ms Willocks-Briscoe  accepted  (in  my  view  quite
    properly) that there were "some difficulties" in the judge's  decision,
    but nonetheless contended that his decision as a whole was sustainable.





Decision on error of law

 9. I conclude that there are a number of material errors  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision, all of which are clearly articulated in  the  grounds
    of appeal.

10. The first error relates to the issue of  internal  relocation.   It  is
    clear from what is said in paragraphs 81 and 82 that the  judge  failed
    to  carry  out  the  crucial  exercise  of  considering  all   relevant
    characteristics  of  the  Appellant  when  assessing  whether  internal
    relocation was a viable option.  With respect, what is  said  in  those
    two paragraphs is of a very generalised  nature  and  simply  fails  to
    engage  with  the  specifics.   The  error   is   certainly   material,
    particularly given the fact that the judge had found the  Appellant  to
    be an entirely credible witness and that  the  medical  evidence  stood
    unchallenged.   The  Appellant's  past  experiences  and  that  medical
    evidence of themselves constituted significant factors which had to  be
    weighed up when considering the viability of a relocation option.  This
    was simply not done.

11. I would add that the judge had not in fact reached a clear  finding  as
    to whether there would be a risk to the Appellant  in  his  home  area.
    However, given his consideration of internal relocation option  it  may
    be said that this was implicitly accepted. Even if  it  had  not  been,
    there is an obvious error as regards a failure to reach a conclusion on
    a core issue.

12. The second error of law renders the issue of risk in the home area,  at
    least in terms of the way the judge dealt with it, flawed in any event.
     A challenge based on perversity necessitates an elevated threshold. In
    this case I am satisfied that that threshold is met.  On the  basis  of
    the Appellant's credible evidence, it was in my view irrational for the
    judge to have described what happened  to  this  individual  simply  as
    "adverse  encounters"  or  "most  unfortunate  encounters"   with   the
    authorities. On any legitimate view, his past experiences (which  I  do
    not need to set out in any detail  here)  constituted  persecution  and
    treatment contrary  to  Article  3.   It  is  to  be  noted  that  this
    persecutory treatment occurred in various places, not simply  the  home
    area.

13. The third error relates to the report of Mr  Stephen  Beckert.   Whilst
    the judge made reference to that report earlier in his decision,  there
    is no engagement with it in terms of findings and  conclusions  in  the
    relevant  section  of  the  decision.   The  report  clearly  contained
    material evidence relating to  all  live  issues  in  the  appeal.  The
    judge's failure is therefore a significant error.

14. The reasons challenge is also made out. I do not propose to go  through
    each and every limb of the Appellant's argument, but I would  refer  to
    what is said in the grounds, as supported  by  the  skeleton  argument.
    Reasons may be concise, but reasons there must be, and  in  respect  of
    the matters set out under ground 4 the duty to  provide  them  has  not
    been discharged in this case.

15. The fifth and final error relates to the medical evidence.   There  has
    in my view been a failure to engage with what was actually said  within
    certain items of that evidence (for example the report from Dr Thomas),
    and also to undertake a cumulative assessment of the  effects  of  that
    evidence in respect of the suicide issue, what may be described as  the
    N issue,  and  as  that  evidence  related  to  the  question  of  very
    significant obstacles under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

16. In light of the foregoing, the judge's decision must be set aside.

17. However, it is quite clear to me that the positive credibility findings
    made by the judge  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  account  of  past
    experiences should not be disturbed.  It is also the case that the body
    of medical evidence was unchallenged before the judge and there  is  no
    sound reason for this evidence not to be  accepted  at  face  value  in
    respect of the expert opinions and conclusions set out therein.

18. What needs to be done when this matter is  re-heard  is  to  apply  the
    factual basis of  the  Appellant's  credible  history  to  the  country
    evidence on Mexico, to consider and make findings on the country expert
    report,  to  reach  conclusions  based  on  the  unchallenged   medical
    evidence, and to place all of this into the appropriate legal framework
    relating to both the protection and the human rights claims.  This will
    involve a degree of fact-finding but in my view, it does not call for a
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  exercise  can  properly  and
    fairly be undertaken in the Upper Tribunal.

19.  Having  considered  the  Appellant's  particular  vulnerabilities,   I
    conclude that this matter should be reserved to myself  for  a  resumed
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, to be listed as soon as  is  practicably
    possible.  I will issue directions to the parties. In summary this will
    involve  skeleton  arguments  and  the  submission  of  any  additional
    evidence in good time.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and I set  it
aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed  hearing  to  be  listed  in  the  Upper
Tribunal.

I make an anonymity order



Directions to the parties

      1. The Appellant shall, no later  than  14  days  before  the  resumed
         hearing, file and serve a skeleton argument addressing all relevant
         issues (subject to what I have said in my error  of  law  decision)
         and containing references to the evidence and relevant case-law;


      2. Any further evidence relied on by the Appellant shall be filed  and
         served at the same time as the skeleton argument;


      3. The Respondent shall, no later  than  7  days  before  the  resumed
         hearing, file and serve a skeleton argument addressing all relevant
         issues (subject to what I have said in my error of law decision).




Signed   [pic]             Date: 20 August 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
