
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08948/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     U R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies to both the
appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Background

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 15 August 1979.  He
arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 18 October 2008 and claimed
asylum.  That application was refused on 14 November 2008 and his appeal
was dismissed on 11 March 2009.  He was subsequently refused permission to
appeal.  He became appeal rights exhausted on 30 June 2009.

On 30 May 2013, further submissions were made on the appellant's behalf and
these were refused on 17 March 2014.  A second set of further submissions
were made on 28 May 2014 but these were again refused on 21 July 2016.

Most recently, further submissions were made on the appellant's behalf on
18 October 2016.  On 4 July 2018, the Secretary of State refused the
appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights
grounds.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mathews).  Before
Judge Mathews, the appellant relied, in essence, upon three bases for his
claim.  First, he claimed that he was at risk because of his activities
with the LTTE in Sri Lanka prior to coming to the UK.  Secondly, he relied
upon his sur place activities in the UK having joined the British Tamil
Forum ("BTF") and the Transitional Government of Tamil Eelam ("TGTE") in
2014.  He claimed that he had been involved in diaspora activities,
including attending a demonstration on 4 February 2018 organised by the
TGTE outside the Sri Lankan High Commission in London.  He claimed that
those activities would put him at risk on return to Sri Lanka and that in
June 2017, the Terrorist Investigation Department ("TID") had visited the
home of the appellant's cousin in Sri Lanka enquiring about the appellant's
activities in the UK.  Thirdly, the appellant relied upon his mental health
problems and that he was at risk of committing suicide if he returned to
Sri Lanka.

Judge Mathews rejected the first basis of the appellant's claim, which had,
in fact, been rejected in the earlier appeal in 2009.

As regards the second basis of the appellant's claim, namely his sur place
political activity in the UK, Judge Mathews also rejected that basis of his
claim.  Judge Mathews rejected the appellant's account that his cousin had
been visited by TID in Sri Lanka looking for the appellant.  Nevertheless,
Judge Mathews accepted that the appellant had attended demonstrations and
whilst he was involved with the TGTE or BTF in the UK, Judge Mathews found
that he did not have any "organisational or management role" - a
"significant" role -  which would put him at risk on return falling within
one of the risk categories in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

As regards the third basis of the appellant's claim, namely the risk of
suicide due to his mental health, Judge Mathews rejected that claim on the
basis that the appellant would have treatment available in Sri Lanka and
the risk, if any, to him did not reach the high threshold required for a
health claim.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on a number
of grounds.  On 2 January 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew)
granted the appellant permission to appeal.  In particular, the judge gave
permission on the basis that the judge arguably erred in law in assessing
the risk to the appellant due to his sur place activities in the UK.

The respondent did not file a rule 24 notice.

The Submissions

Before me Ms Jegarajah, who represented the appellant, focused her
submissions on grounds 1 and 2 (dealing with the assessment of the
appellant's risk based upon his sur place activities in the UK and the
application of GJ and others and also ground 4, which challenged the
judge's adverse finding in relation to the appellant's claim that his
cousin's home had been visited by the TID in June 2017 looking for the
appellant.  She placed no reliance on the other grounds, in particular no
challenge was mounted to the judge's rejection of the appellant's claim
based upon his LTTE activities in Sri Lanka or upon any risk to him as a
result of his mental health problems.

Ms Jegarajah, in her detailed submissions, contended that the judge had
failed to consider the relevant evidence before him concerning the risk to
an individual who had been involved in the UK with the proscribed TGTE.
She relied upon the Court of Appeal's decisions in UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
[2017] EWCA Civ 85 and KK (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 172.

In UB (Sri Lanka), the Court of Appeal concluded that a judge had erred in
law by failing to take into account evidence found in the then Home Office
guidance entitled "Tamil Separatism" (August 2014) and, in particular, two
letters from the British High Commission which are set out at [12]-[13] of
the judgment of Irwin LJ as follows:

"12. Annexed to the guidance is the text of two letters from the British
High Commission in Sri Lanka.  This material is authoritative and clearly
intended to be read with the guidance. The first letter is dated 16 April
2014:

'Proscribed Terrorist Groups

On 1 April 2014, the government of Sri Lanka announced the designation of
16 Tamil Diaspora organisations and 424 individuals under the UN Security
Council resolution 1373 on counter-terrorism.  The order was issued by the
Secretary of Defence.  The government asserts that this action has been
taken to stop attempts to revive the LTTE.  The BHC [i.e. British High
Commission] has asked the government of Sri Lanka to provide evidence to
support this decision.

Among the organisations proscribed are the Transnational Government of
Tamil Eelam (TGTE) and the UK-based Global Tamil Forum (GTF) and British
Tamil Forum (BTF).  When making the announcement on 1 April, Brigadier
Ruwan Wanigasooriya said that individuals belonging to these organisations
would face arrest under anti-terrorism laws ... [T]o date, there have been
no known arrests based on membership of one of the newly proscribed
groups.'

13.  The later letter is dated 25 July 2014 and the relevant text reads:

'The spokesperson from the DIE stated that returnees may be questioned on
arrival by immigration, CID, SIS and TID.  They may be questioned about
what they have been doing whilst out of Sri Lanka, including whether they
have been involved with one of the Tamil Diaspora groups.  He said that it
was normal practice for returnees to be asked about their activities in the
country they were returning from.

The spokesperson from the SIS said that people being 'deported' will always
be questioned about their overseas activities, including whether they have
been involved with one of the proscribed organisations.  He said that
members of the organisations are not banned from returning to Sri Lanka,
they are allowed to return, but will be questioned on arrival and may be
detained.'"

Irwin LJ dealt with the relevance of this material, in the context of it
not having been served prior to the hearing, at [23]-[25] as follows:

"23. If the material had been served, then the issue of TGTE membership
would have been of more significance.  As the matter stood, the FTT reached
no conclusion on the point.  The Appellant's argument is that, if it had
been accepted that he was a member, then the indication from the High
Commission's letters is that (1) he would be questioned, (2) he might be
arrested, and (3) he might be detained.  If detained, the guidance in GJ
points to a risk of mistreatment.

24.  In truth, consideration of the risk to the Appellant turns not merely
on him showing that he was actually a member of the TGTE, but relies on his
membership being detected on arrival in Sri Lanka.  There is no suggestion
that this Appellant is on any list of individuals of interest to the
authorities in Sri Lanka.  The objective findings by the FTT are clear that
any activity by the Appellant in this country, even if observed or
recorded, was low level and not likely to carry risks.  That activity
itself would not demonstrate membership of the TGTE.  In addition, I bear
in mind the very clear findings that the Appellant lied and exaggerated in
alleging mistreatment during his last visit to Sri Lanka, and thus his
credibility is low.

25.  For all these reasons, I have hesitated before reaching my conclusion
on this issue.  However, it seems to me that I cannot quite preclude the
possibility that these letters might affect the outcome, and thus that they
are 'material' to the decision in that sense."

Ms Jegarajah placed reliance upon this and submitted that Judge Mathews had
failed to engage with this material, which might have led him to find that
the appellant was at risk.

In addition, in relation to KK (Sri Lanka), Ms Jegarajah submitted that, on
reading that judgment, and looking at the risk to returning Tamils who have
been involved with the TGTE in the UK, there was no requirement that they
should have played a "significant" role or have a "significant" profile.

Ms Jegarajah placed reliance upon the Appellant's attendance at the
demonstration on 4 February 2018 and the material relied upon before Judge
Mathews that demonstrated the significance of this event where the defence
attach�, Brigadier Fernando, had come out of the High Commission building
and made threats towards the protesters, specifically making a throat-
slitting gesture.  The demonstration received wide coverage and video
coverage of it was readily available on the internet.  Ms Jegarajah
submitted that the judge had failed to consider this material and also what
was said in GJ and others at [336] concerning the Sri Lankan authorities'
monitoring of the Tamil diaspora including, she submitted, this event.

Finally, as regards the judge's adverse credibility finding in relation to
the Sri Lankan authorities' interest in the appellant, she submitted that
the judge had simply been mistaken in para 36 when he counted against the
appellant that his cousin had not mentioned to him that the TID had
contacted him looking for the appellant.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that that
was not the appellant's evidence, which was that his cousin had told him
that the TID had come looking for him.

In response, Mr Howells submitted that the current CPIN did not include the
two High Commission letters relied upon by the Court of Appeal in UB (Sri
Lanka).  He submitted that, in any event, the remittal by the Court of
Appeal in UB (Sri Lanka) was a hesitant one.  In relation to KK (Sri
Lanka), Mr Howells submitted that in that case the individual had not only
been involved with a proscribed organisation in the UK but had participated
in a serious conspiracy to smuggle Tamils into the United Kingdom.  That
distinguished it from the appellant's sur place activities in the UK.

Mr Howells submitted that the judge had found that the appellant was not a
formal member of the TGTE or BTF and, on the basis of those findings, he
was entitled to find that, applying GJ and others, the appellant did not
fall within a risk category.  He referred me to the relevant CPIN "Sri
Lanka: Tamil Separatism" (June 2017) at Section 12.2 dealing with the
treatment of returnees and paras 6.2.1 - 6.2.2 on de-proscription of Tamil
groups and para 6.3 on proscribed organisations.

In relation to ground 4, and the judge's finding in para 36 in relation to
the claimed visit to the home of the appellant's cousin, Mr Howells
accepted that the judge had been mistaken.  The appellant had said in cross-
examination that his cousin had spoken to him about the TID contacting his
cousin.  The judge had, therefore, been in error in counting against the
appellant's credibility on this issue that his cousin had not told him
about the visit.

Discussion

The risk categories acknowledged in GJ and others are well-known.  The risk
category within which the appellant's circumstances prima facie would merit
consideration would be whether he was a person who is, or is perceived to
be, a threat because they are or are perceived to have a significant role
in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism.

Subsequent to GJ and others, cases such as UB (Sri Lanka) have brought to
the fore a claim made by those involved (whether through membership or
attendance at meetings and demonstrations) with proscribed organisations
such as the TGTE in the UK.  Mr Howells referred me to the relevant
passages in Sections 6.2 and 6.3 concerned with de-proscription of Tamil
groups and proscribed organisations.  Paragraph 6.2.2 identifies that, in
relation to de-proscribed Tamil groups, the government of Sri Lanka no
longer considers membership or affiliation with them to amount to terrorism
or a terrorist activity.  It was not suggested before me that the TGTE has
been de-proscribed.  It remains a proscribed terrorist organisation.

The judge was specifically referred to the material emanating from the
British High Commission in the CPIN document for August 2014.  The judge
made no reference to it in his decision.  Its relevance was identified by
Irwin LJ at [23]-[25] of his judgment which I have set out above.  The fact
that the letters are no longer contained in the current CPIN document does
not remove them from the realm of available evidence which was relied upon
by the appellant before Judge Mathews.  Linked with other material dealing
with the Sri Lankan authorities' monitoring of diaspora activity, this
material potentially put the appellant at risk.  Its relevance was that if
he were returned to Sri Lanka, he would likely be asked questions about
whether he had participated in political activities in the diaspora.
Applying the well-known principles in HJ (Iran) & another v SSHD [2010]
UKSC 31 and RT (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38 the appellant could not be
expected to lie and, since the TGTE is a proscribed terrorist organisation
in Sri Lanka, the evidence suggests that he might face detention and
serious harm as a consequence (see GJ and others at [168]).

I acknowledge that the appellant's case was weakened by the judge's finding
that he did not accept that the appellant was a member of the TGTE or BTF.
But the judge did, at least, accept his involvement in certain political
diaspora activities, not least the highly charged events outside the Sri
Lankan High Commission in 2018.  At  para 38, whilst recognising that the
appellant had attended demonstrations, the judge was not persuaded that he
was a "formal member of either the TGTE or BTF".  There was a basis for
linking him to diaspora activities which might interest the Sri Lankan
authorities.

As I am persuaded that the judge erred in assessing the risk to the
appellant based upon his sur place activities in the UK, there is merit in
the decision being remade including all factual matters relevant to that.
It is accepted that the judge erred in para 36 of his decision, and then
made adverse credibility findings, having mistakenly understood the
evidence not to include the appellant's evidence that his cousin had told
him that the TID were looking for him.  Although the judge gave a number of
reasons why he did not accept that the appellant was a member of the TGTE
in the UK, especially at paras 30-35, the judge's rejection of supporting
documentation concerning the appellant's involvement with the TGTE in the
UK was, at least in part, linked to his adverse credibility finding in
relation to whether his cousin's home had been visited by the TID in Sri
Lanka.  So, at para 37 the judge said this:

"I find that these documents have no evidential value, and furthermore that
they have been prepared and submitted simply to bolster a claim, I find
that they are false in their contents and assertions hence the appellant
not having had any such interest in him by the TID mentioned to him by his
cousin, and hence the appellant, who must know of their truth or otherwise,
distancing himself from documents that could only have been sought if he
provided details of who should be approached.  The documents I find to be
destructive of any last vestige of credibility that the appellant may have
had after the previous decision dismissing his previous asylum claim, and
finding in unambiguous terms that he lacks in credibility."

In my judgment, it would be unsafe to disentangle the judge's reasoning in
para 37 such that his accepted error in para 36 can be said to have had no
material impact upon the remainder of his adverse credibility findings in
relation to the appellant's sur place activities in the UK.

Consequently, I accept in substance Ms Jegarajah's submissions on grounds
1, 2 and 4.

I set aside Judge Mathews' decision such that the appellant's claim based
upon his sur place activities must be remade.  That will require an
assessment of the evidence and findings concerning the appellant's role in
the UK including whether he is a member of the TGTE and/or BTF; his
involvement with those organisations, if any; and his attendance at
meetings and/or demonstrations in the UK against the Sri Lankan
authorities.  Some of these matters may no longer be in dispute.  In
addition, the appellant's credible and his claim that his cousin's home has
been visited by the TID must be assessed along with the evidence concerning
what, if any, interest the Sri Lankan authorities would have in the
appellant (including their knowledge of him and his activities) on return
to Sri Lanka.

In this regard, the material to which I was referred in UB (Sri Lanka) will
need to be assessed and its present import.  Further, the "significant"
involvement criterion in GJ and others was said in the context of LTTE
activities in Sri Lanka and not in relation to membership or involvement
with a proscribed organisation in the UK.  Whilst Mr Howells is correct
that KK (Sri Lanka) involved an individual who was not merely a member of
the TGTE but also had been involved in a conspiracy to smuggle Tamils into
the UK, there is no suggestion in the Court of Appeal's judgment that a
claim based upon this turned upon an assessment of whether it amounted to
"significant" involvement.  The categories of risk in GJ and others are not
closed (see MP (Sri Lanka) and another v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 at [50]).
 It will be a matter for assessment on remittal to what extent, if any, the
appellant's UK involvement with the TGTE creates for him a real risk of
serious ill-treatment by analogy to the risk category in GJ and others.

Decision

For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the
appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law and is set aside.

Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and applying para 7.2
of the Senior President's Practice Statement, it is appropriate, in my
view, that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

The issue for the First-tier Tribunal will be the appellant's claim based
upon his sur place activities.  The findings, which led to the dismissal of
his claim, based upon his claimed past activities with the LTTE stand.

Likewise, the appellant's claim based upon a risk of suicide also stands
dismissed.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on the above basis to be
heard by a judge other than Judge Mathews.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                          Dated 10 July 2019


