
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08109/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Columbus House, Newport                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                           |On 25 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


     Between

                                   S S H G
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Ms Lowis, Counsel
For the Respondent:        Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Egypt. His claim for asylum and
humanitarian protection made on 26 January 2018 was refused by the
Respondent on 21 June 2018. He appealed against this decision to the First-
tier Tribunal and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier tribunal Judge
Richardson in a decision promulgated on the 1 November 2018. The Appellant
sought permission to appeal this decision and permission was granted by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Blundell as he considered it arguable that the
Judge erred in finding that the Appellant's failure to flee to a
neighbouring country told against his credibility when this was not part of
the Respondent's case either in the refusal letter or at the hearing.
Further, whilst the two further grounds which related to the Judge's
findings about the Appellant's ability to obtain a copy of his arrest
warrant appeared less meritorious permission was nevertheless granted.

The Grounds

2.   Ground 1 alleges that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate
reasons for rejecting material background evidence in relation to an arrest
warrant. The Judge found that it was highly unlikely that had an arrest
warrant been issued it was not possible to obtain a copy. The Judge
referenced the Appellant's own legal career and contacts in Egypt who could
have checked for a warrant. It is asserted that she rejected the evidence
on the basis that Professor Joffe was simply relying on what the Appellant
told him that arrest warrants are only physically served when an arrest
warrant is actually carried out. It is asserted that Professor Joffe did
not rely on the Appellant's evidence that an arrest warrant was served at
the point the arrest was carried out but attributed his findings to the US
State Department report and extracts from the Penal Code quoted at page 34
of the report. It is asserted that as the Appellant was not arrested, the
arrest warrant would not have been served and there was no evidence before
the Judge to suggest that arrest warrants were otherwise publicly
accessible by third parties. It is said that the First-tier Tribunal did
not give adequate reasons for ignoring the evidence of the expert.

3.   Ground 2 alleges that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate
reasons for rejecting material background evidence in relation to the issue
of whether the Appellant would have been arrested at the airport when
leaving Egypt.  The Judge found that Professor Joffe's assertion that the
airports would not necessarily have been notified of the warrant was 'pure
speculation' as Professor Joffe did not claim to have knowledge of the
administration of the Egyptian Security department. She found that it was
more likely the case that the Appellant would have been placed on a stop
list at airports as soon as the security forces discovered that he was
missing at two addresses and his family did not know where he was.
Professor Joffe's evidence was that the arrest warrant would not
necessarily have been notified to airports, his name would not have
appeared on a stop list and thirdly even if his home had been searched
before he left Egypt the administrative procedures attendant on the
notification of ports and airports might not have been completed.

4.   It is argued in the grounds that not only was Professor Joffe
qualified to comment on the basis of his knowledge and expertise but also
his opinion was buttressed by evidence in the bundle. Further, it was not
incumbent on the expert to repeatedly confirm their specific expertise in
each narrow matter addressed in the report. It is submitted that in the
absence of any countervailing evidence the Judge did not adequately explain
why he was justified in dismissing the background evidence on this key
issue.

5.   Ground 3 asserts that the Judge's key finding that it was implausible
that the Appellant took the risk of leaving the country via the airport
rather than leaving the country via Jordan or Saudi Arabia was unfair as
these points were not put to the Appellant at the hearing or in the refusal
letter. The Appellant, it is asserted, would have had an answer to these
points.

The Hearing

6.   The appeal therefore came before the Upper Tribunal in order to
determine whether there was an error of law in the decision of Judge
Richardson and if so whether to set that decision aside.

7.   There was no Rule 24 Response. Mr Howells stated that the Respondent's
position was that there was no error of law. I heard submissions from both
representatives.  Ms Lowis relied on her skeleton argument. She submitted
that the main point in grounds 1 and 2 arising from the treatment of the
expert report was that it may be open to reject part of expert evidence
looking at the evidence in the round but the Judge had to give a reasoned
justification. The two main basis for rejection were erroneous. Professor
Joffe did not rely on the Appellant's account and did not speculate because
he was an expert. Looking at the issue of the arrest warrant at paragraph
12 onwards of the skeleton argument, at paragraph 15 to 22 Professor Joffe
looked at the basis of the Respondent's refusal and commented on the
plausibility of his responses. At paragraph 20 at p6 of his report in
relation arrest warrants it was his own expert opinion and that opinion was
supported. At p7 he concluded that the Appellant's claims were plausible
and considered his claim as a whole.

8.   With regard to the issue of the warrant and whether he would have been
able to leave the airport, Professor Joffe said at page 35 at paragraph 16
that in his view it was plausible that the warrant had not been issued
although planned or that he would not have a copy because one was only
given on arrest. It was not necessarily issued at airports. The Judge was
wrong to say that this was pure speculation. It was accepted that he was an
expert on Egyptian affairs generally and it was far more within his
expertise than that of the Judge himself. At paragraph 40 the Judge found
that it was more likely the case that he would have been placed on a stop
list at airports. The Judge had speculated and there was no evidence relied
on in support of this finding.

9.   In relation to Ground 3 and the credibility of an ability to flee to a
neighbouring country this did not form part of Respondent's case. It was
open to the Judge to come her own conclusions but it was never put to the
Appellant. This was not the kind of point that was an obvious point which
was adverse to credibility. It was an issue which the Appellant addressed
at paragraph 23 of his witness statement where he explained why he took the
airport and expressly stated the options. It was not put to him that he
should have travelled overland and had it been put he would have said that
he could not. There was no land border with either of the countries and he
would have had a response that the authorities of those countries were
supportive of the regime. It was clear from the Judgement that it did form
an important part of why the Judge found against him. There were other
errors which suggest that the decision should be considered as unsafe. At
paragraph 16 of the Judgement in setting out the law the Judge referred
firstly to his case of fear of persecution in Indonesia which was evidence
of lazy Judgment writing and at paragraph 34 having set out the Appellant's
case the Judge stated that on own evidence he did not engage in political
activity since the coup but he had. The decision as a whole was unsafe.

10.  Mr Howells submitted that it was clear from this determination that
the Judge was alive to the report from Professor Joffe and referred to it
in the findings.  Paragraph 29 showed that the Judge was aware of the
contents of the report that arrest warrants were only physically served
when arrests were carried out. The Judge said that this did not appear to
be the case with the Appellant that referred back to paragraph 6 (vi). The
Appellant moved his wife and child. At paragraph 29 Judge distinguished the
factual matrix from what the Appellant and Professor Joffe were saying and
it was open to him to refer to the Appellant's background at paragraph 35.
Those findings were open to the Judge on the Appellant's evidence that an
arrest warrant had been issued. In response to Ground 2 it was open to the
Judge to make finding at paragraph 39 about inconsistent behaviour. It was
also open to her to make the finding at paragraph 40 in relation to the
stop list because she noted what Professor Joffe said and found it
unlikely. The Judge was referring to his claim that the authorities were
well-aware before he left he was missing at two addresses. Mr Howells
accepted that it was not put at the hearing that he could alternatively
have gone to Jordan or Saudi Arabia and this appeared to have occurred to
the Judge after the hearing. It was not material because the Judge gave
other reasons why he was an economic migrant.

11.  The parties agreed that the appeal should be remitted for de novo
hearing if there was a material error.

Discussion

12.  The Appellant relied on the report of Professor Joffe, an acknowledged
expert who has frequently given evidence before the Upper Tribunal.
Professor Joffe addressed the issue of the arrest warrant at paragraphs 19,
20 and paragraph 43 of his report. In relation to Ground 1, the Judge
stated at paragraph 29 of the decision that Professor Joffe relied on and
repeated what the Appellant said. I find that the Judge was clearly
mistaken to say that Professor Joffe relied on what the Appellant said in
relation to the service of arrest warrants as at paragraph 43 of the report
he justified the conclusion that arrest warrants are handed to the intended
recipient on arrest. However, the Judge noted this evidence at paragraph 30
and the evidence cited in the report that the Egyptian Constitution
requires the issue of an arrest warrant prior to arrest but that in 2017
there were numerous reports of arrests without warrants. The Judge also
noted Professor Joffe's reference to the Amnesty international report that
referred to documented occasions in which police had detained individuals
after forcing their way into homes without producing an arrest warrant. The
Judge then correctly noted that the Appellant's case did not fall into
those categories because the Appellant claimed that an arrest warrant had
been issued possibly only 'verbally'. The Judge's reference to Professor
Joffe relying on the Appellant's evidence in respect of the arrest warrant
did not lead to any adverse credibility findings or any failure to take the
expert evidence in relation to the procedure for the issue of arrest
warrants into account. I therefore do not find that Ground 1 is made out.

13.  Ground 2 impugns the Judge's findings that Professor Joffe indulged in
speculation in relation to whether the airports would have been notified of
the warrant and the Judge's finding, contrary to the evidence of the expert
that it was more likely that the Appellant would have been placed on a stop
list at airports as soon as the security forces discovered that he was
missing at two addresses.  Professor Joffe gave his opinion at page 35 that
the Appellant's friend may have discovered that his arrest was planned but
that the warrant had not been issued. Because it had not been issued, he
states that it would not necessarily have been notified, for example to
airports, and his name would not have appeared on a stop-list. The latter
point is referenced by way of a footnote. Further, he states that even
though his home had been searched before he left Egypt, the administrative
procedures attendant on the notification of ports and airports might not
have been completed.

14.  Professor Joffe set out his qualifications and his expertise and
publications on the Middle East and North Africa at the beginning of his
report. He also set out his duty as an expert and that his opinions
represented his professional opinion. He also sets out that he has made
clear which facts and matters that refer to the appellant are within his
knowledge and which are not. Professor Joffe was therefore not, as the
Judge concluded at paragraph 32, speculating about administrative
procedures but drawing upon his professional knowledge and expertise. It
was not incumbent on Professor Joffe to specify precisely the basis of his
expertise in respect of every aspect of his opinion. I find that these were
matters within his knowledge in respect of which he was entitled to give an
expert opinion. He gave reasons for concluding that the arrest warrant may
not have been notified to airports and that the Appellant's name would not
have appeared on a stop list even though his home had been searched. The
Judge's finding that Professor Joffe was speculating in relation to stop-
lists led to a further finding, at paragraph 40, that it was more likely
that the Appellant would have been placed on a stop-list at airports as
soon as the security forces discovered he was missing at the two addresses
and his family did not know where he was. No background evidence is cited
for this conclusion which is contrary to the opinion of the expert.

15.  In the circumstances I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially
erred in finding that Professor Joffe's opinion was based on speculation
and in failing to give adequate reasons grounded in the background evidence
for replacing the expert's opinion with her own in relation to the
Appellant's name being on a stop-list. Ground 2 is therefore made out.

16.  The Respondent accepts that it was not part of his case that it
adversely affected the Appellant's credibility that he did not travel to
Jordan and Saudi Arabia overland and then fly from these countries. It is
also accepted that this was not put to the Appellant. In WN (DRC) [2004]
UKIAT 00213 the Tribunal held that it is not necessary for obvious points
on credibility to be put to the appellant, where credibility was generally
an issue in the light of the refusal letter or as a result of later
evidence.  However, the Tribunal said that where the point was important to
the decision but it was not obvious, or where credibility had not been
raised or did not obviously arise from new material, or where the appellant
was unrepresented, it was generally better to raise the points and this
could be done by direct questioning of the witness.

17.  This was not an obvious point and I find that it was one which should
have been put to the Appellant in order for him to give an answer and in
the absence of an opportunity to do so the adverse credibility finding was
not fairly open to the Judge to make.

18.  In light of the fact finding required and the agreement of the parties
I remit this matter for a de novo hearing before a Judge other than Judge
Richardson.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

I remit  this  matter  for  a  hearing  before  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Richardson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 18 March 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

