
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/08868/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Without a Hearing at Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 October 2020                         |On 11 November 2020             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     JS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the  Appellant  is  an  asylum  seeker  and  so  entitled  to
anonymity.

2. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of  State  that  he  is  not  entitled  to  leave  on  asylum  or
humanitarian protection or human rights grounds.

3. A similar appeal has been determined previously  unsuccessfully  and  the
appellant made a further application relying on further evidence.

4. Having read all of the papers I see no need  to  give  extensive  reasons
for my decision.

5. The appeal was identified as one  that  was  suitable  for  determination
without a hearing and the parties were asked to make  representations.   As
far as I am aware, the Secretary of State has not responded.

6. The appellant has made further submissions and  has  also  asked  for  an
oral hearing, pointing out the  desirability  of  interchange  between  the
parties.  That point is a perfectly proper point which is noted.  I am very
aware of the assistance that can come from interchange between the  parties
and indeed between the parties and the judge but the Rules do  not  mandate
an oral hearing although such a hearing before determination  is  certainly
customary.

7. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  is  quite
plain that the Tribunal decides whether or not to hold a hearing  but  must
have regard to any view expressed by  a  party.   Only  the  appellant  has
expressed any views and I do not find them persuasive in  this  case.   The
standard directions  provided  when  determination  without  a  hearing  is
contemplated is intended to go some way to  dealing  with  the  absence  of
interplay between the parties by providing for the service of a reply after
the Rule 24 notice has been served.  However, as the Secretary of State has
not served a Rule 24 notice this, and indeed the idea of interplay  between
the parties, becomes a little academic.

8. Having read the papers I have to say that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
just not come to terms with the  case.   The  appellant  has  produced  new
evidence.  It appears to be evidence that could  have  been  served  on  an
earlier occasion but he has given an explanation why that was not the  case
and has given expert evidence to add weight to his  assertion  that  it  is
genuine  documentation  intending  to  show  that  he  is  in  trouble   in
Afghanistan.

9. I do not wish to give the impression that I regard  this  as  weighty  or
compelling evidence.  That is not my present function.  I am here to decide
if there is an error of law and I am quite satisfied that the evidence  has
just not been considered except in the most superficial way and that is not
sufficient.  I cannot say that the evidence could not make a difference and
this is therefore a material error.

10. Indeed, although I do not propose to give  any  further  explanation,  I
find the grounds generally are made out and I find that the appeal  has  to
be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.  The point is that the appellant
has gone to the  trouble  of  preparing  further  evidence  which  he  says
supports his case.  He has a right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
which has just not engaged with his case.

Notice of Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I allow the  appeal  against  its
decision. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error  of
law and I direct that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.
                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 November 2020                |

