
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09101/2019
                                                               PA/09269/2019
                                                               PA/09271/2019
                                                               PA/09274/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2020 and 28 January   |On 11 August 2021                    |
|2021                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MILG
                                    SJLG
                                     ALG
                                    MALG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms L Mensah, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
                    Canter Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public to  identify  the  respondents,
hereinafter "the claimants", or any of them. Breach of this  order  can  be
punished as a contempt of court. I make this order  because  the  claimants
are asylum seekers and so are entitled to privacy.

2. The claimants are siblings.  They were born in 1986, 1988, 1992 and  2000
respectively.  The  first  three  claimants  are  sisters  and  the  fourth
claimant is their brother. These linked appeals, brought by  the  claimants
against a decision of the Secretary of State on 6 September  2019  refusing
them asylum, have previously been determined unsatisfactorily in the First-
tier Tribunal.  I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
directed that the case be heard again.  My reasons for finding an error  of
law are appended to this Decision and Reasons. It will be noted  from  them
that the First-tier Tribunal Judge believe much of claimants' evidence  and
those findings were not criticised by the Secretary of State.

3. The judge's decision to allow the appeal  was  wrong  for  two  important
reasons; it did not  identify  a  Refugee  Convention  reason  although  it
purported to allow the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds, and it did not
show proper consideration and evaluation of an expert report  or  otherwise
explain the conclusion that the claimants could not find a place of  safety
in El Salvador.

4. The hearing before me proceeded  on  submissions  only.   It  had  to  be
adjourned because Mr Melvin had  not  been  able  to  consider  the  expert
report.  My decision to adjourn produced a rather sharp reaction  from  the
claimants' solicitors who insisted that the report had been sent.   I  make
it plain that I never said to the contrary.   Mr  Melvin's  difficulty  was
that it had not come to his attention. The expert's report was  potentially
very important and it was right that he had considered the report  so  that
he could make such informed submissions as he wanted to do.

5. In very simple outline it is the claimants' case that they each fear  for
their safety in the event of return to El Salvador because  they  had  been
threatened by one of  the  main  criminal  gangs  that,  according  to  the
claimants, is influential throughout the country.  It has been  established
that two of  the  claimants,  I  think  the  first  and  second,  had  been
threatened directly by gang members and the other two  claimants  had  been
threatened indirectly with threats passed on through the first two.

6. I begin by looking carefully  at  the  expert  report.   It  is  dated  2
December 2019 and is the work of Dr Andrew Redden who writes  as  a  senior
lecturer in Latin American History at the  University  of  Liverpool.   His
relevant qualifications include a bachelor's degree in  Spanish  which  was
awarded in the first class, a master's degree  in  Latin  American  Studies
which he passed with distinction and a Doctorate  of  Philosophy  in  Latin
American History awarded in 2005.  I also note that from 2017 he started to
supervise a PhD being written concerning British aid to El Salvador.  He is
also particularly interested in a Salvadorian youth organisation  known  as
"Music for Hope" and has been involved since 2016 in creating a documentary
history of that organisation.  He is now also a trustee of that charity and
this research and  associated  work  means  that  he  typically  visits  El
Salvador at least once a year and claims to be in close  contact  with  co-
project workers.

7. His report  begins  by  explaining  how  disaffected  Central  and  South
Americans who had removed to the United States of America were dissatisfied
with  their  lives  there  and  tended  to  form  gangs.   There  was  mass
deportation of non-citizens back to Central and South America introduced by
immigration legislation in the USA in 1996 with the result  that  thousands
of Salvadorians were deported back to El Salvador taking their gang culture
with them.  The difficulties were recognised by  the  governments  but  the
solutions were ineffective.

8. He referred to a series of "iron fist" policies  implemented  by  Central
American governments  intending  to  increase  voter  confidence  in  their
ability to control crime but which actually caused the gangs to  reorganise
and become more effective as they developed  their  own  internal  security
measures to counteract the state.

9. El Salvador particularly suffers from a very high  homicide  rate  and  a
deeply entrenched gang culture.

10. In 2012 the Salvadorian government tried a different approach  based  on
good treatment of gang prisoners in exchange  for  better  gang  behaviour.
This saw some significant improvement  particularly  in  the  reduction  in
homicides in Salvador but the results did not  last.   Crudely  the  murder
rate in El Salvador in 2018 was approximately  50  times  higher  than  the
murder rate in the United Kingdom.

11. There was a new government in June 2019 and a  new  "iron  fist"  policy
involving the militarisation of the streets and poor districts and lockdown
in the prisons.  There was some apparent success including a  reduction  in
the murder rate and on one happy day in July, for the first time on a  long
while, no homicides were recorded in the country.

12. However, by September 2019, the murder rate  was  rising  again  and  Dr
Redden anticipated that the relative peace would prove to be a welcome  but
short lived blip.  He was aware the government claimed that its  "plan  for
Territorial Control" was a  new  policy  because  it  had  a  second  phase
involving social infrastructure investment.  Dr Redden did not regard  this
as particularly new and did not see how the funding could be sustained.

13. He explained in some detail how  gangs  are  highly  organised  and  can
communicate swiftly even within prisons and that their power is  such  that
the two main gangs have each been used, unofficially, by political  parties
to propagate a message.  He said that in Salvador there is no working class
territory that is not "controlled" by one of the  gangs  and  that  it  was
impossible for ordinary  citizens  to  avoid  contact  with  gang  members.
Particularly he said (page 9 of the report):

  "Individuals or families who escape from one region to another will  soon
  be investigated by the controlling gang.  If they  had  fled  from  MS-13
  territory to Barrio-18 territory  (or  vice  versa)  then  they  will  be
  suspected of spying and there is  a  very  high  chance  that  they  will
  quickly be eliminated.  Even if spying is known to be unlikely then  they
  may be tortured and/or killed simply to 'set an example' and as a  method
  of disseminating fear among residents of the community controlling by the
  opposing gang.  If people flee to territory control  by  the  same  gang,
  then the connections between cliques means  that  the  reason  for  their
  flight will soon be discovered and their lives  will  once  again  be  in
  danger."

14. He also suggested that young adults are  in  particular  danger  because
they had to carry an identity card that gives their  place  of  origin  and
therefore their place of nominal gang loyalty.

15. Extortion is a major means of funding.

16. He then addressed his mind to the role  of  the  National  Civil  Police
(PNC) and lack of protection.

17. Dr Redden described the Home Office view that El Salvador has  a  police
force that is  capable  and  willing  to  offer  protection  as  "a  common
misconception".  He said (page 11 of the report, page  38  of  the  bundle)
that whatever the reasons for this misconception,

  "for the entirety of the twentieth-century, right through to the  present
  day, Salvadoran policing has been based on  repression  of  those  deemed
  threats to the state rather than the protection of ordinary  citizens  or
  its own officers who find themselves targeted."

18. He then outlined how after  the  collapse  of  the  truce  in  2014  the
government created a militarised rapid reaction  special  forces  unit  but
that did not seem very different from a  police  commando  force  that  had
existed earlier.  However, it had  wider  powers.   Essentially  it  killed
people and the response was that attacks on the police increased.

19. Certainly in raw figures the  gangs  suffered  more  because  more  gang
members were killed but high numbers of police officers  were  still  being
assassinated and the gangs were not defeated.

20. He opined that experiences developed during the  civil  war  had  caused
the gang members to develop increasingly sophisticated strategies and based
themselves on organised guerrilla warfare.  This included  infiltration  of
legitimate state organisations.

21. Dr Redden was satisfied that  there  was  a  high  level  of  corruption
within the PNC and he described the government's attempts at  attacking  it
as "feeble".  Part of the problem  is  poor  pay.   He  had  no  confidence
whatsoever in the ability of the  state  to  protect  people  such  as  the
claimants.  He gave examples of the assassination of a police sergeant  and
the intimidation of a judge which he indicated were examples of  a  general
trend, not isolated incidents and suggested that if such people  could  not
be protected there was neither the resources nor  the  ability  to  protect
ordinary citizens.

22. He then considered the situation of returnees.  He recognised there  was
no systematic study on the fate of  failed  asylum  seekers  who  had  been
returned to El Salvador but found in 2014 84 people who  had  been  removed
from the United States and returned to Central America had  been  murdered.
This he believed was a trend that echoed an Amnesty International Report of
2016.

23. He quoted an Amnesty International Report saying:

  "In its research in all  three  countries  [El  Salvador,  Guatemala  and
  Honduras], Amnesty International found that states'  efforts  to  protect
  their returned citizens appeared to end the moment they walked out of the
  doors of reception centres and that no  effective  protection  mechanisms
  were in place."

24. Lest this was not sufficiently clear under  the  heading  "Insufficiency
of State Protection" at page 18 of the report, page 45 of  the  bundle,  he
said:

  "With respect to state protection, I can categorically state that, on the
  basis of the available evidence, there is no possibility that  the  state
  could or would be able to offer the protection to [the claimants]".

25. He rejected emphatically the Secretary of State's contention that  there
was a functioning police force.  He described it not as a functioning force
but  a  force  in  which   corruption   is   endemic,   with   insufficient
accountability and which can and did commit abuses with  virtual  impunity.
He gave by way of example that 559 members of the PNC had been arrested for
crimes including membership in extermination groups  and  the  disciplinary
force sanctioned 753 officers, 136 of whom were dismissed.  He pointed  out
that that means that 753 minus 136, that is 617, were  sanctioned  but  not
dismissed.  Clearly this is raw data but  he  did  not  regard  this  as  a
reassuring figure.  Dr Redden rejected the Secretary of State's  contention
that the "iron fist" crackdowns were reasons to be confident of the system.
 He said there had been many "iron fist" crackdowns and they had all failed
and he had no reason to think this one would do any better.

26. By way of further example he referred to key witnesses in  court  trials
under the state witness protection scheme being "routinely murdered".

27. He then addressed his mind to safe relocation.  He  regarded  return  to
anywhere in El Salvador as highly dangerous.  Most  of  the  territory  was
controlled by either MS-13 or Barrio-18.  In the event of their return they
would be noticed and enquiries would be made.  Return  to  the  wrong  area
could easily attract death as a result of being seen as an enemy spy.   The
risks for the fourth, male, claimant would be particularly severe for  this
reason.

28. The Secretary of State had talked about relocating in identified  places
including Chalatenango and Santa Ana or La Paz.  Dr  Redden  regarded  this
suggestion is based on  out  of  date  information.   The  murder  rate  in
Chalatenango had worsened significantly worse and  was  no  longer  at  the
figure suggested by the Home Office but was actually higher than the  place
where the claimants had lived.  Murder rates in the other two  places  were
also very high.

29. It would be very difficult to gain employment even if they were safe  in
any of those places.  Chalatenango particularly is one of the  poorest  and
undeveloped regions in the country.  They would have no income or means  of
obtaining income in  these  very  poor  areas  and  that  would  make  them
particularly vulnerable to control by the gangs.

30. I remind myself at the end of Dr Redden's report where he said:

  "It is also worth bearing in mind that someone who has to relocate due to
  the social conflict will be  unemployed  and  have  no  income  and  will
  therefore have to relocate to  the  poorest  areas  which  are  the  most
  dangerous  and  always  controlled  by  one  or  other  of   the   gangs.
  Unfortunately, there is no 'safe' part of El Salvador  when  someone  has
  received a direct threat from a violent group, or when someone wishes  or
  needs to escape extortion."

31. Mr Melvin criticised this  report  and  I  consider  that  below  but  I
outline now some of the other evidence in the claimants' bundle which tends
to show that Dr Redden was not out on a limb in his conclusions.  There  is
a reproduction of an article from the Washington Post dated 3  March  2019.
It referred to officers "bankrolled" by the United States  and  trained  by
FBI agents to take down MS-13.  At least nine officers were killed  in  the
first month of 2019 and now a number were fleeing the gang that  they  were
intended to  eliminate.   The  US  State  Department  had  spent  at  least
$48,000,000 to train police in El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras  between
2014 and 2017 and the US government said that  the  Salvadorian  government
with its support had "made significant  gains  in  the  area  of  security,
including reductions in homicides and every other category of island  crime
measured".  The fact remained that killing a police officer was  a  way  of
gaining respect.  He gave an example of a police officer seeking asylum  in
the US after the officer's child was threatened in school.

32. There  is  then  an  article  from  Doctors  Without  Borders  dated  25
September 2019 under the title "El Salvador  is  not  a  safe  country  for
refugees or asylum seekers".  Substance is given to the headline  and  that
the headline says it all.

33. The Human Rights Watch World Report 2019 on  El  Salvador  is  dated  17
January 2019.  It refers to El Salvador having one of the  world's  highest
homicide rates.  It confirms that gang members are present in at least  247
of the country's 262 municipalities and says:

  "they  enforce  their  territories'  borders  and   extort   and   gather
  intelligence on residents and those transiting these areas,  particularly
  around public transport, schools, and markets."

34. Mr Melvin referred to the CPIN dated February 2020.  It too referred  to
gangs and under" 7.2 Territorial presence"  it  referred  to  gangs  having
great mobility as well as close territorial identity,  said  how  they  are
present in "nearly all the country's municipalities but  gravitate  towards
the urban areas".  The extent of the gangs' presence has "no equal anywhere
in the world" and they are particularly involved  in  homicide,  extortion,
forced recruitment and forced disappearances, drug trafficking, threats and
carjacking.  It said how demands were made to business operators with a pay
or die policy and it echoed reports on the territorial nature of the  gangs
and how people from a different area would  be  noticed  and  investigated.
People could not live in their areas without  permission.   All  businesses
pay  extortion  fees.   Extortion  is  concentrated   on   businesses   but
individuals can be "taxed".

35. I find it apt to remind myself of the threat that  has  been  issued  in
this  case.   The  first  claimant  in  her  statement  comments   on   the
difficulties  of  living  in  El  Salvador  with  its  gang  culture  where
lawlessness and extortion are part of ordinary life.  Without  in  any  way
approving of such conduct her claim is starker  than  this  suggests.   She
referred to a time on 22 March 2019 when she was returning  from  work  and
she was accosted as she came off a bus and was told to pay $3,000 and "if I
did not pay they would kill me".

36. This is developed in the subsequent paragraph to  say  that  the  threat
included information about the knowledge the gang had of the  claimant  and
her circumstances and includes the warning that if she  did  not  give  the
money "we will kill you or a member of your family or my son".

37. For completeness she reported the matter to the police in  May  2019  (I
think she might mean March) and after living very discreetly left on 27 May
2019 having obtained tickets to the United Kingdom because "we  found  that
flights to the UK were the cheapest".

38. The second claimant's statement has  to  be  read  with  her  interview.
Having said that she knew that her sister had been threatened she said that
she was "attacked" on 14 May 2019.  She said that, untypically, she  walked
home that day and she was accosted by people who threatened her with a  gun
and indicated that they had asked her sister for money and if they did  not
pay then "we know where you live, you live with your sisters  and  brothers
and a little boy, my sister's little boy" (question 45).

39. The third claimant makes clear that she was not threatened directly  but
believes she was at risk because of what was said to her two sisters.

40.  The  fourth  claimant  makes  a  similar  point  stating  expressly  at
paragraph 3 of his statement:

  "Yes, my life is at risk as well because the MS-13 gang threatened all of
  us in the house through my sisters MI and SJ."

41. Clearly a great deal will depend on my evaluation of the expert  report.
 I remind myself that I regarded as of sufficient importance  to  grant  an
adjournment so that Mr Melvin would be in a  position  to  make  considered
response.  Mr Melvin prepared a written challenge to the expert report  and
set it out in  a  "Respondent's  Addendum  Written  Submissions"  dated  27
November 2020 which I now consider.

42. The Addendum Written Submissions summarise the report and the  challenge
starts at paragraph 38.

43. Comment is made that the writer  was  not  able  to  find  any  judicial
analysis of Dr Redden's opinions.  That may be right but no doubt  reflects
the fact that cases involving citizens of El Salvador are, I find, rare  in
the United Kingdom.  It is not a good reason to discredit or even doubt  Dr
Redden's views whose academic qualifications are of a high order.

44. The Secretary of State  then  contended  that  the  report  was  "overly
pessimistic" in its analysis of the likely consequence of the  government's
latest efforts to crack down on gangs.  I see no reason  to  regard  it  as
"overly pessimistic" other than the fact that it  suits  the  Secretary  of
State's case to categorise it so.  Dr Redden has explained that there is  a
history of failed attempts and explained why in  his  judgment  the  latest
efforts are unlikely to succeed.  I find his arguments at least persuasive.

45. The  Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  there  is  "near  absolute
territorial control" by the gangs.  There have been "thousands  of  arrests
and convictions of gang members".  That  is  clearly  right  but  the  fact
remains that gangs continue to exist and  perhaps  have  become  even  more
entrenched in society.  The evidence points not to these gangs  being  some
sort of quirky social club but to an evil throughout society which  asserts
its  presence  by  marking  borders  in  the  streets  and  embarking  upon
widespread, far- reaching criminal acts typically protection  rackets.   Dr
Redden's contention that a person returning would  be  "entering  into  the
theatre" is said to be illustrated by saying that the  claimants  would  be
forced to the poorest areas where the gangs operate.  I do  not  understand
that criticism at all.  All Dr Redden is saying is that the claimants, like
most other people, would have to earn a living.  It is hard to see how they
could expect to return anywhere where there would be jobs  available.   The
fact is that El Salvador is a poor country.

46. I  attach  no  weight  to  the  submissions  tending  to  undermine  the
integrity of the findings.  The Secretary of  State  chose  to  settle  the
grounds and chose not to challenge  credibility.   If  she  had  wished  to
challenge credibility it was open for her to do so.  It is  not  attractive
to do it now and I do not permit it.

47. The criticisms of Dr Redden's report recognise that information  in  the
latest CPIN "paints a difficult picture for those  facing  gang  violence".
Every case has to be considered on its own merits which as far as I can  is
precisely what Dr Redden has done.

48. I remind myself that  although  the  burden  is  on  the  claimants  the
standard of proof is low.  I have to decide if there is a  "real  risk"  to
their safety having considered the evidence as a whole.  I find Dr Redden's
report informed, objective and persuasive.  Having read that report and the
other background material before me I  find  that  there  is  no  effective
protection for people in the  claimants'  circumstances.   The  police  are
reluctant to act partly perhaps because of corruption  and  partly  because
there is little if anything they can do.  There are many cases  where  they
cannot act to protect people who are in direct  need  of  their  protection
such as witnesses.  The idea they can do anything  useful  to  protect  the
claimants is, I find, optimistic to  the  point  of  being  fanciful.   The
claimants have made a report to the police and there  has  been  no  useful
response.  I find that is the sort of thing that tends to  happen.   It  is
not a question of the government of El Salvador not caring.   The  fact  is
they cannot do anything that is useful.  The  gangs  are  large  and  well-
structured and deeply entrenched in society.

49. I then have to consider what would happen if the claimants returned.   I
accept the evidence in Dr Redden's report.  I  also  find  it  chimes  very
tunefully with the passages in internal relocation on the  2020  CPIN.   At
paragraph 2.6.2 it states:

  "El Salvador is a relatively small country (about the same size as Wales)
  with a population of 6,000,000, many communities are  close-knit.   Gangs
  control territory across the country and able exert  influence  over  the
  whole country,  with  some  gangs  reportedly  able  to  track  a  person
  throughout the country.  Gangs monitor movement into areas  they  control
  and are reported to check people moving from one gang-controlled area  to
  another, generally not allowing this.  LGBTI persons and women and girls,
  without support networks, may be particularly vulnerable to abuse and may
  find  it  difficult  to  support  themselves  in  areas  of   relocation.
  Conversely, single men who have  experienced  limited  difficulties,  are
  educated with independent financial means may be more  able  to  relocate
  safely (see Gangs' size and reach,  Women  and  girls,  Displacement  and
  Freedom of movement)."

50. The section "Gangs' size and reach" is under number 7.  Local gangs  can
have a  membership  ranging  from  a  handful  to  100  or  more.   I  note
particularly the UN Special Rapporteur who at  7.1.6  reported  being  told
that "anyone living in gang territory has little choice but  to  co-operate
with them".  The point is that some people may be rich enough  to  live  in
protected areas.  I have no reason to think these claimants are such people
or that if that were a viable option it is not what they would have done.

51. I do not accept effective protection is available.

52. I consider now the separate but related  idea  of  avoiding  trouble  by
internal relocation.  As I have  indicated  above  there  may  be  internal
relocation for people with the means to live in  gated  communities  but  I
have no basis for concluding these claimants are such people.  Rather, they
are people who would have  to  establish  themselves  somewhere  and  I  am
satisfied from the evidence that it is at least reasonably likely that they
would very quickly come to the attention of the controlling  gang.   If  it
was the gang that had threatened them then the threats  would  be  repeated
and carried out if there was not compliance.  If it was  merely  controlled
by the other gangs then there is at least a reasonable chance they would be
seen as spies and at very grave risk indeed for that reason.   I  emphasise
that in reaching these conclusions two of these people  have  already  been
threatened directly and threatened so convincingly that,  having  tried  to
live very discreetly in  their  country  of  national,  they  pooled  their
resources and escaped to the United Kingdom.

53. There is a slightly untypical feature of this case.   Extortion  rackets
tend to work by people being required to pay affordable  amounts,  possibly
even token amounts initially.  This case  is  untypical  but  by  no  means
unprecedented.  A significant premium was demanded.  I do not know why that
should be.  The claim has been believed and I have no reason to  go  behind
it.  In the event of return they would be identified as people who had been
expected to pay a large amount.  Their difficulties would be very real.

54. I accept the evidence that the gangs  have  far-reaching  influence  and
contacts.  I accept that the claimants' return would be noted and I  reject
the contention that there is  safe  internal  relocation  for  them  in  El
Salvador.

55. It follows that I find they are at risk.

56. I must now decide if they are entitled to  refugee  protection.   Having
satisfied myself that the claimants do face a real  risk  of  serious  ill-
treatment in the event of their return I must  now  rhetorically  ask  why.
Realistically if they are to  come  within  the  scope  of  the  protection
offered by the Refugee Convention they must show that they are a member  of
a particular social group.  That  is  a,  no  doubt  deliberately,  elastic
concept  plainly  intended  to  provide  assistance  to  those   who   face
persecution but who do not fall within the  four  main  protected  reasons.
However, as I indicated when I found an error of law, it is not  sufficient
simply to show a person runs a risk of  serious  ill-treatment.   To  be  a
refugee the serious ill-treatment has to be for  a  recognised  reason  and
membership of a particular social group is a phrase that has  been  subject
to case law which I must endeavour to apply.

57. Ms Mensah argued that the claimants are  at  risk  because  they  are  a
member of a particular family.  Mr Melvin argued against that and I find Mr
Melvin was roughly right.  The claimants are not in  trouble  because  they
are member of a family.  Several members of the family continue to live  in
El Salvador without complaint and I see nothing in the evidence that  would
support a finding that the  risk  they  run  is  because  of  their  family
connections.  It contains a core of truth in the sense that the  third  and
fourth claimants are at risk because of their link to the first and  second
but that is not the point.  Families are social groups  but  the  claimants
are not at risk on that account.  I must look for another reason and  there
may not be one.

58. Having reminded myself of the leading authorities and particularly  R  v
Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Shah and Islam [1999] 2 AC 629, I take
as my working definition of particular social group, "a  person  who  is  a
member of a group with immutable characteristics that  they  cannot  be  or
should not be expected to hide and which they do not share with society  at
large".

59. In the hypothetical event of the claimants being  returned  to  an  area
controlled by the major gang that has not, so far, persecuted them  I  find
they would be at risk because they would be seen as spies.  Being perceived
as a spy is a particular social group to which on the  background  evidence
they would undoubtedly belong.  In the event of their being returned to the
area where the persecuting agents are  the  dominant  gang  they  would  be
identified quickly as people who had defied the gang and would, I find,  be
at enhanced risk because of that.  Being a "person who defied  a  gang",  I
find, satisfies the definition of particular social group. They would be at
risk just for being there and the gangs cannot allow people who  defy  them
to  triumph  as  their  authority  would  be  undermined.   Both  of  these
definitions are, in my experience, unusual but I cannot see how  they  fail
to comply with the requirements.  They are not being defined by the fact of
persecution but by the characteristic which makes them vulnerable.

60. If I am  wrong  about  this  then  they  are  entitled  to  humanitarian
protection under Article  15(b)  of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  and  associated
Immigration Rules.  They face  degrading  treatment,  quite  possibly  even
death but there is no need to go that far to come within the protection  of
the Convention.

61. In reaching this conclusion I have reminded myself that I  have  decided
there is no safe place for them in El Salvador.  This  is  not,  as  I  was
concerned it might be when I found an error of law, a case  of  people  who
could return safely to a very difficult part of the country which might not
be so difficult as to  be  contrary  to  their  Article  3  rights.   I  am
satisfied that there is no safe place for them.  That is  what  the  expert
says and that is the evidence I prefer.

62. If I am wrong  about  all  of  this  then  it  should  be  allowed  with
reference to Article 3.

63. I have reflected  on  this  case  particularly  because  it  is,  in  my
experience, rather unusual.  It may be that the arguments have been  tested
in other jurisdictions possibly nearer  to  the  claimant's  home  but  the
claimants here had the advantage of claiming asylum on arrival and offering
at least a plausible explanation for coming to the United  Kingdom,  namely
that was there their funds would take them when the time came for  them  to
leave.

64. Putting everything together I have decided that the  appeals  should  be
allowed and I allow the appeals of the claimants in each case.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 August 2021                  |

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09101/2019
                                                               pa/09269/2019
                                                               pa/09271/2019
                                                               pa/09274/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House Without a Hearing   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2020                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                                   m i l g
                                   S J LG
                                    A L g
                                   M a l g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents
                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public  to  identify  the  Respondents
(also "the Claimants"). Breach of this order can be punished as a  contempt
of court. I make  this  order  because  the  Claimants  seek  international
protection and are entitled to privacy. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
make an anonymity direction but an anonymity order should almost always  be
made in asylum claims.

2. These appeals are brought by the Secretary of State against the  decision
of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  of  the  Respondents,
hereinafter the "the Claimants", against the decision of the  Secretary  of
State refusing them  international  protection.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
refused permission to appeal but permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Kamara on 5 May 2020.  Subsequently Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam
issued directions in what might now be thought a standard form because  she
had reached the provisional view that the appeal  could  be  determined  at
least to the extent of deciding if there were an error of law  and  if  the
decision should be set aside without the need for an oral hearing.

3. Those Directions were sent to the parties  by  their  representatives  by
email on 10 July 2020.  The Secretary of State made "Response  Submissions"
by a Presenting Officer, Mr Stefan Kotas, dated  17  July  2020,  and  then
"Reply Submissions" also by Mr Kotas dated 31 July 2020.  These were  drawn
in reply to written submissions from the appellant's representatives  dated
30 July 2020.

4. The Secretary of State makes plain that she is  content  for  the  issues
identified by Judge McWilliam to be decided without a hearing.  Paragraph 2
of  the  "Response  and  Submissions"  is  unequivocal.    The   claimants'
representatives do not seem to have expressed a view.

5. Although it has  been  a  long-established  custom  in  the  Tribunal  to
determine error of law issues at an oral hearing there is no requirement in
the law to provide a hearing.  However, I am obliged by Rule 34(2)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to "have regard to any  view
expressed by a party when deciding whether to hold a  hearing  to  consider
any matter".  The claimants had not expressed a view and the  Secretary  of
State approves.  That is not the end of the matter.  The  decision  is  for
the Tribunal but I agree with the Secretary of State that the issues raised
are clear and an oral hearing is not necessary.  This Tribunal  is  pressed
to find space because of  the  constraints  imposed  in  the  wake  of  the
national lockdown.  Determining appeals  without  a  hearing  significantly
reduces  the  pressure  on  that  space  and  therefore   encourages   more
expeditious disposal of the Tribunal's business.  I am satisfied that in  a
case such as this, which does not seem  complex,  the  balance  of  justice
favours a decision on the papers. It will be decided sooner and  dispensing
with a hearing will provide hearing room space for other cases that  really
cannot be decided in this way. I am  therefore  content  to  determine  the
issue of whether there is an error of law without a hearing.   I  will,  of
course, have regard to the submissions that are made.

6. I begin by looking at the Decision and  Reasons.   This  shows  that  the
Claimants are citizens of El Salvador and are  siblings.   On  6  September
2019 they were refused asylum and humanitarian protection and they appealed
that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted the immigration  histories  were  not
in dispute.  She said:

  "They arrived in the United Kingdom by aeroplane and  claimed  asylum  on
  the same day, that is 28 May 2019.  The judge summarised  their  case  as
  being a fear of persecution in El Salvador (for a non-Convention  reason)
  namely that they have suffered issues with criminal gangs there and  fear
  return on this basis."

8. The judge went on to explain that the claim for  humanitarian  protection
is based on how they would expect to be  treated  in  the  event  of  their
return to El  Salvador.   They  claimed  that  the  treatment  they  risked
contravened Article 3 and indeed Article 2 of the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights and this would constitute a breach of  Article  15(c)  of  the
Qualification Directive.

9. The Judge noted the Claimant's oral evidence and  the  judge  found  that
evidence credible.  The Judge assessed their evidence particularly  against
the background material and said unequivocally at paragraph 20:

  "I state now at  this  early  stage  in  my  findings  that  I  find  the
  [Claimants'] claim to fear that if returned to  El  Salvador  they  would
  face mistreatment, to be credible."

10. The Judge was satisfied that the  two  eldest  Claimants  were  directly
threatened by a criminal gang that controls the area where they  lived  and
the gangsters made the eldest Claimant  aware  that  they  knew  about  her
family.  The Judge was satisfied that the evidence that protection money in
the sum of $3,000 was demanded was also credible even though this  was  not
typical of extortion rackets which tended to involve, at  least  initially,
smaller sums.  The Judge found that the Claimants had taken steps  to  live
safely in their home area but could not.  The Judge acknowledged there  was
some supporting evidence in the form of a  police  report  which  showed  a
genuine attempt to get assistance.  At paragraph 31 the Judge considered if
there was in fact a Convention reason.  The Judge  also  accepted  evidence
that internal relocation was not possible.  The Judge said at paragraph 36:

  "I am satisfied that even were they to relocate, to  areas  suggested  by
  the Home Office to be  possibilities,  such  as  Chalatenango,  they  are
  likely to be unemployed and have no income, it is stated as  one  of  the
  poorest  and  undeveloped  regions,  meaning  they  would  be  even  more
  susceptible to the mercy of gangs and their threats.  It is stated in the
  objective expert evidence that once a direct threat is received, or there
  needs to be an escape from extortion,  there  is  no  safe  part  of  the
  country.  I am satisfied on this basis that relocation is not  an  option
  at least at present and to return the [claimant] to El Salvador given the
  circumstances would put them in danger of their lives."

11. The judge then reached conclusions at paragraph 39 which states:

  "For the reasons which I have given, I am satisfied to the  low  standard
  of proof that the [Claimant] has  an  objectively  well-founded  fear  of
  persecution in El Salvador.  I  do  consider  that  the  risk  on  return
  engages the Refugee Convention and the ECHR in  these  circumstances.   I
  find they have demonstrated that there is a real risk that  would  suffer
  serious harm if they were to be returned which would justify a  grant  of
  humanitarian protection under the Immigration Rules."

12. The judge then went on to allow the appeals on  asylum  grounds  and  on
"humanitarian protection grounds under the Immigration Rules"  and  decided
there was "no valid appeal before me in respect of human rights".

13. I have considered this but it cannot be right.   It  is  fundamental  to
principles of asylum law that a person is  not  protected  by  the  Refugee
Convention unless that person risk persecution for a Convention reason. The
judge did not identify a Convention reason and no such reason  is  obvious.
In the absence of a Convention Reason there cannot be a lawful finding that
the Claimants are refugees.

14. The decision to allow the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds
under the Immigration Rules is more puzzling.  The essence of  humanitarian
protection is there is a general risk and the case here seems  to  be  that
there is a specific risk.  It is entirely possibly as a matter of law  that
a person cannot be safe anywhere in his or her country of  nationality  but
if that is what the judge has concluded it is  a  conclusion  that  is  not
explained. A vague reference to risks identified in the background material
is not sufficient.

15. I see no point in going through the grounds in detail.  I do  note  that
the grounds expressly criticise the judge's finding that there is no  place
of safety in El Salvador.  I also agree that the conclusion that there  can
be no relocation there because they are likely to be unemployed and have no
income is not enough to justify an  Article  3  finding.   This  is  not  a
question of internal relocation  being  reasonable  in  Refugee  Convention
terms (unless they are in  fact  refugees)  and  the  Article  3  threshold
otherwise is very high and is not shown to be established  in  the  reasons
given by the judge.

16. Mr Kotas' response is appropriately short and  he  is  undeniably  right
when he says that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  identify  a
particular social group or any other Convention reason but I have indicated
above that I accept that criticism.

17. The written submissions from the claimants'  representative,  Mr  George
Madubuike, a solicitor with the claimants' representatives, speculates what
the judge might have meant but I cannot accede to  his  submission  that  a
particular social group was established even though not expressly stated or
even identified.  It is probably right that the phrase  "particular  social
group" is construed broadly rather than restrictively but it does  have  to
be construed.  It is not just a catch-all to describe everybody  who  might
be in some sort of trouble in their country of nationality.

18. For the avoidance of doubt, I make clear  that  I  am  not  saying  that
there is no Convention reason for the alleged risk. The  decision  has  not
been explained. It is open to the Claimants to reargue the point.

19. I take Mr Madubuike's point that I was not at the hearing and if  I  had
been I might have been impressed by the evidence and would have understood,
but that will not do.  The determination has to be a self-standing document
and this Decision and Reasons just  does  not  explain  how  the  claimants
qualify for protection as refugees  under  the  Convention.   As  Mr  Kotas
points out in his reply to submissions, it is just wrong to say  there  was
no challenge to the findings on humanitarian protection.  Paragraphs  7,  8
and 9 of the grounds  of  appeal  could,  with  respect,  be  drafted  more
precisely but, cumulatively, I understand them to be a clear  criticism  of
the finding that there would be an "Article 3 risk" throughout El  Salvador
because such a conclusion is not explained adequately.  The difficulty with
this submission, from the Claimants' point of view, is the  high  threshold
that has to be crossed to establish an Article 3 risk that does  not  exist
for a Convention reason.

20. It follows that I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  and
I set aside its decision.  I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision  that  the
claimants were credible.  Their credibility  was  not  challenged  and  the
findings are explained.  I do set aside the finding of the Tribunal that an
Article 3 risk is prevailing throughout El Salvador  because  that  is  not
explained adequately.

21. This appeal will be heard again and I have  decided  it  will  be  heard
again in the Upper Tribunal.  There  has  been  no  application  to  adduce
further evidence (that is unsurprising at this  stage)  but  I  remind  the
parties that if they wish to rely on further evidence a  properly  reasoned
application under Rule 15(2A) of  the  Procedure  Rules  is  required.   At
present it seems to me there is no need for further evidence.  It is likely
that oral submissions  would  be  helpful  and  this  appeal  seems  to  me
eminently suitable for a remote hearing.  It is likely  to  be  listed  for
remote hearing and either party objecting to that must make its  objections
known forthwith and they will be considered.

22. Notice of Decision

23. The appeal is allowed. The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.  I  set
aside its decision and I direct that the  appeal  be  redetermined  in  the
Upper Tribunal.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 October 2020                 |

