
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09144/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 March 2020                     |On 22 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                  D. A. I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, Counsel, instructed by Freedom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                             DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal T R Smith ('the Judge') sent to the  parties  on  18  November
    2019 by which the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to grant him international protection was dismissed.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission on all grounds.

Anonymity

 3. The Judge issued an  anonymity  direction  and  neither  representative
    sought for it to be set  aside.  The  direction  is  confirmed  at  the
    conclusion of this decision.

Background

 4. The appellant is a national of Iran and an ethnic Kurd. He is aged  29.
    He asserts that having left school in year 4 or 5 he worked as a farmer
    and also in a  shop.  He  then  transported  illegal  goods,  including
    alcohol, for approximately one year before leaving Iran as  his  family
    required money.

 5. Four months before he left Iran a cousin approached him and asked if he
    would transport political material on behalf of the Democratic Party of
    Iranian Kurdistan ('KDPI'). He agreed to, not  because  of  politically
    held beliefs but because  he  would  be  paid.  He  smuggled  political
    materials on four occasions.

 6. He asserts that in  September  or  October  2017  he  was  ambushed  by
    Revolutionary Guards whilst travelling with  his  goods.  He  left  the
    goods and fled. He stayed with a friend for ten  to  fifteen  days  and
    during this time his  uncle  informed  him  that  the  authorities  had
    visited his home looking for him. The appellant left Iran with the help
    of an agent.  He clandestinely arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 March
    2018 and claimed asylum. The respondent  refused  the  application  for
    international protection by a decision dated 8 September 2019.

Hearing before the FtT

 7. The appeal came before the Judge sitting  in  Bradford  on  31  October
    2019. The  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  having  found  the  appellant
    incredible as to his personal history of persecution. The  Judge  found
    that it was plausible that the appellant might have  been  involved  in
    smuggling to supplement his income but did not accept that he had  been
    engaged in the smuggling of political literature reasoning, inter alia:

         "66. On the Appellant's account he smuggled literature for the KDPI
             on four occasions.  The  Appellant's  account  as  to  why  he
             smuggled KDPI literature was contradictory. On the one hand he
             said he did it simply for the money, but before  me,  said  he
             was ready to do anything to  assists  Kurdish  rights.  As  Ms
             Hopkinson submitted the Appellant statement before me that 'as
             long as I am alive, I will fight',  in  reference  to  Kurdish
             rights, did not sit comfortably with his  initial  account.  I
             found this submission to have some weight.

         67.  I also noted that despite the Appellant's apparent  commitment
             to  the  Kurdish  cause,  when  he  was  interviewed  by   the
             Respondent, he said in his AIR that he had  no  links  to  any
             political party and didn't support political parties (question
             82). The contradictory account was a factor that I  gave  some
             weight to in adversely assessing the Appellant's credibility.

         68.  I find force in  the  submission  of  Ms  Hopkinson  that  the
             description given by the Appellant as how he was recruited  to
             help the KDPI was not consistent with  the  external  evidence
             which suggested that there was a period of close scrutiny  and
             vetting before a person was trusted (refusal letter paragraphs
             38 and 39). Further the Appellant's own account  was  that  he
             was not a supporter and had no interest  in  politics  at  the
             time (AIR 81 and 156) and thus I did not accept that he  would
             have been of interest to the KDPI as a recruit.

         69.   Connected  to  the  above  point  the  Appellant  could   not
             satisfactorily explain in cross-examination why if  he  was  a
             supporter of Kurdish rights his cousin had not  asked  him  to
             join the KDPI. His answer was that he didn't  have  the  time.
             Again, I did not find  this  explanation  credible  given  the
             Appellant's contention that he was always a  strong  supporter
             of Kurdish rights. Again, this was a factor I gave some weight
             in adversely affecting the Appellant's overall credibility.

         70.  I did not find it plausible that the Appellant's cousin  would
             pay the Appellant to smuggle literature for the KDPI  when  he
             himself was a smuggler. The Appellant's explanation  for  this
             was  vague  and  unconvincing  when  put  to  him.   It   also
             contradicts the external evidence set out in the  Respondent's
             refusal  letter  (paragraph  39)   that   sympathisers   would
             distribute political material on a voluntary basis."

 8. At [75] of the decision the Judge did not accept that the appellant had
    been engaged  in  the  smuggling  of  alcohol.  He  reasoned  that  the
    appellant's account lacked detail and at times was not plausible.

 9. The Judge rejected the appellant's account as to his being at  risk  of
    persecution in Iran:

         "76. The Appellant did not suggest that any action had  been  taken
             against his family who remain in Iran and which  consisted  of
             his mother, father, brother and sister. His  account,  at  the
             highest, was that when (sic) the Pasdars searched  the  family
             house and threatened to his family  (AIR  132).  However,  the
             external evidence points to the fact that  families  of  those
             who are considered by the Iranian authorities to be  political
             activists are  targeted  and  at  the  very  least  repeatedly
             harassed and frequently arrested: (CPIN - Iran Kurds,  January
             2019,  A1  page  169).  The  discrepancy  with  the  objective
             external evidence is a factor that I give considerable  weight
             to in adversely assessing the Appellant's credibility.

         77.  The Appellant's case was that his uncle remained in  Iran  and
             he had been told  that  an  arrest  warrant  had  been  issued
             against him. The Appellant was asked what steps he [had] taken
             to obtain that document, for example his uncle sending him the
             document in the United Kingdom. The Appellant  contended  that
             he had lost touch with his uncle because he  lost  his  mobile
             phone. However, he accepted he had not reported  the  loss  of
             the phone to the police. He was  also  to  later  say  in  his
             evidence he had access to  a  phone  in  order  to  engage  in
             Facebook postings. The Appellant then gave another account  as
             to why he could not obtain a copy of the  arrest  warrant.  He
             said he could have contacted his uncle via  an  Internet  cafï¿½
             and did so but never thought to ask him about obtaining a copy
             of the arrest warrant. The  Appellant's  account  as  to  what
             steps  he  had  taken  to  obtain  the  arrest   warrant   was
             inconsistent and this was a factor I gave some  weight  to  in
             adversely assessing the Appellant's overall credibility."

10. The Judge concluded as to the appellant's history in Iran:

         "78. The Appellant's whole account of why he was now supporting the
             Kurdish cause was implausible and I preferred  the  submission
             of Ms Hopkinson that in effect the Appellant  had  engaged  in
             activities in order to bolster his asylum claim.  This  was  a
             factor I  weighed  against  the  Appellant  in  assessing  his
             credibility.

         79.  Having considered the evidence in detail, I have  gone  on  to
             consider it in the round by weighing those factors  that  tell
             both for and against the credibility of the Appellant.  Having
             done so I am not satisfied that there is at least a reasonable
             degree of likelihood that the Appellant has given  a  truthful
             account of the circumstances that  led  him  to  come  to  the
             United Kingdom."

11. The appellant informed the First-tier Tribunal that he was  politically
    active in  pro-Kurdish  politics  in  this  country  and  had  attended
    demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in London on three occasions
    from September 2018 onwards. The Judge observed at [86]  that  evidence
    placed before the Tribunal confirmed that  one  of  the  demonstrations
    said to have been attended  by  the  appellant  was  actually  held  in
    Manchester. The Judge concluded as to  the  appellant's  attendance  at
    these demonstrations:

         "88.  The  Appellant  explained  his  level   of   involvement   in
             demonstrations in his AIR (question 157). It is  important  to
             put the evidence in context. The AIR took place in August 2019
             and  at  that   stage   the   Appellant   had   attended   two
             demonstrations on his evidence. He was asked in his AIR if  he
             was involved in any Kurdish political party since  he  arrived
             in the United Kingdom and  answered  as  follows  'no  I  only
             participated in commemorating one of  the  leaders  deaths  in
             London  three  or  four  weeks  ago  and  also  last  year   I
             participated  in  two  events  but  nothing  to  do  with  the
             parties'. In the letter from the  Appellant's  solicitors,  19
             August 2019, seeking to 'clarify' the response  his  solicitor
             said the Appellant had attended  an  event  commemorating  the
             death of Dr Ghassemiou and another event seeking  the  release
             of Abdullah Ocalan and called for the release  of  a  prisoner
             due to be executed (R1 page 51). I found  the  contemporaneous
             account given by the Appellant in  his  AIR  to  be  a  better
             reflection of his involvement, commitment and understanding of
             his attendance.

         89.   The  Appellant  was  not  the  organiser  of   any   of   the
             demonstrations.

         90.  The Appellant was not an activist within  the  demonstrations,
             for example carrying a loudhailer on leading chanting.

         91.  The Appellant was simply a member of the crowd.

         92.  The Appellant did not suggest that he had had any  information
             that Iranian agents or informers were mingling with the crowds
             at the three demonstrations he said he attended.

         93.  I do not accept the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  believed
             there were people with cameras filming the  protests  (witness
             statement paragraph 18) because I did not find  the  Appellant
             to be a  credible  witness.  The  Appellant  did  not  produce
             credible external evidence to show demonstrations outside  the
             Iranian embassy were always filmed.

         94.  The Appellant claimed he had burned the Iranian flag  but,  on
             the photographs, shown to me I did not see  evidence  that  he
             had done so. Indeed, no direct evidence was placed  before  me
             that the Appellant actually appeared in the photos, although I
             am prepared to infer that the Appellant  does  bear  a  marked
             similarity to one demonstrator in some of the  photos.  I  did
             note in one photograph there appeared to  be  an  image  of  a
             person who could have been the Appellant who  appeared  to  be
             burning a piece of paper but the paper was so badly  burnt  it
             was not possible to determine what it originally said (A1 page
             26).

         95.  The theme of the demonstrations appears to be protesting as to
             the position of the Kurds in Iran and their ill-treatment.

         96.  There was no  cogent  evidence  before  me  that  any  of  the
             demonstrations were reported in the news media.

         97.  The Appellant did not claim he had  given  interviews  to  the
             news media in any format."

12. The Judge further  determined  that  the  appellant's  entries  on  his
    Facebook page did not establish a well-founded fear of  persecution  to
    the required standard:

         "104.    Given the possible risk such posts might expose him or his
             family to, he could not explain to me why he would not  use  a
             privacy setting, particularly as he has family in Iran.

         105. I asked the Appellant why he could not delete  his  posts.  No
             evidence was placed before me that posts once deleted could be
             viewed by a third party. The Appellant  sought  to  avoid  the
             question and I had to put  it  to  him  again.  He  eventually
             claimed he was so committed to the Kurdish cause he would  not
             do so. I did not  believe  him.  The  Appellant  could  easily
             delete the posts such as to reduce risk if returned to Iran."

Grounds of Appeal

13. The appellant advances two grounds  of  appeal  with  the  first  being
    subdivided into several  challenges  as  to  the  Judge's  approach  to
    credibility.

14. Ground 1 details that  the  Judge's  findings  as  to  appellant  being
    incredible on core issues were erroneous in law.

15. Ground 2 complains that the Judge  erred  in  law  when  rejecting  the
    appellant's  sur  place  pro-Kurdish  political  activities  as   being
    implausible.

16. In granting permission to appeal, UTJ Finch observed, inter alia:

         'In paragraphs 66 and 67 of his decision the Judge failed  to  take
         into account the fact that the appellant had consistently explained
         that he was motivated as a Kurd to assist by  smuggling  literature
         for the KDPI. There was also evidence to suggest that the KDPI  had
         tried to recruit the appellant. The appellant also gave a  detailed
         account of his smuggling activities in his asylum interview.

         The objective evidence indicated  that  arrest  warrants  were  not
         handed to an accused or his family. For  these  and  other  reasons
         raised in the grounds of appeal, the credibility findings  made  by
         the Judge were unsustainable in the light of  the  evidence  before
         him.

         It is also arguable that a person  can  have  a  political  opinion
         without belonging to a political party and that the Judge failed to
         take into account the decision in HB (Kurds) Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT
         00430 (IAC).'

17. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

Decision on Error of law

18. Before me Mrs Petterson candidly confirmed  the  respondent's  position
    that when considered cumulatively there was insufficient  reasoning  by
    the Judge to justify the conclusions reached.  She  accepted  that  the
    grounds of appeal raised appropriate concerns as to the  Judge  finding
    contradictions as to certain elements of the  appellant's  evidence  in
    circumstances where it could be said that the appellant  was  referring
    to different issues, and so was not contradictory in his evidence.

19. She further accepted that the Judge failed to give  adequate  reasoning
    at [70] as to why the appellant's explanation as to his  cousin  paying
    him to smuggle literature  for  KDPI  was  vague  and  unconvincing  in
    circumstances where the decision does not record  the  appellant  being
    expressly asked a question on this subject, nor  if  it  was  asked  an
    answer being recorded.

20. Mrs. Pettersen informed me that consideration had  been  given  by  the
    respondent as to  whether  some  elements  of  the  decision  could  be
    preserved, but the conclusion reached was that when considered  in  the
    round it would not be safe to  do  so.  The  respondent  accepted  that
    cumulatively there is insufficient reasoning to permit the decision  to
    safely stand. In such circumstances the respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant should succeed in his appeal to the extent that the  decision
    of the Judge is set aside.

Re-making the Decision

21. Both representatives agreed that  it  would  be  appropriate  for  this
    appeal to be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  a
    credibility assessment could be undertaken. I am in agreement that this
    is the most practical course because as the present time the  appellant
    has not enjoyed a fair hearing as to the consideration  of  his  asylum
    appeal.



Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    18 November 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

23. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal T R Smith.



24. The hearing of this appeal is transferred to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting in Manchester.

25. No findings of fact are preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

26. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 31 March 2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email
