
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09073/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2019                       |On 29 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     QL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Malik, Counsel, instructed by Binas Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam. His date of birth is 28 December
1977.

I have anonymised the Appellant to protect the identity of his daughter.

The Appellant successfully appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a
deportation order made by the Secretary of State on human rights grounds.
The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal against this
decision. I found that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred at a
hearing at Field House on 25 April 2019. I set aside the decision to allow
the Appellant's appeal. I found an error of law for the following reasons:

"13. The structure of the Rules and the statutory framework is such that
the public interest question has been decided within the sentencing
thresholds.  KO decided that Exception 2, like Exception 1, is self-
contained.  No account should be taken of the Appellant's criminality when
considering whether deportation is unduly harsh.  I do not accept Mr
Malik's submission that the judge's reference to criminality went no
further than to acknowledge the thresholds within the statutory regime.  It
is self-evident from the decision that the judge considered the Appellant's
criminality when assessing unduly harsh (see paras 104, 105, 106 and 111)
going well beyond the thresholds set out in s117C.  The judge failed to
apply KO and the judge's self-direction at paragraph 78 refers to MM
(Uganda), which had been overruled and does not set out the correct legal
test to be applied.  As I understand Mr Malik's submission was that the
error is not material because the judge considered extraneous factors for
deportation as well as against.  I do not accept that the error is somehow
cancelled out by this.  No account should be taken of the Appellant's
criminality.

14.  In any event, the assessment so far as it related to the Appellant's
step-daughter is wholly lacking in detail.  The judge goes on to consider
briefly her circumstances at [114].  In respect of separation and its
impact on the child, the judge found that the Appellant has been the
child's stepfather from the time she was aged 2 and that she will be aged
10 in 2019.  He concluded that it is a considerable length of time in the
life of a child and that she has known no other father.  It is found that
the Appellant played a crucial role in the family unit and he is the
child's main carer.  He concluded that it would be unduly harsh for the
child to remain in the UK without the Appellant.  The judge did not apply
the correct test namely that identified in KO as the test applied in MK
(Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State [2015] UKUT 223 further explained in RA
(s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123.  The
circumstances he identified in the decision were not capable of amounting
to unduly harsh.

15.  I set aside the decision of the FTT. Mr Malik persuaded me to allow
the Appellant to submit any further evidence relating to the issue and the
opportunity to make submissions relating to that further evidence.  In
these circumstances, I reluctantly agreed to adjourn the matter for a
further hearing before the UT.  I am mindful of the standard directions
issued to the parties and the failure of the Appellant to submit further
evidence; however, the case concerns a child and therefore on balance, with
regard to the overriding objective (Rule 2 of the Procedure Rules 2008), I
conceded to the application.

The background

The Appellant unlawfully entered the UK on 7 June 2007. He was granted
temporary admission subject to reporting conditions. He failed to report.
He next surfaced on 8 July 2012.  He was granted temporary release and
required to report.  He again failed to report. On 26 February 2013 he was
stopped during a routine traffic stop. He was required to attend
Bedfordshire Magistrates' Court on 30 April 2013, facing the following
charges: driving with no licence, driving with no insurance, driving with
minors without appropriate harnesses and possession of identity documents
with intent to deceive.

He failed to attend the Magistrates Court as required.  A warrant for his
arrest was issued.  He was recorded as an absconder by the Home Office.  He
was arrested on 7 October 2014 and appeared at Luton Crown Court where he
was convicted of offences including an offence concerning the possession
and control of identity documents. He was sentenced to nine months'
imprisonment.  For the offence of failing to surrender to court he was
sentenced to three months' imprisonment.  He was on the same occasion
convicted of driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence and using
a vehicle without insurance, for which he was given no separate penalty.

The Secretary of State's case is that the Appellant's deportation is
conducive to the public good because the Appellant's offending has caused
serious harm (with reference to paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules).
 The Secretary of State considered the sentencing comments of the judge on
7 November 2014, which are as follows: -

"...  Your offence is still serious because you had a false instrument
which you were prepared to use to deceive the authorities ...  The choice
you took was to use a false document to deceive the officer who had stopped
you ...  You were driving not in accordance with a licence ..."

The Secretary of State's view is that the danger to the public from
unqualified drivers driving in the UK is self-evident and further to this,
the possession of a false document causes serious harm to the integrity of
UK immigration and other public services by undermining public confidence
in those services and exposes the UK public to risk due to persons being
present in the UK who have not been through the appropriate screening.
There has never been a challenge to the Secretary of State's decision with
reference to para 398 (c) of the Rules.  I raised this at the error of law
hearing. Mr Malik confirmed to me that "that ship has very much sailed" and
he accepted it was not a finding that the Appellant sought to interfere
with.

Resumed hearing

On 3 July 2019 at the resumed hearing Mr Malik indicated that he relied on
the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, specifically the
witness statement of the Appellant of 25 October 2018 (page 39 of the
Appellant's bundle) and the witness statement of his partner, TT, of the
same date (page 44 of the Appellant's bundle).  In addition, he relied on a
letter from a consultant hepatologist of 27 June 2018 concerning TT.

The Appellant submitted a supplementary bundle.  This contained a report
dated 26 June 2019 from an independent social worker, Charlotte Opie-Greer,
and a further witness statement of TT of 26 June 2019.  In addition, in the
supplementary bundle there is further evidence relating to TT's health
condition.  Mr Malik also relied on the supplementary witness statement of
TT, which was unsigned and undated and served on the Tribunal and Mr Tufan
at the hearing.

At the start of the hearing it became clear that an interpreter had not
been booked and that the Appellant was unable to give evidence without an
interpreter.  I was informed by Mr Malik that his partner would also need
one.  The Appellant's solicitor who was in attendance at the hearing
produced a letter dated 26 June 2019 to the Tribunal from the solicitors
requesting an interpreter.  This letter had not been received by the
Tribunal.  There was no record of it and as a consequence an interpreter
had not been booked.  Mr Malik stated that he intended to ask the
Appellant's partner three or four questions at most in evidence-in-chief.
He proposed taking a very short witness statement from her and serving that
on Mr Tufan, who would then be in a position to decide whether or not he
wished to cross-examine the witness.  He confirmed that the Appellant's
solicitor, in attendance, spoke Vietnamese and would summarise the case to
the Appellant at the conclusion of the hearing. Mr Malik confirmed that the
Appellant was content for the matter to proceed on this basis without an
interpreter.  Mr Tufan confirmed once he had sight of the supplementary
witness statement of TT that he would not be seeking to cross-examine her.
The parties agreed that the matter should proceed without an interpreter by
way of submissions only.

It was agreed at the start of the hearing that the issue in this appeal was
whether the effect of the Appellant's deportation on the child, L, would be
unduly harsh in the context of her remaining in the UK with her mother and
without the Appellant. L is not the Appellant's biological child. She is
his step-daughter. It was not a matter of dispute that the Appellant has a
genuine and parental relationship with L. It was agreed by the Secretary of
State that it would be unduly harsh to expect L, a British citizen, to
return with the Appellant to Vietnam.

The evidence of the Appellant

Much of the Appellant's evidence concerns his reasons for fleeing Vietnam.
His appeal was dismissed on protection grounds and this has not been
challenged by the Appellant. He arrived in the UK in 2007 in a lorry.  His
parents are now deceased.  He is not sure whether his stepmother is alive
having lost contact with her when he left Vietnam in 1999. Since he came
here he has been in a genuine and subsisting relationship with TT.  They
have lived together for seven years.  She has leave to remain as a parent
of a British child, L.  L was born on 3 July 2009 in Newham.  She attends
school. The Appellant has raised L as his own child.  TT is suffering from
health conditions.  She has non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and F3
fibrosis.  She is receiving treatment in the UK for this.  She runs her own
business and provides for the family.

The Appellant is a househusband. He is not permitted to take employment.
In relation to his criminality he gives an account of this at paragraphs 18
and 19.  He does not have family in Vietnam.   He wants to be able to
remain here to support his wife and stepdaughter.

The evidence of TT

TT's first witness statement of 25 October 2018 is brief.  She confirmed
her health conditions as outlined by the Appellant.  She says that the
"[the Appellant] caters to the housework and ensures my daughter's
nurturing into adolescence". Her evidence is as follows: "I noticed a
genuine father daughter relationship develop between them as she began to
refer to him as father and this was truly settling".  She says that the
Appellant acts as a father figure for L and that she cannot stress how much
he means to her and L and that his deportation "would be detrimental to the
family lifestyle that has developed".  L is performing well at school. The
Appellant "undoubtedly has impacted my daughter to provide he with the
father figure that she does not biologically have".

In her second witness statement of 26 June 2019 (page 43 of the
supplementary bundle) TT's evidence is that the First-tier Tribunal's
decision allowing the Appellant's appeal was "significantly conducive to my
mentality as well as my health".  Her evidence is that the decision to set
aside that decision has negatively affected her health. Her evidence in the
undated supplementary statement is that she suffers from liver cirrhosis.
The last treatment she had was on 13 June 2019.  Her next appointment is on
23 September 2019.  In this statement she describes the impact of the
condition on her day-to-day living as follows:

"I am frequently in pain.  I am unable to carry out strenuous activities
because I get tired very easily.  I am able to work because I run a nail
bar and my work is sedentary.  My social life has been significantly
affected as a result of this; I am simply unable to combine work with other
pastimes because I am too tired.

The help that my partner [QL] provides in looking after my daughter [L] is
all the more important to me because of my low energy levels.  I believe I
would really struggle to combine work and parenting if he had to leave the
UK."

Expert evidence

The evidence of the independent social worker

Ms Opie-Greer is a qualified social worker with over ten years' experience.
 She has appended her curriculum vitae to her report.  She is registered to
practise as a social worker and has a history of working in Children's
Statutory Social Care Services.  She confirms at paragraph 1.6 of her
report that she has had no prior involvement with the Appellant and his
family.  She was instructed by the Appellant's solicitors to complete an
assessment on the family's social circumstances and to ascertain the
child's wishes and feelings.  She was asked specifically to report on the
relationship between the Appellant and his stepdaughter, what impact an
enforced move would have on the child and what in her opinion would be in
the best interests of L.

The assessment was carried out on 17 June 2009 and lasted two and a half
hours.  It took place at the Appellant's home with all members of the
family.  The Appellant told the social worker that he is not L's biological
father, but that he views himself as her father and loves her as she was
his biological child.  The social worker was told by TT that L's biological
father lives in London, but his location is unknown. She is unable to
contact him.  He has no involvement in L's life. The Appellant is the only
family that they have in the UK.

Helpfully, at the start of her report (section 2) the social worker
summarises her conclusions as follows:

"2.  Summary of Conclusions

2.1. The assessment highlighted that it is against the family's wishes and
feelings for [QL] to be forced to move to Vietnam.  It is my view that an
enforced move would cause a disruption to the life that [L] has in the UK,
and their current life and circumstances would not be able to be replicated
in Vietnam.

2.2. In my opinion an unwanted change would cause disruption to [L's]
routine, stability and would remove one of her main care givers, which
would have a detrimental effect on her emotional wellbeing.

2.3. It is my opinion that if [QL] is removed from the UK, [L's] family
composition would change to a lone parent family, placing significant
limitation to the family's resources.  This would have an impact on her
identity formation, which in my view, is likely to negatively affect her
sense of self and reduce her self-esteem and self-confidence in the longer
term.

2.4. I would recommend that it is in the best interest of [L] for her
circumstances to remain unchanged and for the family to remain together in
the UK.  Any disruption to [L's] current life would cause harm to her
emotional and physical wellbeing and reduce her ability to meet the Five
Outcomes for Children and Young People outlined in Every Child Matters."

At 7.9 of the report the social worker indicated that she completed an
Ecomap (Appendix 2) with QL and TT to identify people who provide support
to the family and the couple identified two friends who have provided
character references.  TT owns and works in a nail salon in Bedford.  She
has worked there since 2007.  It is her sole responsibility to provide
financial support for the family because the Appellant is unable to work.

The Appellant does not have any physical health concerns.TT is not in good
physical or mental health and the social worker refers to a letter
(Appendix 4) from a consultant hepatologist to TT's GP confirming that she
has liver cirrhosis.  TT told the social worker that her condition leaves
her in great pain. At times she is unable to complete normal day-to-day
activities.  She takes medication.   She is depressed as a result of stress
placed on her by the prospect of deportation of the Appellant.  She is
overcome with worry.  She worries that if she dies L will have no-one to
care for her.  The family lives on TT's earnings.  They do not receive
benefits.  They live in privately rented accommodation which they share
with another family.

TT was emotional throughout the assessment.  She said that all she could
think about is the Appellant's immigration status and that she is concerned
that her emotional state is having a detrimental effect on L's emotional
wellbeing.  TT reported that she is "overcome with worry about how her
daughter would cope if her stepfather was forced to leave the UK."

The Appellant is worried about who would provide the day-to-day care for L
if he were forced to leave.  TT would no longer be able to work, which
would put the family under financial pressure and could result in them
losing their home.  There would be no-one there to care for TT and take her
to medical appointments.  The Appellant is concerned that L would grow up
without a father and is concerned about how this would impact on her.  He
feels that he has a good, close bond and relationship with L and feels that
it would disadvantage her and negatively impact on her mental health if
this was to end.

The social worker at 7.27 states as follows:

"7.27.   [QL] advised that he spent a period of time in custody, and at
this point left [TT] to be the sole carer for [L].  This was clearly a very
distressing period of separation for the family and provided an insight
into how they would cope without [QL]. [TT] spoke in detail about how she
struggled to manage practically and financially without her partner. [TT]
feels that she was able to build up some resilience as she knew that he was
going to return home but feels completely hopeless thinking about him being
forced to leave the UK permanently. [TT] advised that when [QL] was in
custody, she took her daughter to visit him weekly so that they still had a
close bond."

L is currently at school and has a good support network of friends. It was
clear to the social worker that she was achieving well and extracurricular
activities were important to her.  She is a healthy child with no
additional health needs.  The social worker under the heading Wishes and
Feelings at 7.40 stated as follows:

"7.41.   I observed [L] at her family home, in the company of her parents.
I observed a close and loving relationship between the family, this was
observed in the way they interacted, laughed and joked at times.  I
observed [QL] and [TT] speak positively and praise [L].

7.42.    I completed 'my wishes and feelings' (appendix 5) which is a self-
assessment for children and young people.  [L] filled this in herself and
we spoke about her answers.  Throughout wishes and feelings work, she
presented as a confident child who was able to speak clearly about her
feelings, her family and people who are important to her.  It was clear
that she feels very well supported and loved by her parents and friends in
the UK.  [L] stated in her 'my hopes for the future' page that one of her
hopes, is that she 'always; lives close to Mum and Dad'.

7.44.    [L] spoke in detail about her worries; she is very worried that
her Father [QL] will be forced to move to Vietnam and that this will mean
that she is not able to see him.  She added that she is worried about her
Mother's health and about what would happen if he were not around to
support her.  [L] advised that her parents tell her 'not to worry' but she
added that she does worry because she often sees both her parents crying
and feeling stressed."

The social worker was satisfied that the Appellant and TT were in a stable
relationship. Under the heading Family Composition and Overview the social
worker stated as follows:

"8.4.    [QL] is not [L's] biological father, but they have clearly built a
close, loving and supportive relationship, which they view as a
father/daughter relationship.  [L] is aware that [QL's] immigration status
is unclear and this is causing her great emotional harm and distress.
Recent research continues to highlight the importance of a father figure,
with emphasis placed on the father's relationship with their daughters.
Research completed in 2013 by Culpin, Heron and Araya finds that girls with
absent fathers had a 53% greater chance of experiencing troubles with their
mental health in later life.  Further research informs us that children who
are no longer able to interact with their fathers have problems relating to
their sexual identity, difficulty recognising limits and learning the rule
of social interaction (Allen et al, 2007).  Given this research, and since
her biological father has always; been absent from her life, I would have
concern that she would be at risk of emotional harm if [QL] was forced to
leave the UK.

8.5. It is against the family's wishes for [QL] to be forced to leave the
UK.  If he is forced to leave then they would lose the physical contact,
closeness, emotional and practical support that he offers to the family.
If [QL] is forced to leave then [TT] would become a solo parent, which
would have a direct impact on the family's resources.  An enforced
separation is likely to make [L] feel that her wishes and feelings are not
valid, which would impact on her sense of self-worth and self-importance.
An enforced separation also raises questions about how [TT] would manage
her health needs, her work commitments and raising her daughter alone.

8.6. [QL] forms a part of her life since 2012.  In my opinion losing this
relationship would cause feelings and symptoms of grief and loss (Ross 1969
and Bowlby 1980) which would be likely to cause emotional distress and
impact on her social and emotional wellbeing. [QL] was incarcerated from
November 2014 to August 2015.  Despite this separation, the family report
that [L] saw [QL] weekly and, therefore, was able to maintain a level of
physical contact.  Research completed by Munford M and Sanders J (2014)
evidences that there is a need for children to be able to seek and maintain
secure connections with key people in their lives.  The research goes onto
highlight that any long-term disruption to this can profoundly disadvantage
children and young people, with the detrimental effects of this continuing
into later life.  I would be concerned that, if [QL] were forced to leave
the UK, [L] would not be able to maintain these relationships and that,
therefore, she would be at risk of emotional harm if her current
circumstances change.

8.7. The information provided indicates that [QL] and [TT] are providing
the necessary routine, stability, encouragement and support for their
daughter to develop, thrive and achieve.  If [QL] were forced to leave the
UK, then it is unclear whether [TT] would be able to continue to offer this
level of care along.

8.8. Statements from the family and character references from [TRR], [TR]
and [HVN] indicate that the family have a strong support network in the UK.
 Due to the length of time that [QL] and [TT] have been away from Vietnam,
this could not be replicated there.

8.9. [L] is settled in her educational setting and is achieving well.  It
is likely that any distress and sudden change in her personal circumstances
would have an impact on her educational achievement.  It was clear from
speaking with the family that [QL] is crucial in ensuring that she is
supported to attend school and supported with completing her schoolwork.
There would be a risk that without the appropriate support she would be
unable to meet the five key outcomes for children and young people
identified in the Children Act 2004, Every Child Maters they are, 'to Be
Healthy, Stay Safe, Enjoy and Achieve, Make a Positive Contribution and
Achieve Economic Wellbeing'.  [L] and her parents report that [L] enjoys
partaking in extra-curricular activities and they feel that this has
increased her self-confidence.  This belief is echoed by research completed
by Public Health England (2014) which found that, 'academic and extra-
curriculum success has a strong and positive impact on children's
subjective sense of how good they feel and how their lives are (life
satisfaction) and is linked to higher levels of wellbeing I adulthood'.
This highlights how important it is for [L's] long-term development to be
supported to complete their education and extra-curricular activities.  I
would be concerned that, if [QL] is forced to leave the UK, her education
would be disrupted and, therefore, she would fail to achieve these
outcomes."

The social worker prepared a balance sheet to evaluate the information
illustrating the benefits to and burdens on L remaining in the current
circumstances and those if the Appellant was forced to return to Vietnam.
The balance sheet raises concerns about how L's mother would cope as her
main caregiver and identifies concerns around the emotional implications to
L if her father is forced to return.  L would feel that her feelings were
not listened to or valued.  She would lose a father figure from her day-to-
day life and would be unable to maintain a high enough level of contact
with him.  There are concerns about who would meet her physical needs as
her mother has health needs and work commitments.  L would lose a primary
attachment figure in her life, which would cause issues of separation, loss
and grief which would negatively impact on her into later life and would
potentially cause disruption to her education.

L would lose her connection with her stepfather. He would not be physically
present to parent nor teach her about his historical heritage.  It would be
likely to have a detrimental impact on her development of self and there is
a risk of lowered self-esteem and self-confidence.  There are concerns that
TT would have difficulty managing as a single parent and there would be a
reduction in family resources.  The Appellant provides all childcare and
without him being present it is unclear how TT would manage to continue to
work as a sole parent which would cause financial hardship.

The social worker observed a close and loving relationship between the
Appellant and L.  He and TT are providing the necessary care, routine and
stability required for L to meet the five outcomes for children and young
people outlined in Every Child Matters.  Should he be forced to leave it
would have a negative impact on L.  At 9.5 of the report the social worker
states:

"It would cause the loss of a primary attachment figure which would cause
her feelings of grief and loss (Bowlby 1980), which would have a negative
impact on [L] emotionally.  In addition, [L] 'stability, order and routine'
would be affected, which Maslow (1970) identified in his hierarchy of needs
as necessary to increase self-esteem, personal strength and independence.
In my opinion a disruption to [L] would cause her emotional harm and have
an impact on her developmental and educational progress.

If [QL] is forced to leave the UK, it would place the family under pressure
financially, as it is unclear is (sic) [TT] would be able to continue to
work and provide the level of practical care that [QL] does.  A change in
financial circumstances would also impact on their ability to visit [QL] if
he was forcibly removed."

The social worker at 9.7 opines that:

"...  If the family were missing the support that [QL] provides then [L]
ability to be able to participate with her educational and social
activities may be reduced.  In the long term, if [L] developmental and
education progress is detrimentally affected then her life choices and
chances will be reduced.  It is therefore my opinion that it is in [L] best
interests for her circumstances to continue unchanged."



Submissions

Mr Malik confirmed that TT has limited leave to remain here as a parent and
that she is not entitled to public funds.  His first submissions focused on
the personal circumstances of L.  She is aged 10 and will soon be
transitioning from primary to secondary school.  Whilst it was accepted
that single parenthood is a way of life for many, the circumstance in this
case are unusual because of TT's illness, corroborated by the letter from
the consultant hepatologist of 13 June 2019.  Whilst there is no medical
report, the evidence is sufficient to establish she has cirrhosis of the
liver and that this is not a transient condition.  She does not have a lot
of energy.  Her work is sedentary.  She does not have an entitlement to
public funds.  Her health condition would impact on her ability to juggle
childcare and work commitments.

Mr Malik turned to the report of the independent social worker on which he
stated he relied quite heavily.  In his view, the report showed that there
would be a particularly severe impact on L should the Appellant be
deported.  He drew my attention to the credentials of the social worker.
Her conclusions could not sensibly be challenged. Her report is consistent
and complies with the requirements relating to expert evidence.  He urged
me to accept the conclusions in the way that they are clinically and
professionally articulated.  He specifically drew my attention to paras
7.27 and 7.42. He submitted that the report reflected that L has specific
anxiety about the prospect of separation.  He drew my attention to paras
7.44 and 8.4.  He asked me to take into account the conclusions in the
report in the context of L not knowing her biological father and not having
any contact with him.  He drew my attention to paras 8.5, 8.6 and 8.9.

Mr Malik accepted that linking emotional impact and outcome was probably a
matter of common sense. However, the report shows that there has been a
rigorous assessment.  It is a specific report based upon the forensic
analysis of the family.  Considering the evidence in the round, departure
of the Appellant would impact strongly on L's emotional wellbeing to the
point of impeding her development. It is against this background that TT
would become a sole parent.  She herself as health conditions and no access
to public funds.  Mr Malik accepted that the threshold is elevated even if
not by a significant margin.  However, the evidence establishes that
deportation of the Appellant would be meet the high threshold required.

Mr Tufan referred me to the case of KO and the test as approved in MK.
There is no medical report relating to TT.  She is suffering from cirrhosis
and has been for some years.  Should she be unable to take care of L the
Social Services would by law be obliged to help and provide for L.  He
relied on the case of BL (Jamaica) v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2016] EWCA Civ 357.  He submitted that the role of the Social
Services is not irrelevant.  He drew me to the social worker's conclusions
at paragraph 2 of the report.  TT runs her own business.  It was not clear
how many people she employs but it is not beyond her resources to pay
someone to look after L if she has to. There is no evidence that she was
not able to run her business when the Appellant was incarcerated.  It is
not challenged that it is in L's best interests for the Appellant to remain
in the UK.

Mr Tufan submitted that the social worker's conclusions at paragraph 8.6
that L would be at risk of emotional harm is speculative.

In response Mr Malik stated that the social worker was entitled to give an
opinion on the future impact of deportation and he asked me to take into
account the social worker's credentials and the quality of the report.

The legal framework

Sections 117A - D NIAA 2002 have set out public interest considerations
which a court or Tribunal must take into account in an appeal based upon
Article 8:

"117A    Application of this Part

(1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to determine
whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

(a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life under
Article 8, and

(b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act
1998.

(2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or tribunal
must (in particular) have regard -

(a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

(b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
considerations listed in section 117C.

(3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means the question
of whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private and
family life is justified under Article 8(2).

117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

(1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.

(2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English, because
persons who can speak English -

(a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent, because
such persons -

(a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

(b)  are better able to integrate into society.

(4)  Little weight should be given to -

(a)  a private life, or

(b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
Kingdom unlawfully.

(5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

(6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where -

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom.

117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving foreign
criminals

(1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

(2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the
greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

(3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been sentenced to
a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

(4)  Exception 1 applies where -

(a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's
life,

(b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

(c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration into the
country to which C is proposed to be deported.

(5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship
with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on
the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

(6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period
of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest requires
deportation unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above
those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

(7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken into
account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to deport a
foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision was
the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

117D Interpretation of this Part

(1)  In this Part-

'Article 8' means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;

'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age of 18 and who -

(a)  is a British citizen, or

(b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years
or more;

'qualifying partner' means a partner who -

(a)  is a British citizen, or

(b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of the
Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

(2)  In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -

(a)  who is not a British citizen,

(b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

(c)  who -

(i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months,

(ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm, or

(iii)    is a persistent offender.

(3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to an order
under -

(a)  section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity) Act 1964 (insanity
etc),

(b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (insanity
etc), or

(c)  Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order 1986
(insanity etc),

has not been convicted of an offence.

(4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of a certain length of time -

(a)  do not include a person who has received a suspended sentence (unless
a court subsequently orders that the sentence or any part of it (of
whatever length) is to take effect);

(b)  do not include a person who has been sentenced to a period of
imprisonment of that length of time only by virtue of being sentenced to
consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate to that length of time;

(c)  include a person who is sentenced to detention, or ordered or directed
to be detained, in an institution other than a prison (including, in
particular, a hospital or an institution for young offenders) for that
length of time; and

(d)  include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or detention, or
ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period, provided
that it may last for at least that length of time.

(5)  If any question arises for the purposes of this Part as to whether a
person is a British citizen, it is for the person asserting that fact to
prove it."

Immigration Rules

The considerations set out in Section 117C NIAA 2002 are reflected in IR,
which is the Immigration Rules, which provide, so far as is material:

"A398.   These rules apply where:

(a)  a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his deportation
would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of
the Human Rights Convention;

(b)  a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against him to
be revoked.

398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to the
UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and

(a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public
good and in the public interest because they have been convicted of an
offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
at least 4 years;

(b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public
good and in the public interest because they have been convicted of an
offence for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

(c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the public
good and in the public interest because, in the view of the Secretary of
State, their offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent
offender who shows a particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of
State in assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A
applies and, if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only
be outweighed by other factors where there are very compelling
circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

(i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

(ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision; and in either
case

(a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country to which
the person is to be deported; and

(b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
person who is to be deported; or

(b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the UK, and

(i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person (deportee) was
in the UK lawfully and their immigration status was not precarious; and

(ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the country to
which the person is to be deported, because of compelling circumstances
over and above those described in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

(iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK
without the person who is to be deported.

399A.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

(a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life;
and

(b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

(c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into the
country to which it is proposed he is deported."

Application of legislation and the Immigration Rules

In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC
53, Lord Carnwath (giving the judgment of the Supreme Court) analysed the
exception, based on the deportee's relationship with a qualifying child, in
Section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 and paragraph 399(a) IR.  At [15], he explained
that he started from the presumption that the provisions were intended to
be consistent with the general principles relating to the "best interests"
of children, including the principle that "a child must not be blamed for
matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a
parent" (see Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
UKSC 74per Lord Hodge at [10]).  He concluded that the exception was self-
contained and so, in deciding whether or not it applied, the decision maker
should only consider the factors specified, and disregard the degree of
seriousness of the parental offending and other public interest
considerations (at [20] - [23]).

Lord Carnwath gave guidance on the meaning of "unduly harsh" at [23]:

"23. On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly intended
to introduce a higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness' under section
117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the deportation of
foreign criminals.  Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of
comparison.  It assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is
a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context.
'Unduly' implies something going beyond that level.  The relevant context
is that set by section 117C(1), that is the public interest in the
deportation of foreign criminals.  One is looking for a degree of harshness
going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with
the deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my view (and
subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a balancing
of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence, other than is
inherent in the distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to
length of sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT
(Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932,
[2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement to
show 'very compelling reasons'.  That would be in effect to replicate the
additional test applied by section 117C(6) with respect to sentences of
four years or more."

Lord Carnwath cited with approval the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal
in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
UKUT 223 (IAC):

"... 'unduly harsh' does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,
undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses a considerably more
elevated threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or
bleak.  It is the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore, the
addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still
higher."

The Upper Tribunal more recently in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence:
seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 considered KO and the unduly harsh
test.  The headnote insofar as it relates to the issues in this case reads
as follows:

"(1) In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the Supreme Court of the test of 'unduly
harsh' in section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002, formulated by the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT223 (IAC), does not mean that the
test includes the way in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation
to the facts of the case before it.

(2)  The way in which a court or tribunal should approach section 117C
remains as set out in the judgment of Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) & Another
v Secretary of State[2016] EWCA Civ 662.

(3)  Section 117C(6) applies to both categories of foreign criminals
described by Lord Carnwath in paragraph 20 of KO (Nigeria); namely, those
who have not been sentenced to imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those
who have.  Determining the seriousness of the particular offence will
normally be by reference to the length of sentence imposed and what the
sentencing judge had to say about seriousness and mitigation; but the
ultimate decision is for the court or tribunal deciding the deportation
case.

(4)  Rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material weight in favour of a
foreign criminal."

The Tribunal stated at paragraph 17 the following:

"17. As can be seen from paragraph 27 of KO (Nigeria), the test of 'unduly
harsh' has a dual aspect.  It is not enough for the outcome to be 'severe'
or 'bleak'.  Proper effect must be given to the adverb 'unduly'.  The
position is, therefore, significantly far removed from the test of
'reasonableness', as found in section 117B(6)(b)."

Conclusions

There was no challenge to the credibility of the Appellant and TT. I accept
their evidence. Whilst their statements lack detail, the social worker's
report is very detailed.  I accept the conclusions of the social worker
which support the Appellant and TT's evidence.

I have taken into account that the Appellant is currently a house husband.
However, I find that this is likely to be as a result of his status here an
inability to seek employment.  I accept that TT has health problems as
evidenced by the correspondence from a consultant.   I find that this has
an impact on her ability to live life to the full. Her condition makes her
lethargic. I am not prepared to speculate about a future prognosis in the
absence of a medical report. The evidence is that she is able to run a
business.  Whilst raising a child singlehandedly would no doubt cause
difficulties for her, she has managed to do so previously whilst running a
business at a time when L was younger (when arguably her demands were
greater) whilst the Appellant was in custody between November 2014 and
August 2015.  Whilst I accept that life as a single parent would not be
easy for her, she has done it previously and it is reasonable to infer that
she has friends (friends of the family were identified by both the
Appellant and TT to the social worker) that are able and willing to assist
her. It is reasonable to infer from the evidence that she could employ
someone to arrange cover in the workplace to enable her to take over
childcare responsibilities.  There was no evidence before me about her
business structure or hours worked.  I have drawn reasonable inferences
from the evidence before me.

There is in this case no doubt whatsoever that L and the Appellant are in a
genuine and subsisting parental relationship. The social worker has
prepared a thorough and properly resourced report.  She has impressive
credentials.  There is no reason not to attach weight to her professional
opinions.  There is no challenge to her best interest's assessment.
However, her conclusions do not simply address what is in L's best
interests, it is a far more nuanced than that.  I attach weight to the
social worker's conclusions when considering whether separation of the
family would be unduly harsh.

The social worker has concluded that deportation would leave L at risk of
emotional harm.  The challenge to her evidence was that her findings about
harm caused to L were speculative. I engage with this submission. Much of
the assessment of the social worker concerns the situation of a child
losing a primary attachment, in this case a daughter losing a father. Some
of the conclusions are generic and is not evidence that meets the elevated
threshold. However, I accept Mr Malik's submission that one of the factors
that make this case unusual is that L does not have a relationship with her
biological father.  L has already lost a father and it is this factor that
makes this case unusual.  Her biological father is absent from her life.
This is a matter to which the social worker attached weight. L has
effectively already lost a parent. A proper reading of the report and its
conclusions makes it clear that the social worker's more far reaching
conclusions concerning L suffering emotional harm were made against this
background. I have attached weight to the social worker's experience, that
the report is properly resourced and that there is no challenge of
significance to the social worker's professional ability.  Whilst TT's
health, economic factors and the reality of being a single parent do not
nearly, alone or together, amount to unduly harsh, cumulatively considered
together with the compelling evidence of the social worker these factors
reach the high threshold required to meet the elevated test. I conclude
that the impact of the Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on L.

Therefore, the appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date11 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
