
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/09837/2019
                                                               PA/09841/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2020                  |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                        |M T                     |                        |
|                        |                        |First Appellant         |
|                        |M M                     |                        |
|                        |                        |Second Appellant        |


                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Nadeem, a legal representative from Piper May
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellants  or
either of them. Breach of this order can  be  punished  as  a  contempt  of
court. I make this order because the appellants are asylum seekers and  are
entitled to privacy.

2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  They claim to be gay and  in  a
gay relationship.  They appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing their appeals against decisions of the respondent on 30
September 2019 refusing them international protection.

3. In simple terms, on the facts of this case, if  they  are  believed  then
they are refugees but they were not believed  and  the  grounds  of  appeal
allege that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  reaching  the  adverse
credibility findings that it did.

4. It is helpful to summarise their cases.

5. The first appellant, MT, was born on 21 November 1988.  He said  that  he
is from a Pakistani Muslim family.  He went to school in Lahore and  became
friends with a person identified as "Norman".  When he was about 14  or  15
years old he had a sexual encounter with Norman and this helped him realise
that he was gay although he  never  disclosed  his  sexual  orientation  to
anyone in Pakistan.  Nevertheless he believed his mother at  least  doubted
his heterosexuality.

6. He said he was bullied at college and so that he was unable  to  complete
his college course.

7. He entered the United Kingdom with permission as a student in March  2011
and that leave was extended until April 2015.

8. He met the second appellant in November 2012 in Bradford.  They formed  a
friendship.  According to MT they spent New Year's Eve together in 2013 and
had breakfast together  on  1  January  2014.   According  to  his  witness
statement he believed they both had feelings towards each other but MM  was
then married and they did not discuss how they felt.

9. Again according to MT, the appellants stayed together for  a  short  time
in December 2013 in Bradford and that was where they exchanged their  first
kiss.  MT then advised MM to leave his wife and when  MT  returned  from  a
planned visit to Pakistan in about  April  2014  they  could  start  living
together.

10. MT said that at some time during his visit to Pakistan  he  intended  to
tell his family that he was gay but he could not bring himself to tell them
when they were together and he told them by telephone on his  return.   The
First-tier Tribunal said that this news  "was  not  received  well  by  the
family" and MTT was threatened.

11. In May 2014 MM did leave his wife and after the  appellant  MT  returned
from Pakistan MM and MT started to cohabit in May 2014 and  have  continued
to cohabit.

12. On 21 February 2015 MT applied for leave to remain as a dependant  in  a
private and family life application.  When the application was  refused  on
10 November 2017 the appellant MT applied for asylum on 1 December 2017.

13. The second appellant, MM, said that  he  too  was  born  into  a  Muslim
family in Pakistan.  He was educated in Pakistan and came  to  realise  his
sexual orientation in his school years and he confirmed that he was gay  in
a relationship with a friend identified as Shafiq.   The  relationship  was
conducted secretly and lasted for about seven months until  Shafiq  removed
to a different part of Pakistan.

14. The appellant MM started to work in Lahore.  In September 2010, when  he
was 27 years old, he was "forced" by his family to marry a Ms RA who  is  a
British citizen then visiting Pakistan.  After the marriage she returned to
the United Kingdom.

15. The appellant remained in Pakistan and then entered the  United  Kingdom
in March 2011 as a student with valid leave until July 2013.

16. He said that in 2012 he met  the  other  appellant  in  Bradford  whilst
visiting friends and they formed a friendship.  MM  said  that  in  October
2012 he visited Pakistan for about three weeks for the very sad reason that
his sister had died suddenly.  During that  visit  members  of  his  family
encouraged him strongly to re-establish  a  marital  relationship  with  RA
which the appellant had stopped on entering the United Kingdom.

17. He succumbed to family pressure and started to live with  his  wife  and
in July 2013 applied for leave to remain as her spouse.  He complained that
his wife relied on and unexpectedly excessive levels of support from him.

18. The application for further leave was refused and he  appealed  and  the
appeal was dismissed.

19. It is his case that while the application and appeal were  underway  the
two appellants spent a  week  together  in  Bradford  and  formed  a  close
relationship with each other.  According to MM, MT visited MM in London for
a week in December 2013 before going to Pakistan in April 2014.

20. In May 2014 MM divorced his wife and  started  living  with  friends  in
Bradford and then found love and affection with  the  other  appellant  and
they started to live together, according to MM, in July 2014.

21. From July 2014 to February 2015 MM made further applications  to  remain
on account of being gay and in a relationship with the other appellant  but
the applications were refused in October 2014 and again in November 2015.

22. On 1 December 2017 he applied for  asylum  claiming  that  he  would  be
persecuted in Pakistan for  being  gay  especially  as  he  was  in  a  gay
relationship with the other appellant.

23. As indicated, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  believe  either  of
them.

24. The appellant MT did not give evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
He was at the hearing but was not called.  The Presenting Officer  made  it
plain that she would like to have cross-examined the first appellant.

25. Paragraph 46 of the Decision and Reasons is particularly important.   It
states:

  "As stated above, the [first] appellant attended the  hearing  but  chose
  not to give oral evidence. [The Presenting  Officer]  submitted  I  find,
  with some force that the medical evidence before the Tribunal  falls  far
  short of any diagnosis  to  suggest  that  the  [first  appellant]  lacks
  capacity or is incapable of giving oral evidence,  the  medical  evidence
  being limited to the [first appellant] being forgetful and showing  signs
  of mental health issues without any conclusive diagnoses.  Further, there
  is no evidence on the medication the [first appellant] is receiving,  the
  [first appellant] was initially prescribed Olanzapine in 2018  before  it
  was changed to Risperidone.  [The Presenting Officer] also  very  clearly
  indicated that the respondent does not  accept  the  [first  appellant's]
  evidence to be credible and had  every  intention  to  cross-examine  the
  [first appellant]."

26. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said that he was referred to the  Practice
Direction "First-tier and Upper Tribunal  -  child,  vulnerable  adult  and
sensitive witnesses" and the "Joint Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of
2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  Appellant  guidance"  and  Mr
Nadeem applied for the appellant to be treated as a vulnerable witness.

27. The judge found the absence of  any  medical  evidence  to  confirm  the
first appellant's incapacity to give oral evidence or to cope  with  cross-
examination to limit the weight that could be  attached  to  any  statement
that he may have made.  This point was enhanced because  the  Tribunal  had
directed that such evidence was to be provided if it was to  be  said  that
the appellant did not wish to give oral evidence.

28. However the judge then directed himself at paragraph 49  that  he  would
treat the evidence with "due care".

29. The judge said at paragraph 50 that the first appellant  MT  claimed  to
have had his first sexual encounter of any kind with his friend Norman when
he was approximately 14 or 15 years old.  The judge said:

  "I do  not  find  the  undisclosed  sexual  conduct  with  Norman  to  be
  sufficient to discharge the burden on the first appellant of establishing
  the [first appellant's] sexual orientation."

30. The judge then noted that the  first  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
bullied due to his sexual orientation was  not  established.   It  was  the
first appellant's case that he had not disclosed his  orientation  and  the
fact he was bullied "is not indicative of the  [first  appellant's]  sexual
orientation being gay or bisexual."

31. The judge noted inconsistencies between the accounts of the  appellants.
 According to the first appellant in  his  statement  the  first  appellant
moved to Bristol after he had come back from Pakistan in April 2014 and the
second appellant left his wife in April 2014 and moved to  Croydon  and  at
the end of May 2014 the first appellant moved in with the second appellant.
 That clearly means "in Croydon".

32. However, the second appellant said that he had a "fight" with  his  wife
in around April/May 2014 and left her and started living  with  friends  in
Bradford.  That was about  the  time  the  first  appellant  returned  from
Pakistan and that is when they started to reshape their lives.  He divorced
and started living with the first appellant in July 2014.

33. May is not July.

34. The first appellant said they had spent a few days together in  December
2013 in Bradford.  The second appellant said they had spent  time  together
in December 2013 in London.

35. The  judge  found  it  also  "more  than  a  coincidence".   The  second
appellant claimed to have started living with the first appellant from July
2014 which was a few days after receiving the Upper Tribunal's refusal  for
permission to appeal.

36. The judge said at paragraph 55:

  "In my view, this particular  time  together  was  significant  in  their
  relationship as it was during these days that the appellants are said  to
  have shared their first kiss and the inconsistency in their  evidence,  I
  find, undermines their credibility and the fact of the relationship being
  genuine."

37. The judge then referred to  other  evidence.   He  had  seen  supporting
evidence from witnesses a Mr ST and a Mr HU.  Both witnesses said they  had
known the second appellant since 2013 and they had known the appellants  to
have been in a relationship since 2012.  It  was  pointed  out  fairly,  if
rather obviously, that they could not know the appellants to have been in a
relationship since 2012 if they did not know  the  appellants  until  2013.
The  judge  found  their  evidence  generally   unpersuasive.    There   is
documentary evidence which the judge considered but he did  not  find  that
particularly helpful.

38. The nub of the grounds which were relied on heavily by Mr Nadeem in  the
case of the first appellant is that the judge was wrong not to factor  into
his analysis the health problems faced by the  first  appellant.   This  is
potentially a very powerful point and may  well  be  the  main  reason  for
permission to appeal being given.   The  problem  is  that  the  evidential
foundation has not been laid to make it good.

39. The grounds assert that the  caseworker  dealing  with  the  matter  had
decided that because the first appellant had a blood clot on his  brain  he
would deal with the matter by way of a statement which was  served  on  the
respondent.  The solicitors objected to the respondent wanting to interview
the claimant.  The caseworker dealing with  the  matter  had  decided  that
because the first appellant had a blood clot on his  brain  he  would  deal
with the matter by way of a statement which was served on  the  respondent.
The  solicitors  objected  to  the  respondent  wanting  to  interview  the
claimant.  The grounds assert that the judge failed  to  note  the  medical
evidence (see pages 246 - 290 of appellants' bundle)  referring  to  issues
with memory recall as a result of a blood clot on his brain and also to his
"hearing voices".

40. I consider that evidence now.  Page 246 in the bundle is a  letter  from
a consultant  psychiatrist  a  Dr  Serena  Lai.   Dr  Lai  referred  to  an
examination of MT on 1 May 2019.  There is reference to  "things  with  his
partner going well and he has a good relationship with his  two  flatmates"
but the partner is not identified.

41. Dr Lai recorded that the appellant had said he could hear voices in  the
back of his head and gave details of the complaint.  Dr Lai identified  the
drugs that were prescribed and noted that no side  effects  were  reported.
Dr Lai suggested that the symptoms did not suggest a psychotic disorder but
rather  anxiety  and  emotional  dysregulation.   Dr  Lai  suggested   some
medication and a further appointment.  At page 248 and 249 are letters from
the South London  and  Maudsley  NHS  Foundation  Trust  dealing  with  the
appointment with Dr Lai.  A letter  at  page  250  similarly  concerns  the
meeting with Dr Lai.

42. At page 251 there is a letter  from  Dr  Lai  dated  28  February  2019.
Again it refers to a meeting with the first appellant and his "partner" who
again is not identified.  The letter is dated 28 February 2019.  It  refers
to the appellant feeling "much better".

43. He again reported frequent visits to  the  mosque  and  to  hearing  the
Muslim call to prayer in his head.

44. There is a letter dated 28 January 2019 from  a  Dr  Chivers  who  is  a
trainee doctor in psychiatry.

45. This refers  to  the  appellant  with  his  still  unidentified  partner
attending for a meeting.  It indicates the  medication  received  and  then
says  how  "his  partner  describes  concerns  that  he  feels  [the  first
appellant] has been forgetful for the last two months.  He  also  described
several occasions where his responses in conversations were not relevant or
did not make sense."

46. The doctor noted that the appellant attended on  time  and  was  dressed
appropriately and exhibited no abnormal behaviours.  He took details of the
first appellant's complaints about receiving the  call  to  prayer  in  his
head.  The doctor said:

  "There was subtle thought disorder in the form of circumstantiality.   He
  sometimes feels that people may be looking at him or  talking  about  him
  but these ideas were not  of  a  delusional  intensity.   Nil  Passivity.
  There were no thoughts of suicide, harm to self or others."

47. At page 255 is a letter from the Croydon Health Service which refers  to
an appointment being made for the appellant and how he should  prepare  for
it.  Next is a letter from the South London and Maudsley NHS  dated  3  May
2018.  This refers to the appellant being present with MM who is  described
in the following terms: "Partner,  joined  later  in  the  meeting  as  per
patient wishes." It was said that he had signs and symptoms suggested of  a
mental illness and on assessment he "appeared to be thought disordered" and
holds delusional beliefs and reported auditory hallucinations".

48. The assessment history included noting that he  had  arrived  punctually
and claimed the symptoms started roughly two years ago and started  with  a
decline in memory and was illustrated by repeatedly forgetting to lock  and
secure a cabinet at work so that he lost his job.  The  doctor  noted  that
although the appellant had described auditory  hallucinations  he  was  not
noted to be responding to external stimuli on  that  occasion.   I  do  not
understand the point has been made there.

49. The first appellant medical problems were formulated  in  the  following
terms:

  "A  29  year  old  gentleman  presenting  with  probably  first   episode
  psychosis,  has  been  symptomatic  since  two  years  ago.   Significant
  problems with  memory  prompting  importance  of  brain  imaging.   Lupus
  antibody +ve and GPs following  up  on  this.   Has  taken  Clanzapine  5
  milligrams for two weeks  but  does  not  tolerate  due  to  side  effect
  profile.   It would be important to investigate physical illness  and  to
  switch to another antipsychotic for tolerability".

50. There was also further information I think in the same  report  but  the
photocopy is such that I cannot read it competently.  There is confirmation
of medications and confirmation of an appointment.

51. It follows that on close  examination  of  the  evidence  I  have  found
nothing which supports the assertion that the first appellant was incapable
of giving evidence or that his memory was  so  unreliable  that  no  notice
would be taken of anything he might say.  There is  some,  not  very  much,
evidence of his being forgetful but no medical evidence  that  provides  an
excuse or explanation for that.

52. I do note that there is evidence that  the  first  appellant  introduced
the second appellant to his medical advisors as his partner  and  it  is  a
matter of surprise that this has not been subject to comment as  far  as  I
can see anywhere in the Decision and Reasons but  no  point  was  taken  of
this.

53. The appellants claim to be in a gay relationship.  They could not  agree
when the relationship started and they could not agree about when  intimacy
started.  The contention that the judge overlooked  evidence  from  medical
sources that provided an explanation for inconsistency or hesitancy is  not
made out.  Clearly it is in the mind of the appellants' representatives but
not in evidence before the Tribunal.  I do not know  what  mild  depressive
episodes might do to memory and I do not see any  evidence  confirming  the
symptoms complained of by the first appellant.  There was nothing clear for
the First-tier Tribunal Judge to factor in.

54. The second appellant's case is much harder to sustain.  The  problem  he
faced is that on own version of events he is a person entirely  willing  to
lie to the Tribunal to achieve an end.  I am very aware that he  claims  to
have been under enormous pressure from his family to establish  a  marriage
although that was contrary to his inclinations and  it  was  necessary  for
family reasons to try and win an appeal.  This is an obvious point  and  it
was disbelieved as a proper explanation by the judge.   Even  if  it  is  a
complete explanation it does not undermine  the  finding  that  the  second
appellant is willing to tell lies to achieve an end.   His  credibility  is
very seriously damaged.  The judge looked at all the evidence  and  decided
not to believer either of them.

55. I assume that the Direction that concerned the  judge  was  the  general
direction issued from Taylor House on 29 October 2019  that  the  appellant
"produce all medical evidence to be relied on for any aspect of the case".

56. This does not add much to the obvious point that  the  medical  evidence
was necessary to support a conclusion that the first appellant  was  either
unfit to give evidence or incapable of giving reliable evidence.

57. I look again at the medical report at page 261 in the bundle because  Mr
Nadeem expressly referred  me  to  it.   It  is  a  report  on  the  second
appellant.  It says there are no abnormalities seen in the brain.  Although
it is very badly reproduced so I cannot read it properly it does seem to be
some fault identified as a "thrombosis" but again  there  is  nothing  that
links that with an  inability  to  recall  accurately  or  express  himself
clearly.

58. In short, although I appreciate the point being made in the grounds  and
have considered the documents with all the care I can, I have  to  conclude
that the judge's decision is permissible and is not wrong in  law  for  the
reasons identified or as far as I can see at all and I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

59. These appeals are dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 May 2021                    |

