
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09098/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2021                     |On 10 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     ZB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the  appellant  is  an  asylum  seeker  and  is  entitled  to
protection.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan against a decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
respondent on 10 September 2019 refusing his application for  international
protection. The decision to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds was not
challenged.

3. Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 22  July
2020.  She said:

  "It is arguable that the judge erred in  considering  the  expert  report
  only after reaching adverse credibility findings, applying  Mibanga.   It
  is further arguable that the judge made findings as to the  substance  of
  the appellant's asylum claim without reference to the expert report which
  addressed those matters.  Lastly, the judge's assessment of  the  medical
  evidence may arguably have been  in  error  as  well  as  the  apparently
  inconsistent findings regarding the appellant's mental health".

4. There was a Rule 24 notice served by the respondent.   This  contends  in
summary  outline  for  the  purposes  of  introduction  that  the   adverse
credibility findings were open to the judge, that  the  judge  handled  the
medical evidence lawfully and there is no material error.

5.  I  begin  by  looking  carefully  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision.

6. The judge began by noting that the appellant's age had been  in  dispute.
He entered the United Kingdom on 14 November 2009 and  claimed  asylum  the
same day.  He said he was a minor but he was found to be an adult  and  his
date of birth was assessed as 1 January 1991.  He claimed  asylum  and  the
application was refused.  He appealed unsuccessfully and was appeal  rights
exhausted on 22 March 2010.

7. He remained in the United Kingdom and was encountered on 8  October  2018
when he was found  working  without  permission  in  the  kitchen  area  of
business premises.  He was detained pending removal and on 24 October  2018
made further submissions.  They were rejected on 14 December  2018  and  he
made still further representations on 20 June 2019 leading to the  decision
complained of.

8. The judge summarised the appellant's case.  He said that  he  would  risk
persecution from his paternal uncle who wanted to kill  him  and  from  the
Taliban particularly because he would be perceived as "westernised" because
of the time he had spent in the United Kingdom.  Additionally, he sought to
remain on "Article 8" grounds.

9. The judge then summarised the respondent's case.

10. The respondent reminded herself that the  appellant's  age  had  already
been determined against his claims, as was his fear of being  killed  by  a
paternal uncle.  The respondent did not accept the appellant was at risk at
all.

11. The respondent did not accept that conditions in Kabul were so bad  that
it was something from which he should be protected on humanitarian grounds.
 The respondent did not accept that the appellant was at any risk in  Kabul
from the Taliban and did not accept that if there was a risk it  could  not
be addressed by effective protection from the authorities there.

12. The judge reminded herself of the decision in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
702.  The judge then referred to a decision of Immigration Judge Alakija in
AA 01474 2020 promulgated on 5 March 2020. The judge then directed  herself
to background evidence and particularly the country  guidance  case  of  AS
(Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).

13. Starting at paragraph 35 the judge set out her findings.

14. At paragraph 35 the judge directed herself that she had considered  each
item of evidence and reviewed the evidence "in the round".  At paragraph 36
she repeated the claim to have looked at the evidence in the  round  having
had  regard  to  the  background  material.  At  paragraph   36   she   was
conspicuously careful, by referring to the decision in  HK  v  SSHD  [2006]
EWCA Civ 1037, to reminder herself that the story as  a  whole  had  to  be
assessed against the available country evidence and expert evidence as well
as its own internal consistency.

15. The judge then directed herself specifically to the  medical  report  of
Dr Michael Shortt dated 24  February  2020.   Dr  Shortt  is  a  consultant
forensic psychiatrist.  The judge noted that the  appellant  suffered  from
flashbacks "of  his  negative  experiences  in  Afghanistan".   The  expert
concluded that the  appellant  was  suffering  from  PTSD  and  a  moderate
depressive order.

16. I find paragraph 46 worthy of note and somewhat  troubling.   Dr  Shortt
had commented on the possibility of the appellant feigning his symptoms and
concluded that this would be "difficult" without  specific  psychiatric  or
medical knowledge.  The judge then said:

  "However,  the  expert  has  not  made  clear  what   psychiatric/medical
  knowledge would be required in order to feign a presentation of  symptoms
  or whether this is readily available on the  internet  and  there  is  no
  comment by the expert as to whether  his  overall  presentation  was  not
  consistent with the appellant feigning his symptoms".

17. The  judge  found  "no  persuasive  evidence"  that  the  appellant  had
suffered any mental health symptoms including flashbacks  until  after  his
detention in the United Kingdom.  The appellant  had  not  made  any  claim
about mental health symptoms in his first asylum claim and had not referred
to any memory or recall problems in his first application.  The judge found
that the appellant was fit enough to have obtained work irregularly in  the
United Kingdom and commented on the strain he would have experienced in the
United Kingdom.  The judge acknowledged that the appellant may have  "minor
mental health  symptoms  for  which  he  is  being  prescribed  a  standard
antidepressant" but the judge was not persuaded that he was suffering  from
PTSD or depression as a result of experiences in  Afghanistan.   The  judge
again said she did not accept  it  as  credible  that  he  would  not  have
mentioned being attacked by people with knives when interviewed earlier  if
such a thing had happened.

18. The judge did not find the appellant's supporting  witness  particularly
helpful.  Although they had known each other for some time  he  claimed  to
have only supported the appellant since his release from detention in 2019.
 The judge did not accept the appellant  was  "genuine  in  his  report  of
mental health symptoms".

19. The judge found nothing in the expert report that upset the  conclusions
reached by Judge Alakija.  The judge found the appellant  "not  a  credible
person".  The appellant had been found to have lied about his age  and  the
judge found no new evidence  that  improved  his  case.   At  paragraph  55
(paragraph 54) the judge said:

  "Overall I am satisfied that there is no new persuasive  evidence  relied
  upon by the appellant relating to his claim for asylum and  I  find  that
  the previous findings of fact are to be used as  my  starting  point  and
  applied in my determination of this appeal".

20. The judge then purported to apply them.  The judge did  not  accept  the
appellant's account.  The judge did not believe his alleged  problems  with
his paternal uncle or that his father was killed by the Taliban or that the
Taliban presented any problems in the future for the appellant in the event
of his return.  The judge did not believe the appellant  came  from  Kapisa
but found that the appellant came from Kabul.  The judge did not accept the
appellant would be at any kind of risk in the event of his return.

21. The judge acknowledged the  expert  report  of  Dr  Giustozzi  dated  19
February 2020 and found the report substantially dependent on the appellant
being credible and the judge did not believe the appellant.

22. In her first ground Ms Revill criticises the  judge's  approach  to  the
expert report.

23. She notes that Dr Antonio Giustozzi opined that the account of the  land
dispute with the paternal uncle was "perfectly plausible".  Indeed, amongst
Pashtuns such a dispute "often occurs".  Her point is that this is a reason
to depart from the earlier findings and the judge has not  dealt  with  it.
The judge has not entirely ignored  the  report  on  this  aspect.   It  is
mentioned in passing at paragraph 64 which begins by the judge saying  that
overall she does not accept the appellant's account of  the  problems  with
his paternal uncle or other things.  She goes on to say:

  "Whilst I note that kin conflict is a  typical  feature  of  the  Pashtun
  countryside, especially amongst cousins, as set out in the country expert
  report, I find that the appellant's account regarding his  conflict  from
  his paternal uncle is fabricated and that he has not proved to the  lower
  standard of proof that a genuine conflict exists or that  he  is  at  any
  genuine risk on return to his home area".

24. The judge drew attention to well-known observations of Wilson J  (as  he
then was) in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and particularly  the  part
at paragraph 24 that she emphasised:

  "What the fact-finder does at his peril  is  to  reach  a  conclusion  by
  reference only to the appellant's evidence and then, if it  be  negative,
  to ask whether the conclusion should be shifted by the expert evidence".

25. Ms Revill contended that this is precisely the error  committed  by  the
First-tier Judge in this case.

26.  The  second  ground  again  criticises  the  judge's  approach  to   Dr
Giustozzi's report.  The judge rejected  the  appellant's  claim  that  his
paternal uncle had taken his land from him on the basis  that  "it  is  not
credible that another male member of the family would not have taken  steps
to ... assist him".  According to the grounds the  difficulty  is  that  Dr
Giustozzi regarded land grabbing as a  "major  issue"  in  Afghanistan  and
trying to reclaim the land can be "very dangerous".  The grounds contended,
in effect, that the judge's speculation about somebody  rushing  to  assist
the appellant was contrary to the expert evidence.

27. The third ground complains about the treatment  of  the  report  of  the
consultant forensic psychiatrist.  The grounds particularly  criticise  the
judge for commenting on the absence of medical evidence at a time when  the
appellant was not entitled to national health care.  It was never his  case
that suffering from PTSD and depression stopped  him  working.   The  judge
gave no proper  reason  for  rejecting  Dr  Shortt's  conclusion  that  the
appellant suffered from PTSD which was likely to  worsen  on  removal  (AB2
p13) but the judge found  that  he  did  not  have  serious  mental  health
difficulties.

28. The fourth ground says the judge has made  inconsistent  findings  about
the appellant's mental health.  At paragraph 48 she accepted  that  he  had
mental problems because the judge said that the  appellant  "may  well  now
have some minor mental health symptoms for which he has been  prescribed  a
standard antidepressant" but then goes on to say that she is "not persuaded
that he has genuine mental health symptoms and finds that  he  has  feigned
symptoms in order to bolster his appeal".

29. These two positions are said to be contradictory.  If the judge  accepts
the appellant has mental health problems that would impact on how he  could
manage in Kabul and that should have been factored in.

30. Before me Ms Revill relied on her skeleton argument  of  3  March  2021.
This is, appropriately, based closely on her grounds of appeal to the Upper
Tribunal.   There  Ms  Revill  reasserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
approach to the evidence of Dr Giustozzi was fundamentally wrong.

31. Ms Revill  accepted  that  the  Rule  24  notice  was  correct  to  draw
attention to the judge referring to the report but, she said, the  decision
showed no consideration of it.  The point that would not go away  was  that
the very contention that the judge  had  rejected  had  been  described  as
plausible by the expert and no proper reason given for  not  following  his
opinion.

32. This is echoed in the development of the second ground where  Ms  Revill
repeats that Dr Giustozzi regarded  land  grabbing  as  a  major  issue  in
Afghanistan and that it can be "very dangerous and can be lethal to try  to
reclaim land".  This assertion is  clearly  against  the  judge's  apparent
finding that it was incredible that nobody stuck up for the appellant  when
the uncle tried to take the land and, Ms Revill suggested, made it credible
that even if the uncle was not involved somebody would have taken the  land
by now.  The problem is that the judge has not considered these  points  in
her decision.

33. Ground 3 deals with the treatment of  the  medical  report.   The  judge
found that the appellant does not have serious mental  health  difficulties
and that Dr Shortt was wrong to diagnosed PTSD which condition was expected
to deteriorate further.  The reasons  given  for  rejecting  the  diagnosis
appear to be that the appellant was not registered with a  general  medical
practitioner for ten years and did not mention his symptoms of  mental  ill
health on an earlier occasion and was able to work but it is not clear  why
these things should be seen as  so  important.   Plainly  it  is  at  least
possible that the absence of further medical evidence  was  connected  with
the absence of access to medical treatment.

34. This is not in any way to  commend  the  appellant  for  living  in  the
United Kingdom without permission but it is hard to criticise him  for  not
producing medical evidence at a time when he had  no  money  or  access  to
medical care.  It is not clear what was said on earlier occasions but  even
if the judge is right that the claim was not made earlier it is hard to see
why that undermines Dr Shortt's opinion.

35. In amplification of ground 4 it is said the judge  was  inconsistent  in
finding that the appellant "may well now have  some  minor  medical  health
problems" but also finding that she is not persuaded they are not  feigned.
It was Ms Revill's case that if  the  appellant  does  have  mental  health
problems that affects return to Kabul and it is not clear  what  the  judge
found.

36. Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response drawn by Ms J Isherwood who  is
also  a  Senior  Home  Office   Presenting   Officer.    Additionally,   he
particularly asked me to look at Dr Giustozzi's report which, he submitted,
was not as helpful as the appellant said.

37. Dr Antonio Giustozzi's report is dated 19 February 2020.   Much  of  the
report is certainly generic although that does not prevent it being useful.
 However, starting at paragraph 22, there is an assessment of the risk from
the uncle and the plausibility of the claim  exactly  as  set  out  in  the
grounds and skeleton argument.   I  do  not  share  Mr  Melvin's  professed
confidence that it could not have made any difference.   I  agree  with  Ms
Revill that considering the report is a necessary part of the  fact-finding
exercise.  It needs to be evaluated properly.

38. I similarly reject Mr Melvin's arguments concerning the medical  report.
 Whilst it is right that it is for the judge to evaluate the evidence I  do
not understand what point is being made when it is said there is no support
in the general medical practitioners' reports.  I also agree with Ms Revill
that it is not clear  what  degree  of  illness,  if  any,  the  judge  has
accepted.

39. It is perfectly  obvious  to  me  that  the  judge  has  considered  the
necessary documents.  Not only is this claim made but reference is made  to
the contents and, although I do not put  much  weight  on  this  because  I
cannot be sure it is the judge's work, certain parts on my  copies  of  the
documents have been highlighted suggesting that the  judge  had  them  very
much in mind.

40. I cannot get  round  Ms  Revill's  insistence  that  mere  reference  to
documents is not the same as showing proper consideration.  It may be  that
the judge has carried out the necessary mental exercises but they  are  not
reflected in the decision and I am  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  this
decision is unsound and I set it aside.

41. I also agree with Ms Revill that the deficiency goes to  the  very  root
of the matter and the appeal needs to be  redetermined  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal and I so direct.

42. Notice of Decision

43. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  and
direct that the appeal be redetermined in the First-tier Tribunal.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 August 2021                  |

