
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09182/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th January 2020                     |On 3rd February 2020               |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                             Mr Rawand Ali Fateh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sadiq of Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 23rd September 1997 and is a citizen of
Iraq.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 25th November 2017 and claimed
asylum or other protection.

2.   By a decision of 11th September 2019, the respondent refused the claim
and declined to give any relief.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal
came before Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McClure on 28th
October 2019.

4.   It was the case as advanced on behalf of the appellant that he was at
risk from ISIS or from any organisation that had replaced it.  He
originally came from Mosul and said that whilst in Mosul he worked with his
maternal uncle as a mechanic and selling water.  Whilst he and his sister
were out shopping he was seized by a group of ISIS followers but eventually
managed to escape.  He managed to get back to his uncle's shop.  His uncle
helped him out of Mosul and made arrangements for him to cross the border
into Turkey.  In Turkey the appellant claimed that he spent some two years
working in a restaurant.  It was not doing very well but he was paid a
significant sum of money which he saved up which allowed him to make the
journey out of Turkey to the United Kingdom.

5.   The Judge comprehensively disbelieved the appellant as to his account
for the reasons as set out in the determination.  He did not find the
account of his seizure by ISIS together with his sister and his escape
credible and cogent reasons for finding that are set out in the
determination.

6.   Further, it was not accepted, given the experiences of the appellant
in Turkey, that he would have had the resources purely from working to
finance his journey to the United Kingdom.  The Judge came to the
conclusion that throughout this matter the appellant had been supported by
his maternal uncle and others.

7.   Thus, in terms of return, the Judge noted that there were returns to
Mosul and also to Erbil.

8.   The appellant claimed that his CSID card had been at home and that his
uncle no longer could be contacted by telephone and none of his friends
could be contacted by telephone, whether mobile or landline.  The Judge did
not accept that the appellant would be unable to contact his family members
or friends.  There was no reason why he could not contact his family in
order to obtain the necessary documentation.  Indeed there was no why the
appellant could not obtain the financial assistance of his uncle and of his
family.

9.   Thus, it was that the appeal was dismissed.

10.  The appellant sought to appeal against that decision on the basis that
there was no evidence of any functioning registry in Mosul and no pertinent
consideration under the guidance set out in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212.  It is argued that the Judge failed
to consider the difficult situation of Mosul, that it had been ravaged in
recent years and that millions had fled the city.  Such was, it was argued,
a relevant consideration in terms of the accessibility to the appellant to
family members and support in obtaining the relevant documentation.

11.  Further, it was argued that the Judge had vastly underestimated the
difficulty facing the appellant in obtaining the CSID card.

12.  Leave to appeal was granted on those matters and thus, the appeal
comes before me to determine those challenges.

13.  The Upper Tribunal has published further country guidance on the issue
of Iraq in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019]
UKUT 00400 (IAC).  This is a recent decision promulgated in December of
2019 and looks at matters that would have been current at the time that the
determination in relation to the appellant's case was being heard.

14.  It is argued on behalf of the appellant that fairness would dictate
that he should have the benefit of having his case considered in the light
of that new country guidance case.

15.  Mr Sadiq cogently argues that it is entirely apparent from that
decision that Western Mosul is largely in ruins whereas Eastern Mosul is in
a better condition.  Millions fled during the occupation by ISIS although
it would seem that nearly 1,000,000 have subsequently returned.  He submits
that, given the extent of the destruction, it cannot be reasonably
considered without more attention to the detail that the appellant had a
home to go to or that he has family members still living in Mosul, given
the extent of the destruction and the many people who left in the conflict.
 It was argued therefore that it is simplistic in the extreme for the Judge
to consider that there would be any viable family support open to the
appellant to obtain a CSID.

16.  Further, and linked of course with that submission is the contention
that because so many people have returned that the conditions in Mosul and
indeed in other cities are extremely bad, given the overcrowding, lack of
employment and so forth.

17.  It is said, therefore, that the appellant could not return without the
CSID and in any event if returned would meet humanitarian difficulties.

18.  The Upper Tribunal in SMO has been entirely clear that return to most
parts of that area including Mosul and Erbil would not entail any breach of
Article 15(c).

19.  In some ways the recent country decision potentially advances the case
of the appellant and in others not.  For example, an argument that was
advanced by the respondent was that the laissez-passer issued to facilitate
removal to Baghdad would also act as an identity document for travel
further onwards.  The Tribunal rejected that contention, saying that it was
likely that upon arrival in Baghdad the laissez-passer would be confiscated
and that there needed to be therefore some valid authority to travel
further without engaging with checkpoints.  It is also said that the
central registry in Baghdad would not be of much assistance to people who
were not born there.

20.  That having been said, there is little in the decision of SMO as to
whether or not there are records still preserved in Mosul.  What is clear
is that a CMO has been established in nearby towns including Erbil so as to
facilitate those from Mosul obtaining a CSID.

21.  Whether the appellant's home was in the destroyed area or on the
eastern part is perhaps unclear.  What is entirely clear, however, and of
utmost relevance, it seems to me, in the factual matrix of this case, is
the continuing support of the appellant certainly by his uncle if not their
family as found by the Judge.  Mosul itself was retaken in July 2017 and
many returned to the city at that time, having been displaced previously.

22.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom in November 2017, having
claimed that for the previous two years he had been living and working in
Turkey.  The Judge's finding was that he had been at least provided with
the financial support to come to the United Kingdom, which was not
inconsiderable.  It was the finding of the Judge that such support came
from the uncle or family.  In other words, whatever may or may not have
been the situation prior to 2017, it was clear that in 2017 the appellant's
family members or some of them were so sufficiently established as able to
financially support him.  So, although there may have been great
destruction within Mosul it was the finding of the Judge that the family
members were still able to lend support.  It seems to me that in the
context of the evidence given at the hearing, that that is a reasonable and
sensible conclusion open to the Judge to make.  No detail has been provided
by the appellant as to where he lived or indeed as to whether that was an
area totally destroyed or not.

23.  The great hurdle which the appellant faces is the very clear finding
that throughout his claim and continuing he has not been credible nor told
the truth as to his experiences.

24.  That is particularly relevant when it comes to the details of the CSID
itself.  In order to obtain a replacement, it is necessary to have details
as to the volume, page and the civil number that is attached to that
document.  In paragraphs 391 and 392 of SMO the Tribunal consider that it
would be extremely unlikely, given the centrality of such a document to the
lives of those who own it, that those who fled from the area would not have
taken the document with them and certainly would have been aware of the
detail as to its volume, page and number, such as to obtain a replacement.

25.  In this particular case the Judge was faced with an individual whom he
has found (and significantly not a matter that has been the subject of
appeal) thoroughly discredited as to the evidence given.  The appellant is
untruthful about the reason for leaving and what he did and how he lived
his life thereafter.  It would be surprising indeed that any reliance could
be placed upon his evidence that he left this vital document behind at home
or that he could not remember its details in order to get a replacement or
that family members could not assist him in that process.

26.  Mr McVeety invites me to find that, rather than assisting the
appellant's case, the more recent country guidance gives little assistance
to it.  Although there was no specific finding made by the Tribunal Judge
as to whether or not the appellant in fact had his CSID that would be a
finding open to the Tribunal to make upon a rehearing and would be one in
which, given the strong findings of lack of credibility, and the comments
in SMO is likely to be made.  The reality is that it is extremely unlikely,
he submits, that the appellant left without his document. He had not been
truthful in any aspect of his claim and therefore his contention that he
does not have the document and cannot find it and that he does not a family
member and cannot find one is to be given little weight in common sense and
reason.

27.   Mr Sadiq seeks to argue that the matters were not put to the
appellant and therefore that he ought to have the opportunity and fairness
to dealing with them.  He also contends that the findings of the Tribunal
in SMO as to documentation does not assist as to the humanitarian problems
that people returning by their millions to an area of little infrastructure
would have.

28.  Looking at the matter overall, I find that, although there were
perhaps criticisms that could be made of the determination and in
particular the potential confusion which the Judge had as to whether
certain areas were part of the Kurdistan region of Iraq, nevertheless the
overall findings as to credibility were sustainable and, as I have
indicated, have not in fact been challenged.  People are returning to
Mosul. There is an alternative registry set up to deal with those from
Mosul.  The appellant could in any event safely return to Erbil if not to
Mosul and the finding by the Judge that he has still family members in
Mosul that could assist him in relation to the CSID are, in my view,
properly open to be made.

29.  I find there to be little assistance that would be given to the
appellant in considering SMO in detail but rather that it is a decision
that is generally unhelpful to the appellant rather than to the reverse.

30.  Looking therefore as to whether any error that may be visited upon the
decision is a material one.  It seems to me that consideration should be
given to that country guidance case.

31.  It seems to me, therefore, that the findings of the Judge were
properly open to him, particularly so in the wider context as highlighted
by SMO.  The Judge found that the appellant would be able to make contact
with his uncle and would be able to return and integrate himself into
society in Mosul.

32.  Little evidence has been adduced that would not be so.

33.  Although it may be argued that the Tribunal Judge ought to have delved
in a little more detail into the issue of how the appellant could access
Mosul with a CSID and how he could obtain it, it seems to me that there
were a number of possibilities that were open to be considered and that the
Judge properly considered some of those.

34.  Overall therefore, I do not find there to be a material error of law
in the determination.

35.  Thus, the appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision
of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely that the appeal is dismissed
in respect of asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2, 3 and 4 of
the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.








Signed  P.D.King                                           Date  28  January
    2020


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


