
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/09962/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10th May 2021                           |On 10th June 2021               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mr N R J C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by AASK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The application for permission to appeal was made by the Home Office but
for the purposes of this decision I shall refer to the parties as they were
described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr C as the appellant
(Indian national born on 10th May 1990) and the Secretary of State for the
Home Department as the respondent.

The respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Coll promulgated on 21st January 2021 following a hearing on 13th January
which allowed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the Secretary
of State, dated 30th September 2019, to grant asylum and humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds (Article 3 European Convention on Human
Rights).  The appeal was refused on Article 8 human rights grounds.  There
was no cross appeal on the refusal.

The Secretary of State submitted that the sole issue was in relation to
credibility and at paragraph 19 of the decision the judge stated:

"Mr Thompson relied on the reasons letter.  The appellant had been unable
to explain any of the inconsistencies in his evidence.  In particular, why
he had described his father as a councillor when he was a civil servant.
Secondly, why he had given two accounts of what had happened on leaving the
airport on return from Bolivia.  Thirdly, why he had given two accounts of
the authorities' involvement with him on his release into custody.
Fourthly, how he had been able to be issued with a passport (on 21 March
2017) if he were of interest to the authorities.  Finally, how he had been
able to leave Mumbai airport for the UK without problems.  In sum, he was
not credible."

At paragraph 20, however, the judge stated she had carefully considered the
oral testimony of the appellant and his brother-in-law and the written
evidence and documents and found the evidence of the appellant and the
brother-in-law consistent, credible and reliable.  The grounds for
permission to appeal added that having heard the appellant, the judge
stated that the appellant failed to explain most of the inconsistencies put
to him and he seemed to be struggling during much of the hearing and that
he was somewhat vague.  Nonetheless, the judge found that his failure to
explain the inconsistencies should not damage his credibility.

It was submitted that the judge erred in finding that the appellant was
consistent, credible and reliable as the judge had contradicted herself
having already stated that he had failed to explain most of the
inconsistencies which went to the core of the claim.  The vulnerability of
the appellant was not sufficient to override the unexplained
inconsistencies of his evidence and the judge had misdirected herself in
accordance with SB (vulnerable adult: credibility) Ghana [2019] UKUT 398.
There was no assessment of the extent of the vulnerability and its effect
on the quality of the evidence.

The judge at paragraph 28 refers to the medical report of Dr Grande which
briefly refers to inconsistencies at (v) but this related to the account of
ill-treatment, not inconsistencies.  The judge failed to provide reasons as
to why this related to issues outside the account of mistreatment.

Further, in relation to the brother-in-law's evidence, which the judge
found to be supportive, the judge noted at paragraphs 32 to 33 that the
absence of mention of the appellant in the brother-in-law's interview was
an 'apparent major weakness' in the appeal.  The judge explained this at 34
but it was wholly unclear why the judge accepted the explanation that the
appellant was very young and required protection at the time of the brother-
in-law's interview.

Further at paragraph 36 the judge set out that the brother-in-law verified
that the appellant had been arrested on return from Bolivia but found in
the alternative that even if she was wrong this was of no significance.
However, later in the same paragraph the judge relied on this as a
corroborating factor.  First, it was unclear and without a reason how the
brother-in-law was able to corroborate such an event as it occurred at a
time when he was not in contact with the appellant or his family.
Secondly, in finding that the appellant was unable to explain
inconsistencies it was unclear how the evidence of the brother-in-law was
in fact corroborative.

Finally, the judge failed to take into account the matter of Section 8 as
raised in the decision letter at paragraphs 31 to 33.

Overall, the judge had materially erred in her consideration of
credibility.

In a Rule 24 response it was submitted that the grounds did not identify a
material error of law and amounted to a mere disagreement with the findings
and the conclusion that the appellant was credible.

The grounds did not challenge the medico-legal report of Dr Grande from
Freedom from Torture, which found that his examination findings were
congruent with the appellant's account of his treatment during detention.

It was submitted that the judge had provided sufficient reasoning for
finding the respondent's account credible and did not simply rely on the
respondent's vulnerability to override unexplained inconsistencies but
considered evidence which provided explanations as to inconsistencies and
evidence which assisted her to reach her findings.  The judge, having
considered all the evidence and submissions, accepted the appellant's
account.  In addition, contrary to the grounds, not all the inconsistencies
went to the core of the account, for example the father's job description.
The judge considered the guidance on vulnerable witnesses giving evidence
and noted he had mental health problems of such severity that he warranted
a full psychological assessment.

In the case of KB & AH (credibility - structured approach) Pakistan [2017]
UKUT 00491 paragraph 34 confirms that if an individual is a vulnerable
person whose account is strongly supported by expert medical evidence it is
immaterial that the account contains inconsistencies and lack of detail.
In the instant case the appellant's account was strongly supported by a
medico-legal report from Freedom from Torture.

Given the limitations of the respondent's evidence, the judge looked to and
considered other evidence to assist in assessing credibility, namely Dr
Grande's expert report and the brother-in-law's statement and oral
evidence.  Dr Grande's undisputed report upon which the judge placed great
weight, specifically dealt with inconsistencies in the respondent's account
and was referred to at paragraph 28(v) and referred to the possible
neuropsychiatric memory impairment from beatings to the head.  What
happened to the appellant on return from Bolivia when detained and ill-
treated and his interaction with authorities after release from detention
clearly related to the issue of detention and ill-treatment.

The judge also considered the brother-in-law's evidence and found him
wholly credible.  In fact, the brother-in-law gave two reasons for the
failure to refer to him in his claim and no issue was taken with the second
ground as to why he did not mention the appellant, namely that the purpose
of providing names was to substantiate his claim and he took the view that
he could do this by offering the names of many individuals, all of them
senior in the venture (paragraph 34).  In relation to SB and the assertion
that there was no assessment of the effect of the appellant's vulnerability
on the quality of the evidence, that assertion was simply wrong when
considering paragraphs 22 to 29.  The judge took care to consider the
extent of the mental health and physical issues as set out in the reports
of Dr Grande and Ms Yoca when considering the quality of the evidence given
and the impact on her assessment.

SB is clear that it is for the judicial fact finder to determine the
relationship between the vulnerability and the evidence that is adduced.

Section 8 was clearly raised at paragraph 22 of the skeleton argument.  It
was accepted that this had not been dealt with by the judge but this would
not in any even be a sufficient basis for setting aside the decision when
reading the decision as a whole.

At the hearing before me Ms Pettersen advanced that the judge should have
made a proper assessment and given proper explanations for her reasoning.
Ms Allen relied on her Rule 24 response and expanded on that to submit that
the judge was exactly right in her approach and noted that the judge stated
that he had failed to explain "most" of his inconsistencies rather than all
and he was "somewhat" vague about the evidence, not wholly vague.  The
judge noted that the appellant struggled with his oral evidence because he
was in pain and the judge did not just stop at the appellant's oral
evidence but proceeded to assess the evidence holistically, which is what
was required of her.

The Dr Grande report established that the appellant was a victim of torture
and nothing in the grounds challenged that report.  It would appear that
the author of the grounds for application for permission to appeal thought
that paragraphs 28(i) to (vii) was a cut and paste from Dr Grande's report,
which it was not.  It was the judge's r�sum� of the evidence by the judge,
which showed she had addressed it in detail.

In relation to the corroborative point at paragraph 36, the judge had
looked at all of the evidence in the round, which is what she should do.

Analysis

The Court of Appeal in Lowe v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62 referred to and repeated the judgment of
Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK Ltd [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at paragraph
114 as follows:

         "Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned, by recent  cases  at
         the highest level, not to interfere with findings of fact by  trial
         judges, unless compelled  to  do  so.  This  applies  not  only  to
         findings of primary fact, but also to the evaluation of those facts
         and to inferences to be drawn from them. The best  known  of  these
         cases are: Biogen  Inc  v  Medeva  plc  [1977]  RPC1;  Piglowska  v
         Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR  1360;  Datec  Electronics  Holdings  Ltd  v
         United Parcels Service Ltd [2007] UKHL 23 [2007] 1 WLR 1325;  Re  B
         (A Child) (Care Proceedings: Threshold  Criteria)  [2013]  UKSC  33
         [2013] 1 WLR 1911 and most recently and comprehensively McGraddie v
         McGraddie [2013] UKSC 58 [2013] 1 WLR 2477. These are all decisions
         either of the House of Lords or of the Supreme Court.  The  reasons
         for this approach are many. They include.

             i)   The expertise of a trial judge  is  in  determining  what
             facts are relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and what
             those facts are if they are disputed.

             ii)  The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is the  first  and
             last night of the show.

             iii) Duplication of the trial judge's  role  on  appeal  is  a
             disproportionate use of the limited resources of an  appellate
             court and will seldom  lead  to  a  different  outcome  in  an
             individual case.

             iv)  In making his decisions the trial judge will have  regard
             to the whole of the sea of evidence presented to him,  whereas
             an appellate court will only be island hopping.

             v)   The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any event,  be
             recreated by reference to documents (including transcripts  of
             evidence).

             vi)  Thus even if it were possible to duplicate  the  role  of
             the trial judge, it cannot in practice be done".

When considering the approach to credibility the Upper Tribunal in KB and
AH at paragraph 34 observed

         'Third, it must never be forgotten that credibility assessment is a
         highly fact-sensitive affair. Whilst having regard to a set of
         "Credibility Indicators" assists in making sure that, where
         relevant, the evidence is considered in a number of well-recognised
         ("familiar") respects, it does not prevent a decision-maker
         reaching a decision without going through such indicators step-by-
         step. For example, their use may be otiose if an individual's
         account rests wholly on a physical impossibility (e.g. that he
         jumped a 6 metre wall unaided) or is riddled with major
         inconsistencies. Conversely, if for example the individual is a
         vulnerable person whose account is strongly supported by expert
         medical evidence, it may not always matter that it contains
         inconsistency and lack of detail'.

In this case the judge had the benefit of hearing live evidence from the
appellant and his brother-in-law and being able to clarify issues as they
arose.  She heard oral submissions on the evidence and weighed the
evidence.  She also had the assistance of an expert medical report.

At the outset at paragraph 22 the judge was aware that the particular issue
was the appellant's credibility and she reminded herself to take into
account the guidance appropriate to vulnerable witnesses within the meaning
of the guidance in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010:
Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance.  The judge
accepted that the appellant was suffering from mental health problems but,
in particular, accepted the report and psychological assessment of Dr
Grande from Freedom from Torture, who had had undertaken a series of
psychological assessments with the appellant.  The judge noted at paragraph
18 that the respondent had previously commented in the reasons letter on
the absence of a report assessing the appellant's injuries under the
Istanbul Protocol but that such a report now existed.

The judge set out the inconsistencies at paragraph 19 and at 20 but also
set out that she had carefully and anxiously considered the oral testimony
of the appellant, the brother-in-law and the written evidence and reports.

It is important to note that the judge set out the oral evidence in detail.
 The Secretary of State did not challenge the report of Dr Grande.  At
paragraph 26, the judge referenced the fact that the appellant failed to
explain most of the inconsistencies but proceeded to find that his failure
to explain these inconsistencies should not damage his credibility and the
judge at paragraph 27 confirmed that she was assisted in assessing his
credibility by Dr Grande's expert report and by the brother-in-law's
witness statement.

The report from Dr Grande highlighted the fourteen scars, of which six were
highly consistent with being beaten or poked with a stick and which
supported the account given by the appellant of his treatment.  At
paragraph 28(iv) the judge assessed Dr Grande's report as finding that a
substantial cause for the depression was his ill-treatment based on various
points and was a characteristic feeling of torture survivors. That goes to
the issue of inconsistency not merely ill treatment.

The judge accepted at paragraph 28(v) (and this was not an extract from Dr
Grande's report but a finding by the judge on that report) that:

"As regards his inconsistencies, there are many reasons that torture
survivors find it difficult to recount specific details about their ill-
treatment (Istanbul Protocol paragraph 142).  The following features of the
appellant's situation are relevant reasons: the psychological impact of the
traumatic events including a very serious injury and subsequent surgical
operation on his neck, the possible neuropsychiatric memory impairment from
beatings to the head and loss of consciousness and the effects of PTSD and
depression on memory and recall."

Having noted therefore that there were inconsistencies, the judge stated
the possible neuropsychiatric memory impairment from beatings to the back
of the head and loss of consciousness and the effects of PTSD and
depression on memory and recall and that there was no evidence of
fabrication.

The judge gave sound reasons for accepting Dr Grande's report in full and
noted that the respondent had not produced her own medical report.

Thus, the judge noted the inconsistencies and gave sound reasoning for
explaining them.

The weight to be given to the evidence is a matter for the judge as
established in Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.  SB confirms that by
applying the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 the
vulnerability will also be taken into account when assessing the
credibility of that evidence.  That is what the judge did.

Not only did the judge consider the appellant's evidence and that of Dr
Grande but she also considered the brother-in-law's evidence, which she
found was presented in a measured and clear manner and answered without
hesitation and addressed the points in all the questions.  The judge gave
sound reasoning for finding the brother-in-law credible and noted that he
had succeeded in his own refugee claim and his fear arose from his support
of the LTTE members in India by providing medical supplies.  One of the
inconsistencies was that the brother-in-law had not identified the
appellant in his own asylum interview.  The judge flagged up that the
brother-in-law had not referred to the appellant in his asylum interview
but the reasoning which was given was twofold.  As Ms Allen pointed out,
the Secretary of State only challenged the reasoning in relation to the
minority of the appellant.  There was no challenge to the second reason
given by the brother-in-law that his purpose in providing the names was to
substantiate the claim and he took the view that he could do this by
offering the names of many other individuals, all of them senior in the
venture, in order to verify his account.  Thus, the judge accepted the
brother-in-law's explanation.  The judge also accepted that the brother-in-
law explained that the word in Tamil for someone senior involved in helping
village residents was the same as that for councillor and thus something
might have "got lost in translation".  Again, that the brother-in-law
verified that the appellant had been arrested at home on return from
Bolivia was accepted, first, because Dr Grande had explained that the
appellant might remember more than one version and not be able to
distinguish between the two and secondly, that the appellant had never
wavered from the assertion that he was arrested by the authorities.  I find
that the brother-in-law's corroboration of that at paragraph 36 is merely a
peripheral addition to the reasoning and not undermining of the overall
reasoning.  Although not in fact dealt with in the reasoning of the judge
the judge did note at paragraph 4 that the appellant was helped by a
different agent to obtain a visa who oversaw his safe exodus from India and
thus this would explain his ability to obtain a passport and exit India
without issue.  That criticism of an inconsistency takes the matter no
further forward.

Lastly, the criticism of Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment
of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 requires decision-makers to take into account
the claimant's conduct and applying the benefit of the doubt in
unsubstantiated material facts.  In particular, Section 8(1) states:

"In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on behalf of a
person who makes an asylum claim or a human rights claim, a deciding
authority shall take account, as damaging the claimant's credibility, of
any behaviour to which this Section applies.

...

         (4)  This Section also applies to failure by the claimant to take
         advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an asylum claim or
         human rights claim while in a safe country."

I find that the judge did err in failing to consider Section 8 but in the
particular circumstances and overall evidence of this claim, particularly
the ill health of the appellant, which the judge did address holistically,
I find that in this particular instance it is not a material error of law
that would induce this decision to be set aside.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
will stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 26th May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

