
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10804/2019 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House and also by     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |On 04th October 2021                 |
|On 16th August 2021                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'PV'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS continue)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

I had indicated to the representatives at the beginning of the hearing, by
virtue of it being a hybrid hearing, with Ms Cunha attending in person and
Mr Jafar attending via Teams, that if either had any difficulties in seeing
or hearing me or one another they should let me know.  There were two
occasions during the hearing when, through no fault of his own, Mr Jafar
froze on the screen before us, had to leave the hearing and then re-enter
after a number of minutes.  Whilst at the time this caused disruption, on
each occasion, I went through with him the points made until contact
between us froze, to ensure that I had had the benefit of his submissions.
Therefore, whilst not ideal, I am satisfied that the parties have been able
to participate effectively and fairly in the hearing.

The immigration history

The appellant, a Sri Lankan national, has made two protection claims. He
originally entered the UK in 2010, on a student visit visa, and then
returned to Sri Lanka in 2012.  Later, in September 2012, he re-entered the
UK, with leave to remain until 7th June 2014.  He overstayed and claimed
asylum on the first occasion on 16th October 2017. That asylum claim was
refused on 16th April 2018.  He appealed and his appeal was considered by a
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Chudleigh, who promulgated her
decision on 25th June 2018, refusing his appeal.  The appellant appealed
against that decision.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
granted on 8th August 2018, but at a substantive hearing, the appellant's
appeal was dismissed by the Upper Tribunal on 10th October 2018.  He
further sought permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, which was
refused on 5th May 2019.

The respondent's decision under challenge

The appellant made further submissions on 25th June 2019, which the
respondent accepted as a fresh claim for the purpose of paragraph 353 of
the Immigration Rules.  The respondent considered the fresh claim in her
refusal decision of 14th October 2019, and which was considered in a second
First-tier Tribunal decision (Judge Norris) (the 'FtT') promulgated on 4th
February 2020, which is the subject of this appeal.

In respect of the fresh claim, the respondent considered the well-known
authority of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and took Judge Chudleigh's
decision as her starting point.  In her reasons for refusal, the respondent
recited a number of passages of Judge Chudleigh's decision, noting in
particular, discrepancies in, and implausibility of, the appellant's
account as to his imputed political support for the LTTE.

The respondent considered a letter said to be from the appellant's attorney
in Sri Lanka, who had referred to a prosecution filed by the Sri Lankan
Criminal Investigation Department, which the respondent did not accept as
reliable.

The respondent also considered an expert report prepared Dr Phyllis Turvill
of the Helen Bamber Foundation, which dealt with scarring and a claim of
PTSD.  An initial report had been before Judge Chudleigh but, it was said,
importantly, the original report had not opined on the possible reasons for
the scarring in question and was said therefore not to be in compliance
with the Istanbul Protocol.  In contrast, in the updated report, Dr Turvill
made a detailed assessment by reference to the likelihood or plausibility
of the scarring being for the reasons claimed by the appellant, in
compliance with the Istanbul Protocol.

The respondent accepted Dr Turvill's expertise, noting in particular the
context of her credentials with the Helen Bamber Foundation; and that she
had made a detailed assessment. The respondent accepted that Dr Turvill had
referred to various scars as being either consistent or highly consistent
with the account of torture as asserted but also went on to consider the
possibility of deliberate self-harm which she had discounted as they did
not fit the pattern of injuries.  The appellant's scars were consistent or
highly consistent with his attribution.  None of the injuries were said to
be inconsistent with the history he gave and considered overall, it was
medically plausible that the appellant's injuries were deliberately caused
by a third party. Dr Turvill had also considered the appellant's depression
and PTSD, although these conditions do not feature in the submissions made
to me.

The respondent that the scars could have been caused by a third party, but
did not accept who that third party might be.  The respondent was also
concerned that Dr Turvill stated that she had studied all of the evidence,
but had not considered a claim of a chin injury, to which Judge Chudleigh
had referred. The respondent finally considered that the appellant had been
able to leave Sri Lanka on his own passport.

The respondent refused the fresh protection claim. It was that decision
that came before the FtT.

The FtT's decision

The FtT considered Dr Turvill's report at ��7.2 to 7.8 of her decision, but
was concerned about the fact that there was no scar on the appellant's
chin, which the appellant had referred to in his asylum interview and about
which Dr Turvill had made no mention (she analysed numerous other scars).
Moreover, at �7.11, while the FtT accepted that Dr Turvill's conclusions
were not against the appellant, in that they confirmed his scarring was
plausibly caused by a third party, in the FtT's view, this took her no
further than the case before Judge Chudleigh.  It did not assist her in
reaching a conclusion that the injuries were sustained as the appellant
described.  His underlying account remained unreliable for the reasons set
out by Judge Chudleigh, including the lack of consistency with the country
guidance; a significant delay without good explanation in claiming asylum;
and the lack of interest by the authorities in the appellant's father.

Moreover, at ��7.5 and 7.6 of her decision, the FtT was critical of a
further translation of correspondence from the appellant's father.  An
original copy of the correspondence had referred to the appellant's father
as having opened the door to the appellant's persecutors at their home in
Sri Lanka, which was said to be inconsistent with th appellant's witness
statement that the appellant's mother had opened the door.  A further
translation of the letter from the father omitted the word "I" and
explained that there had been a mistranslation.  The FtT regarded the
explanation and second translation as incoherent and lacking grammatic
sense.  She dismissed the appellant's appeal.

The appellant's appeal

The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and permission was
granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor on all grounds. I summarise
these three grounds below.

The first ground was that the FtT had failed to place proper weight on the
assessment of the causation of scarring, some of which was said to be
highly consistent with the appellant's account.  Any suggestion that Dr
Turvill's report took the FtT "no further" ignored precisely the point that
the first report before Judge Chudleigh had not given an assessment as to
the cause of scarring.  In contrast, before Judge Norris, there was an
Istanbul Protocol-compliant assessment, some of which assessed the scarring
as highly consistent with the cause attributed by the appellant, and none
was inconsistent.  It was not enough for the FtT to refer to the
inconsistencies in the appellant's narrative without considering the
evidence in the round.  The FtT had impermissibly treated herself as bound
by Judge Chudleigh's decision, rather than taking it as her starting point.

The second ground was that having placed insufficient weight on the cause
of visible scarring, the FtT dwelt impermissibly on an invisible scar.  In
particular, the report of Dr Turvill had not made any reference to the
injury that the appellant claimed to have sustained in relation to his chin
just as an earlier expert had not referred to the chin injury.  Two errors
resulted from the FtT's analysis.  The first was as per the authority of
Junaid v SSHD (01/TH/02540), namely to draw adverse inferences from the
absence of scarring, when scars could heal.  This was backed up by a UNHCR
document, titled "The Istanbul Protocol Manual on the Effective
Investigation and Documentation of Torture", which stated:

"To the extent that physical evidence of torture exists it provides
important confirmatory evidence that a person was tortured.  However, the
absence of such physical evidence must not be construed to suggest that
torture did not occur, since such acts of violence against persons
frequently leave no marks or permanent scars."

The second error was in the FtT adopting the role of an expert, in
concluding that it was highly unlikely for an injury to have been
sustained, if the scarring was no longer visible to two clinicians in less
than a decade later, where the appellant had complained about such serious
ill-treatment.  Dr Turvill's report had stated, at �42, that there could be
detailed reasons why scarring might fade including where on the body the
scar was, the size and depth of the wound, the tension of wound edges,
wound hygiene and infection, medical intervention such as antibiotics and
intercurrent illness and malnutrition.  Where skin damage was superficial,
skin could regenerate in a few weeks.

The third ground was in relation to the adverse inferences drawn from the
second translation of the father's letter.  The FtT had had concerns about
the translation of the letter where its accuracy had been certified by a UK
solicitor and officer of this court.  It was impermissible to draw adverse
inferences, where the appellant had done all he could to identify and
correct the mistranslation, and the respondent had the original,
untranslated document that she could verify.

The hearing before me

The appellant's oral submissions

Mr Jafar reiterated the three grounds of appeal.  The FtT had not given a
reasoned basis for rejecting Dr Turvill's report, which was important
corroboration. The FtT had impermissibly regarded herself as bound by the
assessment of Judge Chudleigh and not approached the evidence
independently, as recommended by the authority of LD (Algeria) v SSHD
[2004] EWCA Civ 804.  The Helen Bamber Foundation was recognised as an
authoritative and reputable organisation.  In her report, Dr Turvill had
provided a detailed analysis of consistency and had considered alternative
causes and given a view in the round.  She had also gone on to consider at
��72 and 73 the appellant's depression and PTSD.  She had reached the
conclusion at �85 that the scars were consistent or highly consistent with
the appellant's attribution. The FtT had not explained why she had given
such limited weight to the report. Instead, she had focussed on the absence
of a reference to the chin scar, mentioned by the appellant in an asylum
interview.  The reason why Dr Turvill had not discussed the chin scar in
her report was simple - it was not visible. It was not fair to reject
credibility on the basis of the visibility of a scar.

In relation to the final ground, whilst it may be that the wording in the
second version of the translation did not make particular sense, there was
nevertheless merit in both of the first two grounds.  Mr Jafar reiterated
again that the second version of the translation had been signed by a
solicitor and officer of this court and therefore should have been given
some weight.

The respondent's response

Ms Cunha asserted that the appellant's challenge was merely a disagreement
with the FtT's findings.  The FtT was entitled to treat the new evidence
with a degree of circumspection and to consider why the material had not
been before Judge Chudleigh.  Whilst the Helen Bamber Foundation was a
reputable organisation, ��61 and 62 of MS (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ
941 confirmed that the FtT was not bound to accept expert evidence and was
able to carry out an assessment of her own.  The FtT was also entitled to
consider, at ��4.3, 5.2 and 7.2, the absence of explanation for the lack of
visibility of the scar and she was entitled to have expected the report to
address this point.

I discussed with Ms Cunha whether the FtT's reference to Dr Turvill saying
that scarring was probably caused by a third party, misunderstood Dr
Turvill's report, because Dr Turvill meant that the scarring was consistent
or highly consistent with the appellant's attributions, rather than any
suggestion of self-inflicted harm.  Ms Cunha said that even if the FtT had
misunderstood Dr Turvill's report, it was a minor error and did not affect
the rigour of the overall analysis.

Discussion

I refer to the third ground first, as it is the most straightforward. The
ground referred to the two translations, certified by a solicitors' firm in
the UK, of a letter from the appellant's father, before the FtT, and an
accompanying explanation.  The first version of the correspondence, which
is at pages B[68] to [70] of the FtT's bundle had stated:

Page B[68]:

"On hearing knocks on the door early in the dawn we woke up.  As I opened
the door I saw five unknown persons standing beside it."

The translation is signed with a statement of truth that said: "I am
sufficiently proficient in Sinhala and this is a true and accurate
translation made to the best of my knowledge of a handwritten plea from
[the appellant's mother] and my interest in this matter is confined solely
to the translation of text therein."  There is a signature with a named
person, not identified as a solicitor, but by reference to S Satha & Co
Solicitors, with the date of 30th May 2018.

The second translation on of the letter is at pages A[73] to [75].  This
too was sworn as being a true and accurate translation, but the named
person is stated as being a solicitor in England and Wales, albeit from the
same law firm.

Put simply, both were therefore certified as true and accurate
translations, the first by reference to a law firm, albeit not by a
solicitor, the second by a solicitor.  The wording of the second
translation is different and states:

"On hearing knocks on the door early in the dawn we woke up.  When open the
door I saw five unnamed persons standing beside it."

There was then a letter of explanation at page [72], which referred to a
mistake regarding the previous letter.  It was said by the appellant that
the FtT's concern, which she referred to at ��7.2 to 7.8 of her decision,
that the second translation made no sense, was not a permissible
observation on which to base an adverse credibility finding.  Mr Jafar
began, in his oral submissions, by paraphrasing the wording as "the door
was opened."   While I do not suggest that he was attempting to mislead,
the second translation does not say this.  The FtT was, in my view,
entitled to take into account that both translations had been from a UK
supervised law firm and that the wording of the second translation did not
make linguistic sense (see �7.8).  In that context, the FtT was entitled to
have concerns about how the original alleged mistake came to be made and
who carried out the first translation.  The FtT did not err in drawing
adverse inferences from the inconsistency between the first translation and
the appellant's account.

Turning to the first two grounds, the expertise of Dr Turvill is not
disputed.  Whilst her report does not have to be automatically accepted by
a Tribunal, it nevertheless is one of a number of pieces of evidence that
the Tribunal has to assess, and explain that assessment. The FtT's
assessment, at �7.11, is as follows: "It does not assist me towards a
conclusion that the injuries were sustained as the appellant describes
because his underlying account remains unreliable ...".

That reasoning falls into the classic "Mibanga" error (see Mibanga v SSHD
[2005] EWCA Civ 367), namely to discount the evidence because of a view
already formed of credibility (see �25 of Mibanga).  Instead, evidence on
scarring causation needed to be addressed and analysed, in the context of
all of the evidence.  The FtT's analysis on causation was limited to �7.4
of her decision:

         "The appellant did not seek to attribute all of his scars to the
         assault, and his overall account is plausible from the medical
         point of view.  However, Dr Turvill also concludes that it is
         "medically plausible" that the injuries were deliberately caused by
         a third party.  Mr Kumudusena was unable to assist me on the
         point."

There appears to be an implication (the use of the word "however"), that
the scarring may have been self-inflicted by proxy, although the reasoning
is not clear.    If that was a concern of the FtT, it was to take Dr
Turvill's comment on plausibility out of context.  Dr Turvill had
considered possible accidental causes of the scarring (including a road
traffic accident).  She then considered self-induced harm at �55 of her
report:

"I have considered the possibility of deliberate self-harm and discounted
it because [the appellant's] injuries do not fit the pattern of this; they
are on the whole not superficial, or grouped, and he has no past history."

At �56, she continued:

"Paragraph 188 of the Istanbul Protocol states that "Ultimately it is the
overall evaluation of the lesions and not the consistency of each lesion
with a particular form of torture that is important in the assessment of
the torture story".  In [the appellant's] case he has scars, lesions and
other physical injuries which are highly consistent with, or typical of his
attribution.  None of the injuries are inconsistent with the history he
gives.  Considered overall it is medically plausible that [the appellant's]
injuries were deliberately caused by a third party."

Dr Turvill's comment about the injuries being deliberately caused by a
third party followed immediately from her comment about the consistency
with the appellant's attribution.  Dr Turvill expressed no view on the
possibility of self-inflicted harm by proxy, nor does it appear that the
FtT directly asked or put this possibility to the appellant's
representative.  In the circumstances, it is hardly surprising that Mr
Kumudusena was unable to comment, when he was not expressly asked about
harm by proxy.    Dr Turvill's view of the consistency in causation
(causation by a third party) appears to have been treated by the FtT as
adverse to the appellant.  When read fairly in context, her view appears to
support the applicant's case.   Any implication to the contrary is not
adequately explained by the FtT.

In summary, in relation to the first ground, I accept that the FtT erred in
law in failing to analyse the evidence as a whole, including the scarring
evidence. The FtT discounted the scarring evidence on the basis of her
view, already formed, of the appellant's credibility.

I turn next to the second ground and the reference to concerns about the
absence of discussion of a chin scar.  Dr Turvill's report did not deal
with the chin scar, as it appears common ground that it is not visible.  Dr
Turvill explained at �42 of her report why scars might fade. In my view,
the FtT erred in law in failing to engage with that explanation and instead
speculated, without a proper analysis, that it was unlikely that an injury
would no longer be visible, less than a decade later.





Conclusions

The FtT did not err in drawing adverse credibility findings in relation to
differing translations of correspondence from the appellant's father.  That
ground is not sustained.  However, the FtT did err in her assessment of Dr
Turvill's report, in the context of the evidence as a whole.  That goes to
the heart of her assessment of the appellant's credibility. In the
circumstances, her decision is unsafe and cannot stand.  There are no
preserved findings.  The decision of Judge Chudleigh remains unaffected by
this decision.

Disposal

 1. With reference to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement and the necessary fact-finding, this is clearly a  case  that
    has to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



 2. The remittal shall involve a complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal.  All
    aspects of the claims must be addressed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  19th August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

