

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10719/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business                    |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                               |Promulgated                  |
|On 13 January 2021                             |On 29 January 2021           |
|                                               |                             |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     A H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Palestinian, from Gaza, aged 40.  He has entered the
    UK several times since 2008.

 2. The appellant was convicted  at  Birmingham  and  Solihull  Magistrates
    Court on 14 August 2018 of 2 counts of assaulting a constable, 1  count
    of assault causing actual bodily  harm,  and  1  count  of  failing  to
    surrender to custody.  On 11 September 2018  he  was  sentenced  to  10
    months imprisonment in total.

 3. On 18 October 2018 the respondent decided to deport the appellant.

 4. On 17 October 2019 the respondent refused  the  appellant's  protection
    and human rights claims and found that  no  exceptions  to  deportation
    were established.

 5. Designated Judge Macdonald dismissed the appellant's appeal to the  FtT
    by a decision promulgated on 4 February 2020.

 6. The appellant appealed to the UT.  By a decision promulgated on 27 July
    2020, UT Judge Norton-Taylor set aside the decision of the FtT for  (a)
    failure to address whether  later  evidence  warranted  departure  from
    country  guidance  and  (b)  lack  of   consideration   of   individual
    vulnerability.

 7. Current country guidance is set out in  HS  (Palestinian  -  return  to
    Gaza) Palestinian Territories CG [2011] UKUT 124 (IAC):

      Headnote (6). The conditions in Gaza are not  such  as  to  amount  to
      persecution or breach of the human rights of returnees or  place  them
      in need of international protection.

      222.  Our assessment of the background evidence  is  that  it  clearly
      shows a harsh state of affairs in Gaza which reflects a  deterioration
      beyond the situation prior to the  Operation  Cast  Lead  hostilities.
      The infrastructure of Gaza is significantly depleted,  and  there  are
      problems of access to electricity and clean water and there are limits
      on the amount of products that are brought into the territory.  We  do
      not seek to undervalue the level of difficulty that the appellants  in
      this case, and indeed other residents of Gaza, face in the  territory.
      But we consider that the tests set out in the  Refugee  Convention  as
      applied in the case law and under Article 3 are set at a level of risk
      which is higher than that which would be experienced by the  appellant
      and her family in this case on return.

 8. On 30 November 2020 a transfer order was made to enable the decision to
    be completed by another UT Judge.  The case accordingly came before  me
    on 13 January 2020 for  remaking  of  the  decision.    The  technology
    enabled an effective remote hearing.

 9. I had the benefit of a skeleton argument from Mr Winter and of thorough
    and helpful submissions from him and from  Mr  Howells.   Having  heard
    those submissions, I reserved my decision.  I now resolve the issues as
    raised by the parties, (i) - (vii).

    (i)  What is the test for humanitarian protection?

10. Mr Winter submitted that the test for humanitarian protection,  article
    15(b) of the Qualification Directive, and article  3  ECHR,  should  be
    taken from Sufi & Elmi v UK (2012) EHRR 9 as cited in MI (Palestine)  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1782:
    1.  Laws LJ then reviewed the decisions of the Strasbourg Court in MSS
       v Belgium and Greece and Sufi & Elmi v United Kingdom ... The latter
       is  of  particular  relevance  in  the  present  context.  The  case
       concerned Somalian nationals who had committed criminal offences  in
       this country. The Secretary of State was proposing to deport them to
       Somalia,  which  was  resisted  on  the  grounds   that   the   dire
       humanitarian conditions in Somalia were such that their return would
       be a  breach  of  Article  3.  The  Government  contended  that  the
       appropriate  test  for  assessing  whether  the  dire   humanitarian
       conditions reached the Article 3 threshold was that set out in N  v
       United Kingdom so that humanitarian conditions would only reach the
       threshold in  very  exceptional  cases  where  the  grounds  against
       removal were compelling.
    1. The Strasbourg Court rejected  that  contention  in  the  particular
       circumstances of  that  case  because  the  humanitarian  crisis  in
       Somalia was predominantly due to the direct and indirect actions  of
       the parties to the conflict there, so  that  the  "very  exceptional
       circumstances" test in N was not applicable. At  [282]-[283],  the
       Court said:
           282. If the dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia were  solely
           or even predominantly attributable to poverty or to the  State's
           lack of resources to deal with a naturally occurring phenomenon,
           such as a drought, the test in N v the United Kingdom may well
           have been considered to be the appropriate one. However,  it  is
           clear that while drought has  contributed  to  the  humanitarian
           crisis, that crisis is  predominantly  due  to  the  direct  and
           indirect actions of the parties to  the  conflict.  The  reports
           indicate  that  all  parties  to  the  conflict  have   employed
           indiscriminate methods of warfare  in  densely  populated  urban
           areas with no regard to the safety of the civilian population...
           This fact alone has resulted in widespread displacement and  the
           breakdown of social,  political  and  economic  infrastructures.
           Moreover, the situation has  been  greatly  exacerbated  by  al-
           Shabaab's  refusal  to  permit  international  aid  agencies  to
           operate in the areas under its control, despite  the  fact  that
           between a third and a half  of  all  Somalis  are  living  in  a
           situation of serious deprivation...
           283. Consequently, the Court  does  not  consider  the  approach
           adopted in N v the United Kingdom to  be  appropriate  in  the
           circumstances of  the  present  case.  Rather,  it  prefers  the
           approach adopted in MSS v Belgium and Greece, which requires it
           to have regard to an applicant's ability to cater for  his  most
           basic  needs,  such  as   food,   hygiene   and   shelter,   his
           vulnerability to ill-treatment and the prospect of his situation
           improving within a reasonable time-frame (see MSS v Belgium and
           Greece, cited above, paragraph 254).

11. To show that there is a humanitarian crisis predominantly caused by the
    conflict between Israel and the Palestinian  Authority,  the  appellant
    cites passages from the respondent's  Country  Policy  and  Information
    Note ("CIPIN") (Gaza), March 2019, and from the Report of a Home Office
    Fact-Finding Mission ("FFM") Occupied Territories, March 2020.

12. Mr Howells submitted that MI found only that the  point  was  arguable,
    and remitted to the UT,  observing  that  country  guidance  was  dated
    (there has been  no  subsequent  country  guidance).   He  adopted  the
    position taken for the SSHD in MI:
    1. [Counsel for the SSHD] submitted that the  decision  of  this  Court
       in Said demonstrated that it was only in very narrow circumstances
       that the Court would allow an Article 3 claim  which  departed  from
       the paradigm. If there was to be such departure, it had to be on the
       basis of principle which here was that the approach adopted in Sufi
       & Elmi only applied where there was an element of intentionality on
       the part of the  parties  to  the  conflict.  There  al-Shabaab,  an
       extremist organisation was  corralling  the  population  in  certain
       areas and refusing them access to international aid.  The  situation
       in Palestine was not comparable not least because of  the  permanent
       presence of UNRWA to protect the refugee population. If the Sufi  &
       Elmi approach were applied here, it would apply to other  receiving
       states where there were dire humanitarian conditions.
    1. She relied upon the decision of the Strasbourg Court in SHH v United
       Kingdom (2013) 57 EHRR 18. That case concerned an  Afghan  national
       who was disabled in a rocket launch attack and came  to  the  United
       Kingdom some four years later.  The  Court  held  that  the N test
       applied to his Article 3 claim and distinguished Sufi & Elmi holding
       at [91] that although the situation in Afghanistan was very serious,
       it could not be attributed to  the  ongoing  conflict.  Ms  Anderson
       submitted that the same conclusion would have been reached here even
       if the Sufi & Elmi point had been raised.

13. Mr Howells said that, unlike in Somalia, in Gaza indiscriminate methods
    of warfare in densely populated urban areas are not being used with  no
    regard to the safety of the civilian population;  not  only  UNRWA  but
    many other NGO's support that population; there is no blocking  of  aid
    and no intentionality of parties; and while conditions are  poor,  they
    are not attributable to the actions of the parties to the conflict.

14. The passages cited for the appellant,  from  sources  complied  by  the
    respondent, show that since 2011, waves of conflict, the worst of which
    was in 2014, have exacerbated the already poor  humanitarian  situation
    in Gaza, and there has been a decline in aid  transfers.   The  sources
    also show that humanitarian food and medical supplies as  well  as  oil
    and fuel continue to be delivered. The "executive summary" in the  FRMM
    notes that while the humanitarian situation is  worsening  due  to  the
    ongoing Israeli blockade and the internal Hamas/PA conflict, there  are
    multiple organisations working to alleviate the difficult conditions.

15. The Court of Appeal reached no conclusion on the  submissions  made  to
    it.  The respondent's submissions, and her policy, are of  course  only
    the position of one party.

16. The principal  causes  of  the  humanitarian  situation  are  intensely
    controversial, but the appellant has not shown that the sources justify
    the conclusion that it is predominantly  due  to  the  actions  of  the
    parties to the conflict, as such.  Problems arise from poverty and from
    lack of state resources  (or  perhaps  misuse  of  resources,  on  some
    interpretations) rather than from intention.

17. Unlike in Somalia, there is no refusal of aid.  Humanitarian assistance
    is provided on quite a  large  scale  by  UNWRA,  the  EU,  USAid,  and
    numerous other organisations.

18. Accordingly, the appellant has  not  shown  that  his  case  should  be
    assessed by "ability to cater for his most basic needs", rather than by
    general article 3 principles.

    (ii) Would the appellant be able to cater for his most basic  needs  on
    return?

19.  In the alternative, if the test in Sufi & Elmi should be  applied,  is
    it satisfied?

20. On this issue, the appellant relies on matters specified above, and  in
    particular on difficulty in  obtaining  accommodation  and  employment;
    deteriorating  living  conditions;  undrinkability  of   piped   water;
    fluctuating electricity supply; poverty and food insecurity; his length
    of absence; mental health issues; lack of mental health facilities; and
    risk of suicide.

21. Mr Howells countered with references to the recent relatively low level
    of hostilities; a certain amount of health care  through  the  WHO  and
    others, including mental health care; groups active  on  mental  health
    issues; and so on, which he said showed that  basic  needs,  at  least,
    were catered for; and that the situation  did  not  amount  to  general
    infringement of article 3.

22. Conditions for most residents in Gaza are poor, but the  appellant  has
    not shown that they are so dire that his  most  basic  needs,  such  as
    food, hygiene, and shelter, would not be catered  for.   Assistance  is
    available from UNWRA and other organisations to a level at which,  even
    if he did not find employment and accommodation on his own  initiative,
    he would be kept above the level of destitution.

23. The mental  health  aspects,  specific  to  the  appellant,  are  of  a
    different nature.  They do not bear on the general test to  be  applied
    to the receiving territory.

    (iii) Should the UT depart from country guidance?

24. Based on the same evidence, and for the same reasons, the appellant has
    not shown that general conditions in Gaza have further deteriorated  to
    such an extent as to  qualify  him,  without  more,  for  international
    protection.

    (iv) Would the appellant's return breach article 3 of the ECHR?

25. The appellant points out, and it is undisputed, that the legal test  is
    now to be taken from AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] 2 WLR 1152,  UKSC  17,
    at [32].  He submits that there are "substantial grounds for  believing
    that this is a very exceptional case because of the real risk of  being
    subjected to inhuman treatment  and  on  the  facts  of  this  case"  -
    skeleton argument, [4].

26. The test approved in AM was stated in Paposhvili v Belgium  [2017]  Imm
    AR 867 at [183]:



      The Court considers that the 'other very exceptional cases' within the
      meaning of the judgment in N v The United Kingdom (para 43) which may
      raise an issue under article  3  should  be  understood  to  refer  to
      situations involving the removal of a seriously ill  person  in  which
      substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that  he  or  she,
      although not at imminent risk of dying, would face  a  real  risk,  on
      account of the absence  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the  receiving
      country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a
      serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of  health
      resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction  in  life
      expectancy. The Court points out that these situations correspond to a
      high threshold for the application of article 3 of the  Convention  in
      cases concerning the removal of aliens suffering from serious illness.


27. The medical aspect of the appellant's case  comes  into  play  at  this
    stage, being the only point which  might  differentiate  him  from  any
    other averagely resourceful Palestinian.

28. He founds upon a report dated 12 December 2019  by  Mrs  M  K  Ross,  a
    consultant clinical psychologist.  The report finds at  [46]  that  the
    appellant  "experiences  borderline  clinical  anxiety  and  borderline
    clinical depression".  At [49] his presentation is found to meet:

      ... the diagnostic criteria for  an  Adjustment  Disorder  with  Mixed
      Disturbance of Emotion and Conduct 309.4.  That is  to  say  there  is
      anxiety, depression and past disturbance of conduct.


29. At [50] the criteria are set out:

      ... excessive reaction to a stressful life event which causes negative
      behavioural changes and impacts emotional stability.

30. The report goes on at [52] to find that as certain of  the  appellant's
    stressors are chronic, including his lack of  immigration  status,  the
    disorder is now in the persistent form.

31. At [54] the report notes that although the appellant is not and has not
    been suicidal, he states that he would have no option but to  take  his
    life if faced with return to Palestine, because he  believes  he  would
    not be able to survive and would be killed.

32. The appellant has failed to establish,  objectively,  either  of  those
    fears.  Perhaps advisedly, his case has been put on the  generality  of
    article 3 risk and not on suicide risk alone.  However, the  degree  of
    that risk requires assessment.

33. The report at [54] goes on:

      Given that DSM-5 indicates ... an increased risk  of  suicide  attempt
      and completed suicide ... I would consider that there is a serious and
      significant suicide risk ... in the circumstances  in  which  he  were
      removed from the UK to Palestine.

34. Thus, a qualified expert assesses the  risk  at  a  level  which  might
    indicate a need for protection.  However, her report takes a major leap
    from the "increased  risk"  associated  generally  with  the  diagnosis
    (which is at the lower end of the  spectrum  of  mental  disorders)  to
    "serious and significant risk" in the instant case, where there  is  no
    suicidal history apart  from  the  statement  to  the  psychologist  at
    interview.  A risk may increase, without reaching a significant level.

35. While I hesitate to take the expert report other than at face value, it
    is  hard  to  see  any  justification  for  the  intensification   from
    "increased" to "serious and significant" risk.

36. The key cases on suicide risk are J v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629, [2005] Imm AR 409, and Y (Sri Lanka) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ  362.   The
    following summary is from Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 9th
    ed. + supplements, 7.54:

      In principle psychological illness is capable of  engaging  Article  3
      just  as  physical  illness  is,  particularly  where   there   is   a
      significantly increased risk of suicide because of removal.1 In  the
      case of J the Court of Appeal confirmed that Article 3 may be breached
      if there is a  real  risk  of  committing suicide  as  a  foreseeable
      consequence of the decision to remove whether on being informed of the
      removal decision, in the course of removal or  after  arrival  in  the
      destination country.2 The court drew a distinction between  'domestic
      cases' and 'foreign cases'.3 With regard to the risk  of suicide  on
      being informed of an adverse immigration decision and in the course of
      being removed from the UK (both of which are  'domestic  cases'),  the
      tribunal would be entitled to assume that  the  UK  authorities  would
      take all reasonable steps in accordance  with  its  obligations  under
      the Human Rights Act 1998 to protect the individual from  self-harm,
      including by the practice of arranging escorts to accompany the person
      on removal.4 Further, a real risk that the person would commit suicide
      after arrival in the  receiving  State  might  not  be  sufficient  to
      establish an Article 3 breach: what happens to the person on and after
      arrival is treated as a 'foreign case' (ie one in  which  the  alleged
      violation takes place outside  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the  sending
      State), making the Article 3 threshold particularly high.5 What would
      have to be shown is 'exceptional circumstances comparable in impact to
      those of the terminal patient in D'6 or that  'removal  would  be  an
      "affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian  principles"'.7 An  issue  of
      considerable relevance in this context is whether the removing and the
      receiving states have effective mechanisms for  reducing  the suicide
      risk and whether those mechanisms are  accessible  to  the  particular
      invidual.8 Although suicide risk cases are rarely successful, in Y the
      Court of Appeal found that the removal of a brother and sister to  Sri
      Lanka where they had both been tortured and the  sister  raped;  where
      they   subjectively   feared   similar    treatment    if    returned,
      notwithstanding that their fear was not objectively well-founded;  and
      where they would have no family or other social support created such a
      likelihood that they would commit suicide in order to escape isolation
      and fear that their removal would breach Article 3.9 In Balogun the
      ECtHR approved of the approach taken in J and noted that in suicide
      cases, appropriate and adequate steps taken to mitigate the risk  will
      weigh against a conclusion that the high threshold of  Article  3  has
      been reached.10

37. On the effectiveness of mechanisms  in  the  receiving  territory,  the
    appellant's most recent citations were from the FFM:

      4.24.14.  The WHO representative noted: 'WHO aim to work with partners
      to adequately support services to address the mental health burden and
      have been actively engaging with UNWRA,  to  integrate  mental  health
      care into primary healthcare to avoid  stigmatisation.  Some  progress
      has been made but there are  severe  capacity  gaps  in  services  and
      specialists. There is a  small  number  of  psychiatrists  and  mental
      health  professionals  and  primary  healthcare  is  not  specialised.
      However, with training it is  possible  to  diagnose  and  treat  some
      mental health conditions.  There  is  some  investment  in  trying  to
      alleviate the problem. ...

      4.24.16  Source 2 also noted 'there is one mental health  hospital  in
      Gaza, but with limited capacity in comparison with the needs. There is
      a need to address some gaps in mental  health  in  terms  of  building
      capacity of health professionals and improving capacity of centres (in
      terms of the setting, beds, structure, etc).

38. The evidence does not reach the high threshold - taking account of  its
    modification in in AM  (Zimbabwe)  -  or  the  affront  to  fundamental
    humanitarian principles, required to succeed on this issue.

    (v) Is the appellant entitled to withdraw his concession on whether his
    offences caused serious harm?

39. The appellant cites Wilson [2020] UKUT 00350 and Mahmood v SSHD  [2020]
    EWCA Civ 717, both reported after the decision of the FtT, and seeks to
    withdraw his previous concession.

40. The respondent says that the intention to withdraw the  concession  was
    notified only on 11 January 2021, long after those cases were reported,
    and that withdrawal at this unjustifiably  late  stage  should  not  be
    permitted.

41. Notification of withdrawal might have come earlier,  but  it  does  not
    prejudice the respondent.  This is  an  evaluative  exercise  based  on
    information known to both parties throughout  the  proceedings,  to  be
    carried out following a hearing on remaking the decision.  There is  no
    good reason to bind the appellant by his previous concession.

    (vi)  Did the appellant's offences cause serious harm?

42. The appellant does not specify any passages in  Wilson  or  in  Mahmood
    which suggest that his offending  should  not  be  considered  to  have
    caused serious harm.  The evaluative exercise turns on the facts.   The
    appellant refers in this respect to his  "mental  health  issues",  but
    those are not related to the seriousness  of  resulting  harm.   Beyond
    that, he says that although the police officer whose hand he bit had to
    undergo further tests, nothing arose from that, nor  from  spitting  on
    another officer; and there is nothing to  indicate  that  the  bite  or
    scratch to the second officer needed stitches, or left scarring.

43. The appellant has consistently denied his offending, or at least played
    his behaviour down, and has sought to blame his  previous  lawyers  and
    the police for what happened.  On the  other  hand,  I  note  that  the
    psychologist viewed a video recording of the incident and was impressed
    by the patience and restraint of  the  police.   His  failure  to  take
    responsibility, however, is irrelevant to the degree of harm caused.

44. The sentencing remarks convey the reality:

      You chose to bite one of the police officers ... hard enough to  break
      the skin so that the officer required both a tetanus jab and  a  blood
      test ... You flailed your arms catching another officer ... causing an
      unpleasant scratch to his face ... and spat at  another  officer,  the
      spittle catching him in the face.  You have never come to  terms  with
      what you did ...

      ... I regard the assault occasioning actual bodily harm as a  category
      2 offence ... of high culpability because of the  bite  you  inflicted
      the injury with ...

      The other two offences of assaulting a police officer in the execution
      of his duty are both serious.

45. The remarks make it clear that the actual harm  was  a  factor  in  the
    overall sentence of 10 months.

46. The  offences  had  an  effect  on,  it  appears,  3  police  officers,
    especially the one who was bitten.  I consider that effect crosses  the
    threshold from actual, but trivial, into serious harm.  The appellant's
    case accordingly falls within the deportation provisions.

    (vii)  Are  there  very  significant  obstacles  to   the   appellant's
    integration into Palestine?

47. The factors on which the appellant relies in this respect  are  all  as
    considered  under  previous  headings.   Paragraphs  399A9(c)  and  276
    ADE(1)(vi) of the rules apply to protect private life, not  to  provide
    an easier alternative to  the  refugee,  humanitarian,  and  article  3
    routes.  Although the appellant has been away from Palestine for years,
    he grew up there, speaks the language, and is familiar with the culture
    and society.  He would be at no greater disadvantage than the  rest  of
    the general population, among whom he would  be  an  "insider"  not  an
    "outsider", which is the principal criterion for integration.

48. The appellant has shown no feature of his private life in the  UK  such
    that it should carry any more than "little weight" in terms of part  5A
    of the 2002 Act.

    Conclusions.

49. It is readily understandable  that  the  appellant  resists  return  to
    Palestine, but he has not shown  that  his  offences  were  other  than
    serious, that there are any exceptions or very compelling circumstances
    such that he should not be deported, or that he is entitled  to  remain
    in the UK on grounds of refugee or humanitarian protection,  article  3
    ECHR, private life, or any other legal basis.

50. The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The  decision  substituted
    is that the appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is  dismissed  on
    all available grounds.

51. The UT's decision promulgated on  27  July  2020  is  headed  with  the
    appellant's name, followed by "anonymity order not made"; but  that  is
    followed by an anonymity order.  There is no obvious reason  to  depart
    from the principle of open justice, and the matter was not mentioned at
    the hearing before  me.   However,  taking  a  cautious  approach,  and
    although it may be of little import, this decision is anonymised.

        Hugh Macleman

      15 January 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.


