
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10836/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Teams       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2021                      |On 19 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MOK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. E Sanders, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant in this matter is referred to as the 'Secretary of State',
the respondent as the 'claimant'.

The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of the First-tier
Tribunal (Judges Welsh and Scott) ('the panel') who allowed the claimant's
appeal against a decision by the Secretary of State not to grant him leave
to remain on international protection grounds, or in the alternative on
human rights grounds. The decision of the panel was sent to the parties on
30 November 2020.

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted the Secretary of State permission to
appeal by a decision dated 5 January 2021.

Remote hearing

The hearing before us was a Teams hearing held during the Covid-19
pandemic. We were present in a hearing room at Field House. The hearing
room and the building were open to the public. The hearing and its start
time were listed in the cause list. We were addressed by the
representatives in the same way as if we were together in the hearing room.
We are satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that the
open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced;
and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a right or interest,
it is justified as necessary and proportionate.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal issued an anonymity order and neither party sought
for it to be set aside. We confirm the order at the conclusion of this
decision. We do so as it is presently in the interests of justice that the
claimant is not publicly recognised as someone seeking international
protection: paragraph 13 of Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber
Guidance Note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders.

Background

The claimant is a national of Iran and is ethnically Kurdish. His age has
been subject to dispute. The Secretary of State initially believed the
claimant to have been born in 1997. A local authority concluded after a
'Merton' compliant age assessment that he was born in 1995[1]. The panel
concluded that at the date of their decision the claimant was aged 18 and
so was aged 16 on his arrival in this country. The panel's finding as to
fact identifies the claimant as having born in 2002.

The claimant asserts that he did not attend school and so can neither read
nor write. Whilst in Iran he worked with his father as a shepherd and
assisted with farming.

In July 2018, in the company of two friends, he met a group of armed people
who were known to his friends. The claimant was informed that the armed men
were members of the KDPI. One of his friends provided the armed men with a
piece of paper and in turn received an envelope containing papers.

Two days later officials from Ettelaat, the Ministry of Intelligence,
attended the family home whilst the claimant was working in the fields.
They informed his grandmother that his two friends had been arrested and
KDPI leaflets had been found in their possession. The friends named the
claimant to the officials, leading to the visit to the family home.
Consequently, arrangements were made for the claimant to leave Iran.

The claimant travelled to the United Kingdom and following his arrival in
August 2018 he claimed asylum. Whilst present in this country, the claimant
attended demonstrations outside of the Iranian embassy in London on several
occasions.

A friend of the claimant set up a Facebook account for him and showed him
how to upload pictures onto his account. Material was uploaded that was
negative of the present Iranian authorities. The claimant's Facebook
account is open, with no restriction upon who can view it. Friends have
written comments in English and Kurdish on pages of the claimant's account.


Consequent to the age assessment, the Secretary of State treated the
claimant as an adult and following a substantive asylum interview held on 4
October 2018 the application for international protection was refused by a
decision dated 25 October 2019.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

The hearing came before the panel at Taylor House on 23 October 2020. The
parties were represented. The claimant gave evidence.

As a preliminary matter the panel considered the claimant's age. It noted
that the age assessment conducted by the local authority was procedurally
compliant. Consideration was then given to the substance of the assessment.
The panel concluded that the assessors, who were social workers, had placed
too great an adverse reliance upon the presence of body hair upon the
claimant. The stated concern of the assessors as to the claimant's ability
to recall his date of birth was held not to be a matter sufficient to
warrant an adverse credibility finding in circumstances where it was
perfectly plausible that the claimant could recall the date of birth
provided to him by his father despite his not being able to read or write.
The assessors reliance upon the applicant's ability to count to 10 was
found not to be properly capable of being an adverse factor as numeracy is
not a determinative indicator of literacy.

The panel was also critical as to the assessors' conclusion that the
appellant had given a vague account regarding his leaving Iran. It was
noted that the account provided to the assessors was largely consistent
with that given to the Tribunal.

Upon considering the evidence placed before them the panel concluded,
having regard to the guidelines provided in R(B) v. Merton London Borough
Council [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin) and the lower standard of proof applicable
in asylum matters, that the claimant was presently aged 18 and so entered
the United Kingdom when aged 16. When considering the claimant's
credibility, the panel had regard to the fact that he was a minor when he
entered this country and that he was a minor when he was substantively
interviewed by the Secretary of State about his claim.

The panel found the claimant's account of events in Iran to be credible. It
was accepted that the claimant uploaded anti-regime posts onto his Facebook
account and that he attended demonstrations outside the Iranian Embassy in
London. It was not accepted that he had attended these demonstrations
because he was a political activist. Rather, his involvement in the
demonstrations was limited to attending, holding up placards and shouting
slogans. The panel concluded that such involvement was no more than that of
an ordinary attendee. However, it was accepted that the claimant had
uploaded onto his Facebook account photographs of himself demonstrating
outside the Embassy.

The Tribunal held at para. 74(vi) of the decision:

         '74(vi) Mr. Ojo [Presenting Officer] invited us to find that if the
         [claimant] was questioned regarding his Facebook account on
         returned to Iran, he could inform the authorities that he did not
         have the capability of uploading posts to Facebook, and that it was
         done by others on his behalf. This, he submits, would result in the
         [claimant] not being at risk of persecution. We do not agree with
         his submissions. As per the UT in BA, the Iranian authorities
         demonstrate a 'hair trigger' approach to those suspected or
         perceived to have been involved in Kurdish political activities.
         The UT qualified 'hair trigger' as 'threshold for suspicion is low
         and the reaction of the authorities is reasonably likely to be
         extreme'. Further, the posts on Facebook show the [claimant]
         demonstrating outside of the Iranian embassy. Even if the Iranian
         authorities words are accept that others had uploaded posts to the
         [claimant's] Facebook page, they would still have evidence of the
         [claimant's] involvement in the demonstrations and this, we find,
         would put him at risk on return.'

The panel found that the claimant would be returning to Iran as a Kurd who
was not in possession of a passport. There was a real likelihood of his
being questioned upon his return resulting in his internet profile,
including his Facebook account, being checked by the authorities. It was
accepted that his Facebook account would present evidence to the
authorities as to his attendance at the demonstrations, his support for
Kurdish rights and his anti-regime position. Consequently, there was a real
likelihood that he would be subject to prolonged detention and physical
abuse at the hands of the Iranian authorities and so a real risk of
persecution existed if the claimant were to be returned to Iran.

Grounds of Appeal

By means of her written grounds of appeal, the Secretary of State relied
upon two grounds of challenge, identified as:

         i. The First-tier Tribunal found that the local authority
            assessment was procedurally compliant, and it concluded that the
            claimant was aged 22 at the date of assessment. The First-tier
            Tribunal 'departed' from the assessment and concluded that the
            appellant was age 16 when he arrived in this country. The
            Secretary of State contended that the conclusion reached as to
            the claimant's age infected the First-tier Tribunal's further
            findings that the inconsistencies in the claimant's evidence in
            regard of his international protection claim could be explained
            by his young age at the time of interview and hearing.


        ii. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant is not a
            political activist and so failed to consider that his sur place
            activities were an attempt to bolster his asylum claim. Further,
            the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider that Facebook posts
            are not determinative as to the appellant being of interest to
            the Iranian authorities, particularly in light of the fact that
            he does not have a high-profile.

Decision on Error of Law

Mr. Melvin filed and served a skeleton argument which we considered with
care. Before us Mr. Melvin observed that a country guidance decision is
awaited from this Tribunal in respect of Iran, the use of Facebook and sur
place activities. No request was made to adjourn this hearing pending
promulgation of the awaited country guidance decision.

In respect of ground 1, the core of Mr. Melvin's submission was that the
panel members lacked sufficient expertise in respect of age assessment to
depart from the conclusions reached by properly trained and experienced
social workers. Further, complaint was made that the range between the
conclusions as to age reached by the social workers and those of the panel
was some six years.

There is no merit to the submission that the First-tier Tribunal was
required to possess a particular expertise, beyond its statutory role, in
respect of age assessments. McFarlane LJ confirmed in Rawofi (age
assessment - standard of proof) [2012] UKUT 00197 (IAC) that where age is
disputed in the context of an asylum appeal, in contrast to age assessment
in judicial review proceedings, it is for a tribunal to make a factual
conclusion with the burden being placed on the appellant and the standard
of proof as laid down in R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department,
ex parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958 and R (Karanakaran) v. Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA Civ 11.

The panel was not bound to accept the conclusions of the local authority's
age assessment, even though it accepted that it was 'Merton' compliant and
conducted by two experienced social workers. As Elisabeth Laing LJ
reaffirmed in MS (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2021] EWCA Civ 941, at [61], it is trite that a tribunal of fact is not
bound to accept expert evidence if it disagrees with that evidence. That is
so even if the expert witness is not cross-examined. The tribunal of fact
is entitled, and obliged, to examine the analysis and reasoning in the
expert's report. It is obliged to reach its own conclusions on any
questions of fact, or mixed questions of fact and law, which it must decide
in order to determine a case. Whilst it may accept guidance from an expert
on those questions, a tribunal of fact is not obliged to accept it.

What weight is appropriately given to an expert or indeed any evidence is
primarily a matter for a judge subject to perversity and irrationality. We
note Stanley Burnton LJ's confirmation in SS (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 155, at [21], that a judge's
decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve an error of law on
their part, provided they approach that evidence with appropriate care and
give good reasons for their decision

We are satisfied that the panel gave adequate, lawful reasons for not
agreeing with the assessors in respect of previously identified issues of
concern. The panel was able to consider a wide range of evidence as well as
assess the claimant's consistency in the round. We conclude that the
Secretary of State's challenge simply amounts to a disagreement as to the
conclusion reached and is incapable of establishing that the panel's
decision is perverse or irrational. Consequently, this ground is dismissed.


With his usual candour Mr. Melvin accepted before us that if the Secretary
of State was unsuccessful on ground 1, there would be an uphill struggle to
succeed on ground 2 because the challenge was underpinned by the submission
that the panel erred in considering the claimant's evidence at his
interview through the prism of his having been a minor, and not an adult as
asserted by the Secretary of State. We conclude that Mr. Melvin was correct
to make such concession. This challenge is unsustainable consequent to the
dismissal of ground 1. It has been reduced to a reasons challenge, and
simply constitutes a disagreement with the conclusion reached. We find that
the panel carefully considered the claimant's evidence, including
inconsistencies in his evidence, and reached reasoned, lawful conclusions.
The panel accepted that the claimant's attendance at demonstrations was
genuine in nature, though his participation was no more than that of an
ordinary attendee. Consequent to such finding of fact, there was no
requirement to consider the appeal in light of the guidance provided by the
Court of Appeal in Danian v. Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2000] Imm AR 96. We are further satisfied that the panel gave lawful
reasons in concluding that the claimant would be stopped on return to
Tehran airport and his Facebook account would be identified, thereby
informing the authorities of his anti-government activity. This ground is
dismissed.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
material error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sent to the parties on 30 November
2020 is upheld, and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The anonymity order issued by the First-tier Tribunal is confirmed in the
following terms:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of
         these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly
         or indirectly identify the claimant. This direction applies to,
         amongst others, the claimant and the Secretary of State. Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt
         of court proceedings.



Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 29 July 2021



TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal made a full fee award in favour of the claimant.

As no fee was paid by the claimant, such award could not properly be made.

No fee award is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 29 July 2021
-----------------------
[1] There is no prescribed way in which local  authorities  are  obliged  to
carry out age assessments; however, general  guidance  was  given  to  local
authorities in R(B) v.  Merton  London  Borough  Council  [2003]  EWHC  1689
(Admin) and abidance with the guidance will  usually  establish  a  'Merton'
compliant decision.


