
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10818/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd October 2020                  |On 14 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                 ASHFAQ [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Aziz, Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
were given orally at the end of the hearing on 2nd October 2020.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bowler (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 30th December 2019, by
which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal
of his protection and human rights claims.  The respondent had, on 11th
October 2019, refused the appellant's further submissions made on 21st
December 2017, but provided him with a statutory right of appeal.

Background

The appellant, an Indian national, had previously applied for asylum,
having arrived in the UK in April 2000. He claimed asylum on 27th September
2000. The respondent had refused this application on 7th November 2000 and
his appeal against that refusal was dismissed by, as he then was,
Adjudicator Chalkey in a decision promulgated on 16th February 2002. The
gist of the appellant's asylum claim was that as a person of Muslim faith,
his family had been persecuted by members of the Hindu faith and his
parents had been murdered; he had been arrested in India in 1997 and
falsely accused of murder, detained, released on bail and subsequently fled
to Saudi Arabia; then returned to India and then travelled on to the UK.
Adjudicator Chalkley rejected the appellant's account in its entirety, not
accepting the plausibility of the account of having been charged with
murder in India, fleeing bail, only to return to India; nor accepting the
plausibility of the account regarding the appellant's subsequent detention
in India, but his ability to then flee that country.  Adjudicator Chalkley
regarded purported death certificates for the appellant's parents as
forgeries. He dismissed the appellant's appeal by reference to refugee
status, as well as articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

The appellant's further submissions reiterated the appellant's fear of
persecution in India due to his Muslim faith, particularly by religious
extremists and his fear that the Indian police would not help him. He also
claimed that he had tried to hide without success in another part of India,
as his parents had been murdered. He also reiterated the general obstacles
to his integration into India, were he required to return there.

The respondent rejected the further submissions, taking Adjudicator
Chalkley's decision as her starting point and noting no other evidence
except representations from his lawyers substantiated his renewed claims
that his life would still be at risk in India due to his religious beliefs.
The respondent noted the appellant's relatively youthful age (he was only
49); his residence in India for the vast majority of his life and, in terms
of the appellant's claimed mental health issues, the lack of any evidence
that he was receiving treatment in the UK, and the availability of medical
treatment in India, if he so required it, on his return. The respondent
also did not accept that the appellant no longer had family in India.

Limited scope of appeal before the FtT

The appellant initially appealed both in respect of the protection appeal
and article 3 ECHR; and his wider article 8 ECHR rights, noting the period
of time in which the appellant had lived in the UK and the obstacles to his
integration in India.  However, by the time that the FtT considered the
appellant's appeal at the hearing on 6th December 2019, as the FtT's
decision records at �[2], the appellant no longer pursued his protection
claim or a claim under article 3 of the ECHR. The sole ground of appeal
pursued was with respect to the appellant's rights under article 8 of the
ECHR, with the appellant's case summarised at �[17] to [21]. The appellant
relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), namely whether there were very
significant obstacles to his integration into India. The appellant asserted
that the situation in India for those of muslim faith was deteriorating. He
also relied on his poor mental health and the period of time spent by him
in the UK. At the date of the FtT hearing, he had been present in the UK
for 19 years and eight months, (although the date when the appellant had
entered the UK, namely whether it was April or November 2000, was, at that
stage in dispute - it has since been accepted to be April 2020). The
appellant also relied on paragraph GEN .3 .2 and unjustifiably harsh
consequences resulting from his removal.

The FtT's decision

The FtT noted at �[6] that the appellant was like to be distressed when
questioned and that the accuracy of his testimony may be undermined and he
was unlikely to have the capacity to be cross-examined, but that he would
have the capacity to give instructions. At �[7], the FtT noted that the
appellant was a vulnerable witness, who although might be unable to be
cross-examined, could proffer some evidence, but in the absence of cross-
examination, the weight attached to his evidence would be reduced.
However, at �[12], the FtT said that she had not take into account the
witness statement of the appellant, as opposed to attaching limited weight
to it, because he had not been called to give evidence. The FtT reminded
herself of the previous findings of Adjudicator Chalkley, adopting the
guidance in the well-known authority of Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT
00702 and taking Adjudicator Chalkley's findings as her starting point. The
FtT noted that the appellant had not been in the UK for 20 years, even
taking his case at its highest. In terms of very significant obstacles to
the appellant's integration to India, despite having close supporters in
the UK, they had been unable or unwilling to provide any evidence of their
knowledge of the appellant's circumstances in India which would, in the
FtT's view, have been readily available.

There was a report of an expert, Dr Ahwe, whose evidence the FtT analysed.
The FtT noted at �[39] that the expert had not had access to the
appellant's medical records, and had based his assessment on the
appellant's account of events previously found by Adjudicator Chalkley to
have been fabricated. The expert did not suggest that the appellant
currently required medication but noted the negative impact of the
appellant's removal on his family in the UK, even though in the appellant's
case, he did not claim to have family in the UK.  Whilst the expert
asserted that the appellant was unlikely to engage with mental health care
in India, it was said that the expert was inconsistent about the extent
which the appellant accessed healthcare in the UK; and the expert had
provided no analysis of the availability of treatment in India. Having
identified her concerns with the expert's evidence, the FtT applied limited
weight to it.

The FtT assessed the appellant as a relatively young man, with no physical
health conditions, who had lived in a different culture (the UK) where he
had not spoken the language.  The FtT considered, at �[63] and �[64], a
Country Policy and Information Note ('CPIN') and concluded that while it
indicated an increase in tensions faced by people of muslim faith in India,
this was not at such a level to support the assertion that there were very
significant obstacles to the appellant's integration, noting that he had
lived there for nearly 30 years.

The FtT dismissed the appellant's article 8 appeal and dismissed his
protection appeal, as it was not pursued.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially that the FtT
had failed to consider the widespread degrading treatment towards Indian
Muslims, rather than simply those of Muslim faith who were not Indian
nationals. He would be subjected to unduly harsh treatment. The FtT had
failed to carry out a proportionality assessment by reference to the well-
known authority of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and there were
insurmountable obstacles to the appellant enjoying family and private life
outside the UK.

The appellant's application for permission to appeal to this Tribunal was
initially refused, but a renewed application was granted by Upper Tribunal
Judge McWilliam on 27th February 2020. She noted at �[12] of the FtT's
decision that the appellant was not called to give evidence and as a
consequence, the FtT had not taken into account his witness statement at
all. Judge McWilliam regarded that as an arguable 'Robinson obvious' error,
in light of which it was arguable that the FtT's proportionality assessment
was flawed. The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me and concessions by the Secretary of State

I explored with Ms Cunha on behalf of the respondent at the beginning of
the hearing the respondent's response to Judge McWilliam's identification
of the arguable 'Robinson obvious' point.  I did so, in the context of this
Tribunal having since received correspondence from Mr Stefan Kotas, Senior
Home Office Presenting Officer, dated 15th July 2020. Mr Kotas asserted
that the contents of the appellant's witness statement would not have made
any material difference to the outcome, but added at �[6] to �[8]:

"6. Further in the circumstances it would now appear that the appellant
meets paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  The Secretary of State considered this
Rule in her decision letter in the following terms:

'It is accepted that you meet the requirements of 276ADE(1)(i).  It is
noted that you are 48 years and 8 months of age and have lived in the UK
since 7 April 2000.  You have failed to demonstrate that you have had
twenty years' residence in the UK as required under Rule 276ADE(1)(iii).'"

7. Thus the respondent accepts that the appellant was not refused on
grounds of suitability and has indeed lived in the UK since 7 April 2000
and as a consequence of the further passage of time since the date of the
decision now meets the Rules.

8. To that extent that the Upper Tribunal is invited to issue further
directions inviting the appellant to vary his grounds of appeal in
accordance with the above and subject to the decision of the FtT being set
aside, the Upper Tribunal can remake the appeal in the appellant's favour
on the papers without the need for a further oral hearing notwithstanding
that the appellant still appears to be unrepresented.  Should the Upper
Tribunal still consider remaking it in the above terms the SSHD of course
defers to that view."

At the hearing before me Ms Cunha made two further concessions.  The first
was that contrary to Mr Kotas's submission, the respondent now accepted
that the witness statement of the appellant, which had been discounted in
its entirety by the FtT, would have added a material weight to the
consideration of whether there were very significant obstacles to the
appellant's integration into India.  The fact that this was not considered
by the FtT meant that there had been not only a failure by the FtT to
assess that evidence, but a failure to explain why it was discounted.  Ms
Cunha conceded that that this was a material error and as a consequence,
that the FtT's conclusions were unsafe and should be set aside.

Second, Ms Cunha conceded that when discounting the appellant's witness
statement, the FtT had erred in failing to analyse and consider the
appellant's continuous residence in the UK.

Ms Cunha made clear that the concessions were made in relation to the
article 8 claim, and on the basis that the protection and article 3 ECHR
had not been pursued further. Ms Aziz accepted that there had been no
renewed appeal in respect of the protection and article 3 ECHR claim and
the appellant's appeal, which was considered by the FtT, was solely on the
basis of the appellant's article 8 ECHR rights.

Conclusion on error of law

 In light of Ms Cuhna's concession, I conclude that the FtT erred in law,
such that her decision in respect of the article 8 appeal is unsafe and
cannot stand. The FtT's decision in respect of the protection and article 3
ECHR remains undisturbed.

Disposal of appeal

Ms Cunha and Ms Aziz agreed that given the narrow legal issue and Mr
Kotas's concession on behalf of the respondent, which made further fact-
finding unnecessary, and considering paragraph 7.2 of the Senior
President's Practice Statement, this was clearly a case where the remaking
of the appellant's appeal should be retained by the Upper Tribunal.

Remaking of the Decision

I next discussed with Ms Cunha and Ms Aziz the scope of the remaking
required and was grateful for their clear and concise submissions, as well
as the concessions reiterated by Ms Cunha.  First, Ms Cunha conceded on
behalf of the respondent that the appellant met the requirements of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and therefore at the date of today's hearing, met
those requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Both Ms Cunha and Ms Aziz
agreed that it was unnecessary and inappropriate for me to consider
separately the issue of whether the appellant met the requirements of
276ADE(1)(vi), namely whether there would be very significant obstacles to
the appellant's integration in India, noting that this provision applies to
those having lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years. Moreover,
this would, in their view, unnecessarily require more detailed evidence as
to whether there were obstacles to integration in India on religious
grounds, as well as an assessment of medical evidence, when the appellant
now met a different part of the Immigration Rules.  I explored with Ms
Cunha the authority of OA and Others (human rights; 'new matter'; s.120)
Nigeria [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC) and in particular the headnote which stated
at �[3]:

         "Where the judge concluded that the ten years' requirement [in our
         case twenty years is relevant] is satisfied and there is nothing to
         indicate an application for indefinite leave to remain by P would
         be likely to be rejected by the Secretary of State, the judge
         should allow P's human rights appeal unless the judge is satisfied
         that there is a discrete public interest factor which would still
         make P's removal proportionate.  Absent such factors it would be
         disproportionate to remove P or require P to leave the UK before P
         is reasonably able to make an application for indefinite leave to
         remain."

�[4] of the headnote continues:

         "Leaving aside whether P has any other Article 8 argument to deploy
         (besides paragraph 276B) and in the absence of any policy to give
         successful human rights appellants a particular period of limited
         leave, all the Secretary of State is required to do in such a case
         is grant P a period of leave sufficient to enable P to make the
         application for indefinite leave to remain.  If P subsequently
         fails to make such an application P will continue to be subject to
         such limited leave as the Secretary of State has granted in
         consequence of allowing the human rights appeal."

While that case applies to applications for indefinite leave to remain (not
applicable here), in the circumstances, Ms Cunha accepted that whilst there
might have previously been a separate article 8 argument to deploy, namely
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), in this case, on the basis that the appellant now
meets the requirement of paragraph 276ADE(iii), his appeal on article 8
grounds should succeed.

Conclusion on remaking the appellant's appeal

In light of the concessions of Ms Cunha and Mr Kotas, my decision is that
the appellant's appeal on article 8 grounds succeeds.

Notice of Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of  law  in
relation to article 8 ECHR and I  set  aside  the  decision  in  respect  of
article 8. The First-tier Tribunal's decision in respect of  the  protection
and article 3 ECHR appeal stands.

I remake the appeal by upholding the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.




Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   7th October 2020






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has succeeded. I regarded it as appropriate to make a  fee  award
of �140.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   7th October 2020
