
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10138/2019 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'AK'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr S Chelvan, instructed by Primus Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and reasons which were given
orally at the end of the hearing on 9th November 2020.

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to the
hearing being via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Buckley (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 6th February 2020, by
which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal
on 26th September 2019 of his further submissions, which the respondent had
treated as a fresh claim, seeking asylum and asserting that his removal
would breach his rights under articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

In essence, the appellant's claims involved the following issues:

   1. whether, as an Iranian national of Kurdish ethnic origin, he was
      perceived by the Iranian authorities as having political affiliations
      to a Kurdish opposition group, the 'KDPI,' as a result of helping
      wounded people to hospital; and 'sur place' activities in the UK.  He
      claimed that he was forced to flee Iran and had been convicted and
      sentenced to imprisonment, in his absence, because of his perceived
      loyalties;

   2. to what extent the new evidence justified departing from an earlier
      FtT decision (Judge Siddiqi) promulgated on 12th December 2017;

   3.  the nature of the appellant's 'sur place' activities, attending
      demonstrations and posting material on 'Facebook'.

The FtT's decision

The FtT considered and applied the well-known authority of Devaseelan v
SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702. The FtT noted the absence of any reference to any
Facebook material in the earlier case, despite the appellant having a
Facebook account at the time (�31); the FtT noted the vagueness of the
appellant's evidence about multiple Facebook accounts (��33 to 34; 36 to
39); the vagueness of his evidence about demonstrations he had attended
(�35); the FtT considered a letter purporting to be from the KDPI in Paris,
whose provenance the FtT did not accept (�41) and the FtT considered what
he regarded as the implausibility of the issuing of a court order (�42) in
the appellant's absence.  At �43, the FtT saw no reason to depart from the
previous findings of an FtT about the appellant's credibility.  He then
went on to consider Country Guidance on attendance at demonstrations and
other sur place activity and considered that even though it was accepted
that the appellant had attended demonstrations and had a Facebook account,
which he could delete, the appellant did not have a genuinely well-founded
fear of persecution (��47 to 49).  The FtT therefore dismissed his appeal.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal, without legal representation at the
time, asserting that his lack of memory for details of attendances at
demonstrations or Facebook posts were not relevant to the risk he faced,
and his letter from the KDPI in France had been ignored.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson, noting the lack of legal representation,
identified the following arguable errors, not limiting the scope of her
grant of permission:

   4. Ground (1): the FtT had placed too much weight on the appellant's
      inability to recall the dates of demonstrations he had attended, and
      Facebook posts;

   5. Ground (2): the FtT's reference to Country Guidance cases arguably
      appeared as an afterthought, after he had already made findings on
      the appellant's credibility;

   6. Ground (3) the FtT had arguably failed to consider that the appellant
      may be at risk, even on the basis of opportunistic sur place
      activities, on the "hair-trigger" principle as set out in HB (Kurds)
      Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC).

The hearing before me

The appellant's submissions

The appellant elaborated on submissions in response to a late served Rule
24 response, in a Rule 25 response submitted on 6th November 2020.  Very
broadly speaking, it identified the grounds set out by Judge Simpson and
went on to elaborate that the approach to the Facebook posts had been
flawed.  In particular, the respondent's case, as recorded at �24(c) of the
FtT's decision, had been that there were ways of manipulating Facebook
entries that could be deleted or altered.  For example, a post could be
made, a snapshot of it made, and the post promptly deleted. In essence,
there was an allegation of deception.  Despite this being part of the
respondent's case, the FtT had gone on to say at �39 that while he was
unable to attach any weight to the Facebook posts, it was unnecessary to
make any findings regarding manipulation of the Facebook entries, because
of existing credibility concerns relating to the appellant.  The FtT had
erred in failing to address a key allegation of deception, where the burden
was upon the respondent, see the authority of RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria
[2006] UKAIT 00086

Next, Dr Chelvan reiterated that the FtT had been obliged to consider the
risk of persecution on return at the date of the hearing - see the
authority of Ravichandran v SSHD [1995] EWCA Civ 16. Crucially, the FtT had
erred, at �48 of his decision, in finding that while the appellant had made
posts on Facebook, he could delete his Facebook account before returning to
Iran and this would not offend the principles set out in HJ (Iran) v SSHD
[2010] UKSC 31.   This implied that there was a real risk on returning from
the Iranian authorities but that effectively those risks could be
mitigated.  However, the FtT's reasoning was based on an assumption for
which there was no legal authority, namely requiring a refugee to take a
step after the date of the hearing, in order to evade persecution on
return.  To the extent that it might be argued, this was contrary to �464
of AB and Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT
00257, which had stated clearly that it was not relevant that a person had
used the internet in an opportunistic way, as the Iranian authorities did
not seem in the least concerned as to the motives of the person making the
claim.  The FtT should have applied AB.

In addition, the reasoning effectively amounted to a forced modification of
behaviour in response to the risk of persecution, which was unlawful: see
the authorities of Danian v SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ 3000; Iftikhar Ahmed v
SSHD IATRF1999-0490-C; and HJ (Iran).   Moreover, to the extent that SSHD v
MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA Civ 715 might be relied upon, this was with
respect to conduct following return, rather than prior to return.  The
respondent had never engaged with the flaws in �48 of the FtT's decision,
in her Rule 24 response.  It had never been put to the appellant that he
could delete any Facebook posts, which was an additional error of law.

The respondent's submissions

Mr Melvin relied upon the respondent's Rule 24 response. The FtT had
considered all of the Facebook evidence, after detailed submissions and had
reached these findings in the backdrop that the evidence had been taken
into account as a whole.

The FtT had considered three new pieces of evidence: Facebook screenshots;
the letter from the KDPI in Paris; and the court order; they were
considered in detail at ��31 to 39 and the FtT had explained why he had
placed limited weight on them in the context of wider concerns about the
appellant's credibility.  The FtT had considered all three new sources of
evidence in the context of current Country Guidance cases.

The respondent disputed that the FtT had concluded that, as appeared to be
argued before this Tribunal, any failed asylum seeker, whose credibility
was rejected, could open a Facebook page and expect to be granted asylum.

Discussion and conclusions

On the one hand, I am conscious that an assessment of credibility is one
that is nuanced, evidence-specific and one that I should be slow to
interfere with, for example, by taking particular comments in a decision,
in isolation.  Nevertheless, I accept first, the difficulty in the
structure of the decision, identified by Judge Simpson, when she granted
permission, that the FtT assessed and reached conclusions on the
appellant's  credibility at ��31 to 43, by reference to the Facebook posts
and the court order document.  �43 states:

"In conclusion, I have considered the additional/new evidence provided by
the appellant and do not attach any weight to such evidence, and have made
further adverse credibility findings against the appellant, dismissing his
claim in relation to the genuineness of his political beliefs, sur place
activities and support for the KDPI.  I find no reason to depart from the
findings of Immigration Judge Siddiqi's determination."

�44 continues, "I have considered and had regard to the case law submitted"
and there is then a recitation of the case law, specifically the relevant
Country Guidance.

The practical difficulty is that the FtT had reached his conclusion on the
appellant's credibility at �43, and then went on to consider the Country
Guidance authorities, including passages relevant to credibility of the
appellant's claimed fear of persecution, such as the 'hair-trigger'
approach of the Iranian authorities to those suspected or perceived to
support Kurdish rights, at ��44 to 46 onwards.  I accept the force of the
criticism that the FtT has effectively compartmentalised two sources of
evidence, i.e. specific documents and oral evidence; discounted it and then
gone on to consider objective country evidence, which is potentially
relevant to the genuineness of the appellant's fear.  That
compartmentalisation is analogous to the 'Mibanga' trap (relating to expert
evidence), see: Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  Bearing in mind that
the appellant's credibility is central to this case, I accept that the
FtT's approach amounts to a material error of law.

I also accept Dr Chelvan's submissions that there are also linked flaws in
the three paragraphs of the FtT's decision: ��24(c), 39 and 48.  At �24(c),
the FtT recorded the respondent's case as including that the appellant had
manipulated Facebook entries, namely that he posted or altered them, took
snapshots of them and deleted them on the day of posting. The FtT was
invited to place no weight on the Facebook posts.

The FtT sought to resolve the respondent's challenge to the reliability of
the Facebook evidence at �39, stating:

"In relation to the Facebook posts, I am unable to attach any weight to
them.  I do not find it necessary to make any finding regarding the
manipulation or otherwise of the Facebook entries.  The appellant's claim
regarding his social media activity lacks any credibility.  I do not accept
that the appellant had a second Facebook account, nor do I accept what the
appellant tells me in relation to why he is posting anti-regime sentiment.
I make this finding also in the context of the appellant confirming in his
original asylum interview that he was an ordinary man and had no political
profile ..."

I accept Dr Chelvan's challenge that the FtT's decision not to make any
findings about whether the appellant had manipulated Facebook entries,
first, fails to engage with an allegation of deliberate deception, the
determination of which clearly has potential relevance to the appellant's
credibility.  Second, whether the Facebook posts have or have not been
deleted, on the day in question, or still exist, is also particularly
relevant to the risk to the appellant on return to Iran, even if the
material has been posted in an opportunistic way - see �464 of AB:

         "464.    We do not find it at all relevant if a person had used the
         internet in an opportunistic way. We are aware of examples in some
         countries where there is clear evidence that the authorities are
         scornful of people who try to create a claim by being rude
         overseas. There is no evidence remotely similar to that in this
         case. The touchiness of the Iranian authorities does not seem to be
         in the least concerned with the motives of the person making a
         claim but if it is interested it makes the situation worse, not
         better because seeking asylum is being rude about the government of
         Iran and whilst that may not of itself be sufficient to lead to
         persecution it is a point in that direction."

I also accept the final part of Dr Chelvan's challenge, to �48 of the FtT's
decision, which states:

"Although it is accepted that the appellant has attended some
demonstrations, he has not demonstrated even a low-level political profile
or involvement in such demonstrations, over and above mere attendance.  I
have found that the appellant does not have any genuinely held political
beliefs and as such he can delete his Facebook account before returning to
Iran and this will not offend the HJ principles."

The flaw here is that on the one hand, the FtT had already considered, but
expressly declined to make a finding at �39 regarding the manipulation of
the Facebook entries; on the other hand, at �48, there appears to be the
suggestion that there is such Facebook material that still exists, but the
appellant can be expected to delete it on his return. I accept that first,
the conclusion and reasoning as to the continuing existence of Facebook
entries is not clear; and second, it is contrary to the authority of AB,
already referred to, that even those having taken part in opportunistic sur
place activities may well have a well-founded fear of persecution.  While
the 'hair trigger' approach was cited by the FtT, I accept the criticism
that the FtT has not gone on to adequately explain why the appellant's fear
would not be well-founded, in that context, other than the reference to his
ability to delete the Facebook material, which, it may be argued, have been
viewed by the Iranian authorities in the meantime. I also regard this gap
in the FtT's reasoning as a material error.

For the above reasons, I conclude that the FtT's decision is not safe and
cannot stand.



Decision on error of law

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Disposal

With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Direction and the necessary
fact-findings on credibility, this is clearly a case that has to be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing, without
preserved findings.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing
with no preserved findings of fact.

The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Buckley, with an interpreter in Kurdish Sorani.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed   J Keith  Date:  16th November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


