
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/10354/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype Remote Video    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Link                                          |                              |
|On 20 January 2021                            |On 4 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                   MR ABB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Singh, instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

This is an appeal against the decision issued on 17 January 2020 of First-
tier Tribunal Judge McKinney which refused the protection and human rights
claim of the appellant.

The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone and was born in 1980.

He came to the UK on 7 September 2015 with leave until 22 October 2018.  He
claimed asylum on 17 October 2018.  That claim was refused by the
respondent in a decision dated 11 October 2019.  The appeal then proceeded
to the First-tier Tribunal and was dismissed in the decision of 17 January
2020 of First-tier Tribunal Judge McKinney.  Permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal was granted by the Upper Tribunal in a decision dated 20
April 2020.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant maintains that he is the nephew of X, a former minister and
chairman of the All People's Congress (APC) Party in the western area of
Sierra Leone. The appellant lived with his uncle from the age of 12 until
he left Sierra Leone to come to the UK.

The appellant maintains that he is at risk because of his connection to his
uncle. His uncle and his family disappeared after elections were held in
Sierra Leone on 31 March 2018. Members of staff at his uncle's home were
attacked and killed. The appellant fears that he will face violence on
return also as a close relative of X.

The appellant also maintains that he would be at risk on return as he is a
member of the APC and also because he is a journalist. He obtained a degree
in communications in Sierra Leone in 2013 and worked as a freelance
journalist between 2007 and 2015. He published articles critical of the
current ruling party as part of his work as a freelance journalist and
spoke on the radio on political issues.  He maintains that he campaigned
with his uncle in 2012.

The appellant submitted that he made his claim for asylum only in October
2018 as the key event., the disappearance of his uncle, occurred only in
March 2018 after the elections in Sierra Leone.  The appellant maintained
that he was only informed of the disappearance of his uncle and his family
when a journalist contacted him about the issue in August 2018.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

The First-tier Tribunal did not accept the core of the appellant's claim,
that he was at risk as the nephew of X. The reasons for reaching this
conclusion are set out in paragraphs 49 to 65 of the decision. Put simply,
the judge found that there was insufficient evidence that the appellant was
the nephew of X, particularly so where he claimed to have lived with him
for over 20 years.

The judge found in paragraphs 49 and 50 that the appellant's evidence as to
his uncle's political career did not accurately reflect what had happened,
his uncle being removed from his post as a minister rather than merely
being a Minister of Trade in 2012.  The uncle being "sacked" or "removed
from his post" was not mentioned by the appellant when asked to discuss his
uncle's political career in his asylum interview.  reported in national
press.

In paragraphs 51 to 52 the judge considered photographs provided by the
appellant of an APC rally from 2012 at which he maintains he was present
together with his uncle and the former President of Sierra Leone.  As the
judge notes in paragraph 51, the photographs did not purport to show a
picture of the appellant and his uncle together but to show them separately
attending the same rally.  The judge accepts that the photographs showed
the former President attending a rally. The judge also noted that the
photographs showed a man in white clothing attending. The appellant's
evidence was that this was his uncle.  The judge also accepted that the
photos showed the appellant attending the same event. However, the First-
tier Tribunal found the man in white clothing was not dressed the same as
the other officials who were present. This did not suggest that he was X
and a regional chairman of the APC. The appellant was dressed casually and
was carrying a camera. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that all that the
photographs showed was the appellant attending a rally as part of his work
as freelance journalist.

In paragraph 53 of the decision First-tier Tribunal Judge McKinney the
judge found that an old family photograph purporting to show the
appellant's uncle in his youth together with the appellant's grandmother
and his mother were of very little evidential value as there was no way to
identify who the people in the photographs were and the people in them
could not be compared to any more up-to-date photos.

In paragraph 54 the judge found that only limited weight could be placed on
an email from the appellant's brother, AB, in the USA.  The First-tier
Tribunal accepted that the email was from AB, an African Union adviser to
the United Nations in New York.  The judge reached this conclusion where
the email contained the office address and a copy of the writer's work ID
card.  The judge did not take the evidence in the email at its highest,
however, where the information given about the appellant's relationship to
X was almost word for word that given by the appellant, where the names of
the appellant and AB were different even though they claimed to be full
brothers. The judge also placed less weight on the email as AB was not
available to be cross-examined and this could have been arranged relatively
easily by the use of video link.

In paragraph 55 the judge found that there was reliable evidence that there
was a functioning birth certificate system in place in Sierra Leone at the
time of the birth of the appellant's parents and his uncle and that, as a
result, the appellant's claim that it was not possible to obtain birth
certificates showing his relationship to his uncle was not credible.

In paragraphs 57 to 59 the judge found that the appellant's evidence
concerning events at the home of the appellant's uncle after the March 2018
elections was not credible.  The appellant's evidence was that government
supporters attacked the uncle's home after the elections were concluded.
This was inconsistent with a newspaper articles on these events provided by
the respondent which showed that X fled his home on 2 April 2018, before
the conclusion of the counting of the election and at a time when the APC
were still in power.  In paragraph 59 the judge found an inconsistency
where the appellant maintained that a member of his uncle's staff had been
killed but this significant incident was not referred to in the newspaper
report.

In paragraphs 60 to 62 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal considered
a newspaper article provided by the appellant dated 24 July 2018.  The
judge sets out numerous reasons for placing little weight on this article.
The source was not independent as the appellant claimed to be a former
colleague of the editor. The appellant claimed the editor had contacted him
requesting information but there were no documents to support that contact.
The article referred to the motive of the attack on X and his family being
"unclear" when the appellant's account was that it was a politically
motivated attack following the March 2018 elections.  The judge noted that
nothing in the article other than a specific quote from the appellant
actually named X. The judge also found in paragraph 62 that it was not
credible that the editor, supposedly a friend of the appellant, would print
an article likely to create difficulties for the appellant where it
highlighted his relationship to X.

Grounds and Discussion

The first ground maintains that the First-tier Tribunal contradicted
himself when considering the photographs of the appellant at a rally in
2012. This ground appears to be a misreading of the judge's findings. The
appellant maintained that the photographs showed his uncle at the rally and
that he was also at the rally. The judge refers in paragraphs 50 and 51 to
the appellant's case being that the man in white was his uncle but does not
at any point accept that this person was X or that the applicant was
related to him.  The First-tier Tribunal accepted only that the man in the
white clothing and the appellant appeared to be attending the same event
but no more than this.

References to judge was entitled to find in paragraph 50 of the decision
that, "if the appellant were his nephew and were as close to his uncle as
he proclaims, I find he should have known these important facts".  The
judge notes for example that the profile of his uncle was

The second ground challenges the judge's approach to the newspaper articles
again maintaining that there was an inconsistency. The judge stated in
paragraph 59 that it could be expected that there would be "independent"
newspaper coverage of the attack on X's home and death of one of his
uncle's staff. Ground two argues that the appellant had provided a
newspaper article on the attack, however, the one published by his former
editor on 24 July 2018.  Again, it appears that this ground misreads or
misstates what was said by the First-tier Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal
did not dispute that the appellant provided the newspaper article dated 24
July 2018 but did not find that this article was reliable for a number of
reasons; see paragraph 15 above. The reference to the "independent" press
reporting on the death of a member of X's staff and there were no other
reports of such an event.

The third ground objects to the First-tier Tribunal placing little weight
on the email from AB where he was not available for cross-examination. In
my view, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take this approach. It
would not have been difficult for AB to give evidence by video link and the
judge was not required to take his written evidence at its highest in the
absence of cross-examination. This approach did not amount to failing to
apply the correct standard of proof.

The fourth ground maintains that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
conducting independent research and failed to properly reflect the
available country evidence, for example the US State Department Report for
2018. Paragraph 55 of the decision shows that the parties agreed that the
judge could consider country material on Sierra Leone where none had been
provided for the hearing. Further, paragraphs 69 and 70 of the decision
sets out what is, in my judgment, an accurate summary of the sections of
the U.S. State Department Report for 2019 contained in the appellant's
grounds so there is no merit in the submission that the judge did not
consider that material correctly. The materials sets out that there is
relative freedom of expression in Sierra Leone including for the press and
that the government generally respected those rights but there were
exceptions. The only specific example of political harassment of the press
concerned the APC itself rather than the current government.

For all of these reasons, I do not find that the grounds are capable of
showing a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  S  Pitt                                         Date:  21  February
    2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
