
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/10016/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2021                     |On 25 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    A K L
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Frost, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION and REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Vietnam,  aged  28.   FtT  Judge  Khan
    dismissed his appeal against deportation by a decision  promulgated  on
    22 January 2020.  That was set aside by my decision  dated  27  January
    2021, which should be read along with this.

 2. Remaking was not restricted by reference to the grounds and  the  grant
    of permission.

 3.  I  am  obliged  to  both  representatives  for  useful  and   accurate
    submissions, which brought the case into clear focus.

 4. The appellant is a victim of trafficking.  The question is whether,  if
    returned, he is at real risk of  abuse  or  re-trafficking,  given  his
    individual circumstances.  That is a matter of fact and degree.

 5. Parties agreed  that  six  relevant  factors  may  be  taken  from  the
    respondent's policy guidance,  updated  in  April  2020,  at  paragraph
    2.4.8:

    (1)  Outstanding debt to traffickers.  There is  no  evidence  of  such
    debt.

    (2)  The person knowing the trafficker.  The appellant  identifies  the
    main person concerned in trafficking him from Russia  to  the  UK,  but
    that was some years ago.  The suggestion that there might be a network,
    possibly linked back further to trafficking of the appellant's  mother,
    is vague and rather speculative.  The  evidence  does  not  support  an
    inference of ongoing interest reasonably likely to follow the appellant
    to Vietnam.

    (3)  Absence of a supportive family.  The evidence shows no  family  in
    Vietnam.

    (4)   No other support network.  The respondent refers to  the  support
    she is willing to provide,  which  is  a  reasonable  point,  but  also
    accepts that is not enough on its own.  There are no  other  indicators
    of assistance of any substance.

    (5)  No or little educational or vocational skills.  The appellant  has
    no skills of value, even at the lower end of the job market.

    (6)  Mental health conditions, which  may  well  have  been  caused  by
    experiences of abuse.  I take this factor to cover general capacity, as
    well as specific  health  conditions.    The  respondent  refers  to  a
    finding in a report by a clinical psychologist that the appellant  does
    not have a learning disability, but she accepts that is not the end  of
    the matter. The report  places  the  appellant  on  the  borderline  of
    disability; at best, in the low  average  range.   Other  reports,  not
    disputed, show that he was an easy victim in the past, and that  he  is
    naï¿½ve and vulnerable, with a history of PTSD.

 6. While the assessment is  not  simply  a  "box  ticking"  exercise,  the
    appellant satisfies four of the six factors.  The evidence shows him to
    be a less resilient young  man  than  the  average,  at  real  risk  of
    becoming subject to abuse in  Vietnam,  including  the  risk  of  being
    trafficked out of the country.  His appeal, as  originally  brought  to
    the  FtT,  is  accordingly  allowed  on  Refugee  Convention   grounds.



 7. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is maintained.




    Hugh Macleman


    17 March 2021
    UT Judge Macleman







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




