
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11355/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2019                      |On 18 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     ML
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court
directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant or
any member of his family.

This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Sweet promulgated on 21 March 2019 dismissing his appeal against the
decision of the Secretary of State dated 12 September 2018 to refuse his
protection claim.

First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien granted permission to appeal on 7 May
2019.  Thus, the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal for an error
of law hearing.

In the first instance, I have to determine witness or not there was an
error of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such
that it should be set aside.

The background can be summarised as follows.  The appellant's claim for
asylum is based on the (political opinion) fear that on return he will be
killed by the Taliban because of his former role in the Afghan Border
Police Force.  There was fighting between Taliban-supported drug smugglers
at the post or base at which he was stationed.  After three smugglers were
killed in 2013 the Taliban sent village elders to persuade him to surrender
to the Taliban to avoid being killed.  On another occasion a Taliban
commander had been killed.  He returned to his post two days later but
found everyone had left and the Taliban had burnt down the post.  In
addition, his brother-in-law had been tortured and his family had been sent
threatening letters.  He continued to work as a police officer, at a
different base, but the Taliban continued to attend his family home,
seeking his whereabouts.  After the base was bombed in early 2014, which
the appellant considers was a personal attack against him, he left his job
and went to different areas, including Kabul for two months, before leaving
Afghanistan in June of 2014.  He arrived in the UK in June 2016 and claimed
international protection.  No human rights claim was pursued.

The respondent accepted that the appellant had worked as a police officer
but rejected the claim to have been personally targeted by the Taliban.

Between paragraphs 39 and 43 of the decision Judge Sweet rejected the
appellant's factual claim as not credible and doubted the veracity of the
documents adduced by the appellant, including a letter from the Taliban
from 2012/13 and, more particularly, a petition lodged with the authorities
in Afghanistan in 2016/17.  In addition, the judge found the appellant had
the option of internal relocation to Kabul, relying on AS (Safety of Kabul)
Afghanistan [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC).  The appeal was dismissed on all
grounds.

The primary grounds assert that the judge prevented the appellant's
Counsel, Ms Emma King from addressing him in full in her closing
submissions, thereby creating material unfairness and the appearance of
bias.  Ms King did not attend the hearing as a witness even though there is
a witness statement from her dated 26 March 2019, although unsigned.  Mr
Gilbert, who did not have a signed copy of the statement, confirmed that Ms
King was aware of the hearing today and was intending to attend but had not
done so because of childcare difficulties.  Mr Gilbert accepted that put
him in some difficulties in pursuing this aspect of the appeal.  Also, at
the grant of permission stage the allegation against the judge should have
been identified and he should have been asked for comment.  That did not
happen.  Bearing in mind my other findings below, the likelihood of which I
highlighted in advance to the parties, Mr Gilbert did not pursue the
allegation of procedural unfairness or appearance of bias, and thus I need
not address that issue further.

There are two other substantive grounds, the second of which addresses the
risk on return on relocation to Kabul, to which I will turn in a moment.
The first, however, directly addresses the credibility of the factual
claim.  As noted above, the judge dismissed the appellant's factual account
in a very short number of paragraphs amounting to less than a page of the
decision.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe submits that there is nothing intrinsically
wrong with a short decision, provided the findings are clear and that it is
reasoned.

The grounds take issue with the judge's treatment of what is called a
'petition,' copied at pages 30 to 33 of the appellant's bundle, which a
friend of the appellant lodged with the authorities in Afghanistan sometime
in the period between 2016 and 2017.  At paragraph of the decision 39 the
judge stated: "The appellant was not able to explain why this petition was
lodged some years after he left Afghanistan, or what prompted the petition
- and I am left with the only conclusion that this was provided in order to
bolster his claim for asylum."  I accept, as Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed
out, the judge went on at paragraph 40 to address some specific concerns
about the content of that document.  However, the way in which paragraph 39
is drafted, it appeared to the appellant and appears to me that the judge
may well have misunderstood the nature of the petition.

The appellant was asked about this matter in evidence and the judge's
summary of that appears at paragraph 20 of the decision.  He was asked why
it was lodged with the police four years later to the instance relied on.
He said he needed the document to show that his claim was genuine.  The
petition was lodged with the chief of police at a provisional level and
that chief of police then referred it to other branches.  In other words,
it was made clear that the appellant was seeking to corroborate his factual
claim from within the UK by having a document, prepared by a friend or
family or both, submitted to the authorities to confirm his factual account
of events as I have described in the summary of the appellant's case.  It
is obvious that this document was prepared long after the events in
question and obvious why the appellant went about obtaining this document.
I find that the judge may well have misunderstood the nature of this
document and relied on the late obtaining of it as a point against the
appellant in the assessment of the credibility of his factual claim.  The
very suggestion that it was provided in order to "bolster his claim for
asylum" suggests that the judge believed it was a false or unreliable
document, prepared solely in order to bolster his claim for asylum.  As Mr
Gilbert has submitted, it is obvious that it was indeed prepared in order
to "bolster" his claim in the sense that he was seeking to corroborate his
factual basis of claim by obtaining an endorsement of those facts from
those who were in a position to confirm them in Afghanistan.  It is
difficult to see why he should be criticised for doing so.  The judge would
have been entitled to treat such a document cautiously but the lateness of
it being obtained is not a factor that necessarily undermines its
reliability. Of course, these comments do not address the other aspects of
the document dealt with by the judge at paragraph 40 and on which Ms
Willocks-Briscoe relies.  However, if the judge has or may have
misunderstood the nature of the obtaining of the petition, I find that
there are so few additional factors relied on in the short number of
paragraphs in the decision that actually comprise findings of fact that
this factor has to be regarded as a significant component of the
credibility assessment  but one which was in factual error.  I find that
the apparent mistake of fact undermines the sustainability of the findings
as a whole in relation to the credibility of the appellant's claim and the
judge's dismissal of that claim at paragraph 43 of the decision.  For that
reason alone, this decision cannot stand.

In addition, I find that the judge's treatment of the risk on return is
inadequately reasoned and does not apply any of the guidance from AS.  The
judge simply states at paragraph 44:

         "I do not consider that internal relocation to Kabul or another
         safe area would be unreasonable.  There is no reason why his family
         could not join him there, and I am not persuaded that he would not
         be able to be re-engaged by the police force for whom he previously
         worked."

Given the arguable difficulties on return to Kabul, I find that this is an
inadequate assessment of the risk on return, particularly where the
appellant would be returning to live with his wife and two young children.

In any event, AS was appealed to the Court of Appeal, who found that the
Upper Tribunal had made significant errors in assessment of the safety in
Kabul.  The matter has been remitted to the Upper Tribunal to re-assess the
risk in Kabul.  That decision is pending before the Upper Tribunal.  I bear
in mind that the findings in relation to risk on return are drafted in the
alternative, and therefore may not be a material error of law in this
decision.  However, I find that it may well be necessary to make an
assessment of risk on return if, when the appeal is reconsidered or
redecided, his factual claim is accepted, or some other reason suggests
that the risk on return needs to be considered.

In all the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find that
there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
such that it cannot stand and must be set aside to be remade.

When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside Section 12(2)
of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either that the
cases are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions, or it must
be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The scheme of the Tribunals, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of primary fact-finding
to the Upper Tribunal.  Where the findings and conclusions are unclear on
crucial issues at the heart of appeal, as they are in this case,
effectively there has not been a valid determination on those issues.  I am
satisfied that the errors of the First-tier Tribunal vitiate all findings
of fact and the conclusions from those facts. In all the circumstances, and
noting that the decision to do so is not opposed by either party, I relist
this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis
that this is a case which falls squarely within the Senior President's
practice statement at paragraph 7.2.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision should be set
aside.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal in
accordance with the attached directions.




                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 12 June 2019


Consequential Directions

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross;

The appeal should not be heard until after the promulgation of the Upper
Tribunal's decision remaking AS;

The estimated length of hearing is three hours;

A Pushtu interpreter will be needed;

The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge with the
exception of Judge Sweet and Judge O'Brien.


To the Respondent
Fee Award

In the light of my decision I make no fee award.
Reasons: the outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.



                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 12 June 2019
