
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11879/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2020                    |On 27 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIon made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Harvey, Counsel, instructed by Latta & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties and neither party expressed any concern with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

It is common ground that the appellant is Kurdish.  However, his
nationality is in dispute.  The appellant claims to be Iranian.  The
respondent's position is that he is from Iraq.

The issue of the appellant's nationality has been considered by the First-
tier Tribunal on two occasions.

In a decision promulgated on 5 June 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Porter ("Judge Porter") rejected the appellant's claim to be from Iran and
found that he is from Iraq, as had been contended by the respondent. Judge
Porter gave several reasons for not accepting the appellant's claim to be
from Iran. This included that (a) he told the French authorities on three
occasions he was from Iraq; (b) despite claiming to be a smuggler he was
unable at the hearing to name nearby areas and the mountains surrounding
his claimed village; (c) he lacked knowledge of the Persian calendar; and
(d) it was conceded that the photos submitted did not assist in showing
that he was from Iran.

In September 2019 the appellant made further submissions, in which he
continued to claim that he was from Iran.  These were rejected on 15
November 2019 by the respondent.

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, where his appeal was
heard by Judge of the Tribunal Farrelly ("Judge Farrelly").  In a decision
promulgated on 8 April 2020, Judge Farrelly dismissed the appeal, finding
that the appellant is a citizen of Iraq, not Iran.

Before Judge Farrelly, the appellant relied on an expert report by Dr
Kakhki, dated 31 January 2020, that had not been before Judge Porter. Dr
Kakhki expressed a firm view that the appellant is an Iranian citizen. As
this appeal turns on Judge Farrelly's approach to this expert opinion, I
have set out the relevant part of the report in full:

         "20. Returning to Mr M's illiteracy, it is my opinion that his poor
             educational background is likely to have had a detrimental
             effect on the quality of his answers and his level of
             understanding during the course of his interviews.  In other
             words, Mr M's family background and the remote nature of his
             home village could have well affected his ability to provide
             solid, knowledge-based, logical, and complete answers to the
             questions asked.  It is common knowledge in Iran that rural
             residents are simple individuals, who consequently often come
             across to those from more urban areas as rather naive and
             lacking in basic general knowledge and/or reticent to
             speak/challenge others in comparison to those originating from
             a similar demographic within urban society.  In this respect,
             I am of the opinion that Mr M's comprehension of the questions
             put to him and the answers provided should be considered in
             light of his poor educational background and lack of exposure
             to common information sources (such as newspapers, internet
             articles, journals etc.)."

21.  Having thoroughly reviewed Mr M's responses to the questions relating
to his nationality in the context of the applicable country information, in
my opinion, his answers to the majority of the questions are accurate and
consistent with the background information in this respect and I therefore
found it somewhat surprising that his Iranian nationality was not accepted.

22.  It is apparent from the interview records that Mr M speaks Kurdish
Sorani, a language widely spoken in the Kurdish region of Iran.  He
correctly identified that his village, Dulkan, is located in the Sardasht
region, within West Azerbaijan province.  He further explained that Dulkan
is situated in the Alan area, which is a district in the vicinity of
Sardasht city where smuggling activities are prevalent.  Mr M was asked to
explain how long it takes to travel from his village to Sardasht, and his
response was that it takes an hour by car.  A simple search of Google Maps
shows that in fact it takes one hour and three minutes to travel between
the two locations by vehicle.  A copy of the relevant page of the search
results has been appended to this report.

23.  Mr M also correctly identified a number of villages in his local
area...  It should also be noted that it is not common knowledge that there
is a form of exemption from military service for individuals who are the
only son of the family and, in my view, Mr M's explanation on this point
seems to have been grounded in his actual experiences.  When Mr M was asked
about the colour of the Iranian flag, he correctly identified the relevant
colours, whilst he was also able to identify the currency, the highest
mountain (Damavand), Iran's neighbouring countries and a famous waterfall
in his home region ...

24.  Lastly on this point, I would like to note that Kurdistan
smugglers/farmers do not tend to use the Farsi language or calendar system,
rather focussing on the practical aspects of their daily lives, namely
managing their crops and/or transporting their cargo.  To put simply, there
is little requirement for a Kurd in Mr M's circumstances to use a calendar
in his day-to-day life as the nature of smuggling activities is as such
that they work on an as and when basis (often at night, sometimes during
the weekdays and/or weekends, etc.).  Therefore, Mr M's ability to provide
at least some dates in the Persian calendar, in my view, lends weight to
his claim of being an Iranian national.

25.  All in all, it is my view that Mr M's responses to the questions
relating to his nationality are of the nature and quality that would be
expected from an Iranian Kurd in his claimed circumstances, particularly in
view of his cultural and ethnic background, his educational level, his
place of birth and residence, as well as his job as a smuggler."

Judge Farrelly found at paragraph 29 of the decision that Dr Kakhki was
merely repeating arguments made before Judge Porter. Applying Devaseelan
[2002] UKIAT 00702, he found that the new evidence from Dr Kaakhi, which he
stated could have been obtained "at the outset", did not "detract from the
original reasoning".

The reasons given by the judge for reaching this conclusion are set out in
paragraphs 23 - 28, where the judge, inter alia, found that:

      i) The appellant's lack of education does not mean he lacks
         intelligence or an awareness of immediate events;

     ii) the appellant's knowledge of the local area and rules regarding
         military service exemption as described by Dr Kakhki did not
         "demonstrate something unique which would only be known to an
         Iranian Kurd"; and

    iii) Dr Kakhki's report did not demonstrate that Iranian Kurds would be
         unaware of the national calendar.

The grounds of appeal make three arguments.

Firstly, it is argued that the judge failed to give proper consideration to
Dr Kakhki's report and did not adequately explain why his evidence failed
to address the issue of the appellant's nationality and was not persuasive.
Reference is made to the expert's comments about the appellant's knowledge
of his local area and of military service rules and to his knowledge of the
Persian calendar. The grounds state that the judge failed to give adequate
reasons for not accepting the opinion of the expert on these points.

Secondly, the grounds argue that the judge took into consideration
irrelevant information by stating that there was no reason why the expert
report could not have been commissioned at the outset.

Thirdly, the grounds of appeal argue that the judge misapplied the law by
failing to recognise that the explanation given by the appellant as to why
he gave the French authorities incorrect information regarding his identity
could not be said to be inherently implausible.

In his submissions, Mr Harvey only addressed the first ground. He submitted
that the judge erred by failing to follow Mibanga [2015] EWCA Civ 369,
where Wilson J stated at paragraph 24:

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must not reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all the evidence relevant
         thereto. Just as, if I may take a banal if alliterative example,
         one cannot make a cake with only one ingredient, so also frequently
         one cannot make a case, in the sense of establishing its truth,
         otherwise than by combination of a number of pieces of evidence".

Mr Harvey submitted that the judge fell into a "Mibanga trap" by not
recognising that even though Devaseelan was applicable it was necessary to
consider all of the evidence (including the expert report) before reaching
a conclusion on whether the appellant was from Iran.

He sought permission to rely on an unreported case where the interplay of
Devaseelan and Mibanga was considered and it was stated that the judge in
that case had erred by not carefully considering the evidence as a whole to
determine whether, taken together, the new expert evidence justified
departing from the previous appeal decision. I did not give permission to
cite the unreported case because there is no need to rely on it to support
what is essentially a noncontroversial position that was not disputed by Ms
Cunha, which is that Judge Farrelly was required to carefully consider Dr
Kakhki's report along with all of the other evidence in order to reach a
conclusion on whether departure from the decision of Judge Porter was
justified.

The difficulty with Mr Harvey's submissions, and the reason why the first
ground of appeal cannot succeed, is that this is precisely what Judge
Farrelly did. Dr Kakhki gave several reasons why he was of the view that
the appellant was from Iran. Judge Farrelly did not discount these reasons
merely because they conflicted with the conclusion reached by Judge Porter.
Rather, he addressed them. At paragraph 26 he considered Dr Kakhki's
comments about the appellant having some local knowledge (and knowledge
about military service that is not commonly known) and found that none of
the information provided was something that would only be known to an
Iranian Kurd. And at paragraph 27 he considered what Dr Kakhki stated about
use of the Persian calendar but did not accept that the appellant would be
unaware of the national calendar given what had been said about children
being taught in Farsi. The judge then considered other evidence (including,
most significantly, that the appellant had told French officials he was
from Iraq) alongside the new expert evidence before concluding that the new
evidence did not justify a departure from the previous decision. As the
appellant's credibility was not determined without first assessing the
expert evidence - and all evidence was considered together - the approach
taken by Judge Farrelly was not inconsistent with Mibanga.

The second ground of appeal is plainly without merit as, far from being
irrelevant, the fact that Dr Kakhki's report was not commissioned earlier
is a consideration highlighted as relevant in Devaseelan: see paragraph
40(5), where it is stated that such evidence should be treated with
caution.

The third ground of appeal is difficult to understand and was not developed
(or argued) by Mr Harvey. In the absence of any particularisation (or
explanation) the appellant cannot succeed on this ground.

Notice of Decision

The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law. The decision stands
and the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

D Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan
                                                        Date 21 October 2020
