
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    PA/11179/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 13 August 2020                    |
|On 5 August 2020                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  JANE [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Olabamiji, of DMO Olabamiji, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant sought  asylum  on  28  November  2018.   The  respondent
    refused her claim, on all available grounds, by  a  decision  dated  30
    October 2019.

 2. FtT Judge Handley  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 January 2019.

 3. By a decision issued  on  21  July  2020,  Mr  C  M  G  Ockelton,  Vice
    President, set aside the decision of Judge Handley, error of law having
    been conceded by the respondent, and accepted the  suggestion  of  both
    parties that the appeal should be redetermined in the  UT.   The  FtT's
    findings on protection, including articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR,  were
    unchallenged, and were preserved.

 4. The decision goes on:

         ".... The appeal continues as one on article 8 grounds  (within  or
         outside the rules) only.

         In assessing that issue, the undisputed evidence that the  children
         have received  medical  treatment  in  Nigeria  will  no  doubt  be
         relevant, but no judicial findings in relation  to  article  8  are
         preserved.

         The evidence has already been  taken:  the  remaining  task  is  to
         assess it according to law.  There will  be  a  hearing  by  remote
         means ..."

 5. A transfer order was made to enable the decision  to  be  completed  by
    another judge.

 6. I conducted the hearing from George House.  No members  of  the  public
    attended, either in  person  or  remotely.   The  appellant,  and  both
    representatives, attended remotely.  The technology enabled a full  and
    fair hearing.

 7. It was submitted for the appellant that removal of  children  who  have
    been in the UK for 7 years or more was likely  to  be  disproportionate
    "on Supreme Court authority".   Mr  Olabamiji  repeatedly  stressed  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 on 7 years residence being  taken  as  a
    starting point that leave should be granted, unless there are  powerful
    reasons to the contrary.

 8. Apart from legal generalities, the  considerations  specified  for  the
    appellant were these:

      i) The oldest three children have spent over 7 years in the UK.

     ii) The two oldest children have sickle cell disease, which caused them
         regular crises in Nigeria,  but  not  here.   They  have  "a  life-
         threatening, life-long condition".

    iii) The children  are  well  integrated  into  the  UK,  including  the
         educational system.

 9. Mrs Aboni accepted that the three older children  are  now  "qualifying
    children".  She submitted that it was  reasonable  to  expect  them  to
    leave the UK for  Nigeria  with  their  parents,  and  specified  these
    matters:

      i) It was normally in the best interests of children  to  remain  with
         their family.  In this case, it would be in the best  interests  of
         the qualifying children to leave with their parents  and  siblings,
         with no separation of family members.

     ii) There might be educational  and  health  care  advantages  for  the
         children in the UK, but not of such a degree as to  override  other
         considerations.

    iii) The main point for the appellant was the sickle cell disease of two
         of the children, but there was no evidence of anything  approaching
         the threshold to succeed on health grounds, as now set  out  in  AM
         (Zimbabwe) 2020 UKSC 17.

     iv) The medical reports by the children's consultants in the UK  raised
         concerns over availability of medication and treatment in  Nigeria,
         but that was not based on evidence,  and  indeed  was  contrary  to
         evidence specified in the respondent's decision at [135 -  140]  on
         medication and treatments  available  in  Nigeria.   There  was  no
         indication that those would not be available to the children.

      v) The appellant's FtT bundle included academic reports on the matter,
         but those predated the evidence cited by the  respondent,  and  did
         not detract from the respondent's position.

     vi) The children's parents are both well educated and  capable.   There
         was no reason to think that they would not provide successfully for
         their children in Nigeria, including access to medical treatment.

10. In response Mr Olabamiji referred  again  to  the  need  for  "powerful
    reasons", to the improved heath in the UK of the children  with  sickle
    cell disease, to  the  letters  from  their  consultants,  and  to  the
    favourable reports on the children's academic progress in the UK.

11. I reserved my decision.

12. The appellant's citation from MA (Pakistan) is apt to mislead.

13. In KO (Nigeria) and others [2018] UKSC 53 the Supreme Court cited  with
    approval from EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [58]:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

    The Supreme Court (Lord Carnwath) went on:

         "To the extent that Elias LJ may have  suggested  otherwise  in MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."

14. The submissions for the appellant  tended  to  suggest  that  the  best
    interests of the children are a paramount consideration (and  confer  a
    right to remain on the appellant).  Those interests  are  primary,  but
    they are not paramount.

15. Neither parent has a right to remain in the UK.  The issue  is  whether
    it is reasonable to expect the children to accompany their  parents  to
    their country of origin.

16. The medical conditions of the  children  do  not  reach  the  threshold
    required to succeed on health grounds alone (and, realistically,  there
    was no submission to that effect).

17. The appellant insists that the children are at serious health risk, but
    vaguely, without specification of evidence in  support.   The  children
    received treatment while they were in Nigeria.  Their doctors here  are
    experts in their care, but they are  not  experts  in  availability  of
    medication and treatment in Nigeria.   The  most  recent  and  accurate
    information is that cited by the respondent in the decision letter,  in
    the rule 24 response dated 26 June 2020, and in submissions.   Although
    medical care for the population as a whole is not to the  same  general
    standard as in the UK, the care available to the  appellants'  children
    in Nigeria, on the evidence cited by the respondent, is adequate.

18. The children are doing well here.  With  their  parents,  there  is  no
    reason to think that they will not adapt and thrive in Nigeria.   Their
    parents are well educated and caring.  They will seek to maximise their
    children's wellbeing and opportunities.  The children will be among the
    more advantaged section of the Nigerian population.

19. The appellant has quoted much law, not all of it entirely accurate, but
    she has not specified any evidence by which it is less than  reasonable
    to expect her children to remove to Nigeria.

20. The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The  decision  substituted
    is that the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

     [pic]

     7 August 2020
     UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.





