
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11762/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 13, 2019                              |On May 17, 2019               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  Mr S A P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Maqsood, Counsel, Direct Access instruction
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Ms Syed


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant, a Pakistani national, entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
(General) Student on February 21, 2011 with leave to remain until June 14,
2012.  His leave expired and on March 27, 2018 he applied for asylum.  His
application was subsequently refused by the respondent on September 25,
2018 under paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

The appellant appealed that decision under Section 82(1) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 8, 2018.  His
appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sangha, who in a
decision promulgated on January 22, 2019 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on April 9,
2019 on the sole ground that the Judge had failed to demonstrate that he
had considered the appellant's witness statement when considering all the
other evidence.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

UNLESS AND UNTIL A TRIBUNAL OR COURT DIRECTS OTHERWISE, THE APPELLANT IS
GRANTED ANONYMITY.  NO REPORT OF THESE PROCEEDINGS SHALL DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY IDENTIFY HIM OR ANY MEMBER OF HIS FAMILY.  THIS DIRECTION
APPLIES BOTH TO THE APPELLANT AND TO THE RESPONDENT.  FAILURE TO COMPLY
WITH THIS DIRECTION COULD LEAD TO CONTEMPT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS.

Submissions

MR MAQSOOD ADOPTED THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND SUBMITTED THAT THE FIRST-TIER
JUDGE ONLY ENGAGED WITH THE WITNESS STATEMENTS IN ONE PLACE, NAMELY AT
PARAGRAPH 11 OF THE DECISION.  HE SUBMITTED THAT THE JUDGE HAD FAILED TO
CONSIDER ANY OF THE EXPLANATIONS SET OUT IN THE WITNESS STATEMENT ITSELF
AND WENT ON TO IDENTIFY A NUMBER OF AREAS IN THE WITNESS STATEMENT, IN
PARTICULAR PARAGRAPHS 7, 8, 9 AND 13, WHERE THE JUDGE HAD FAILED TO ATTACH
ANY WEIGHT, EITHER POSITIVELY OR NEGATIVELY, IN HER CONSIDERATION.  IN
SUMMARY, MR MAQSOOD SUBMITTED THE JUDGE'S FAILURE TO CONSIDER THE
EXPLANATIONS AMOUNTED TO AN ERROR IN LAW.

Mr Tarlow submitted that the challenge was a mere disagreement or,
alternatively, any failure to specifically set out the appellant's witness
statement merely went to materiality of the decision and that the Judge had
provided adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim.  He relied
on the decision letter, which dealt in detail with the appellant's claim
from page 4 onwards.

In response, Mr Maqsood submitted that the credibility findings themselves
were flawed because they had failed to consider the witness statement of
the appellant and the Judge had failed to afford anxious scrutiny to the
evidence.

decision ON error in law

THIS WAS A NARROW ISSUE THAT CAME BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL.  THE SOLE ISSUE WAS
WHETHER THE FAILURE BY THE JUDGE TO SET OUT THE EVIDENCE IN THE APPELLANT'S
WITNESS STATEMENT EITHER AMOUNTED TO AN ERROR IN LAW ITSELF OR,
ALTERNATIVELY, EVEN IF THERE WAS AN ERROR DID THE EVIDENCE GO TO THE
MATERIALITY OF THE DECISION.

There is no evidence within the decision that the Judge engaged with any
aspect of the witness statement and on the face of it therefore there is an
error.  I therefore reject Mr Tarlow's first submission and proceeded to
consider the materiality of such an error.

Mr Tarlow argued that the Judge had given ample reasons for rejecting the
appellant's claim.  The Judge did not engage with the contents of the
witness statement and in deciding credibility I find that the Judge must
consider all relevant evidence.  When making credibility findings it seems
that any failure to engage with an important part of the evidence, which in
this case is the witness statement, must be material to the credibility
findings.  It is difficult to argue that the credibility findings may have
been different in circumstances where the witness statement itself was not
considered.

The outcome ultimately reached by the Judge may well have been the same,
but it is difficult for me to make that finding when there was no evidence
that the Judge had actually looked at the witness statement itself.

I therefore find that despite the care taken by the Judge in making her
numerous findings, the decision lacks one important aspect, namely a
consideration of the witness statement, and this undermines the decision
and amounts to an error in law.

Both representatives agreed that if there was an error of law, the case
would have to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.  I therefore
direct that this case be remitted back under Section 12(1) of the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Decision

There was an error of law and I set aside the decision and remit the matter
back to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019


[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
