
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11240/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|under rule 34 (P)                    |On 29 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     H M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  dated  07  November
    2019 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge G. Richardson ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 26 February 2020.

3.    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal in an order sent on 06 May 2020.

4.    In the light of the need to take precautions  against  the  spread  of
    Covid-19 the Upper Tribunal reviewed the file and  sent  directions  to
    the parties on 20 May 2020. I expressed the preliminary view  that  the
    question of whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law could be determined on the papers. I gave the
    following indication relating to the merits of the appeal.

           "In particular, the parties may  wish  to  note  my  preliminary
           indication of the merits of the  appeal  (without  prejudice  to
           further submissions). There is some  force  in  the  appellant's
           argument  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  his
           approach  to  assessing  the  credibility  of  the   appellant's
           account. The judge based his credibility findings largely on his
           own  view  of  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's  and  his
           brother's  actions  but  without  considering  whether  it   was
           plausible in the context of the background evidence relating  to
           Afghanistan and the accepted fact that the  appellant's  brother
           works as  a  journalist  for  the  BBC.  It  is  not  inherently
           implausible that a young Pashtun man from  a  rural  area  might
           feel able to obtain information about Taliban activity when,  on
           his own evidence, many members of the local  Taliban  were  from
           his village  i.e.  he  was  likely  to  know  them.  Nor  is  it
           inherently implausible that in a  country  that  has  seen  many
           years of conflict, a young man might have some knowledge of  the
           weaponry used by local armed groups. It is  arguably  irrational
           to reject his  brother's  account  on  the  basis  that  it  was
           implausible to place the appellant at  risk  by  asking  him  to
           obtain information when journalists often obtain information  of
           that kind at some risk to their sources. It seems that the judge
           rejected the plausibility of the appellant's account  first  and
           then used those findings to  reject  the  documentary  evidence.
           This is likely to be  a  Mibanga  error.  The  correct  approach
           should have been to consider  all  the  evidence  in  the  round
           before coming to a conclusion about the overall  credibility  of
           the appellant's account.


           In addition to the grounds of  appeal,  I  note  that  there  is
           another obvious point that cannot be ignored. The  appellant  is
           from Nangarhar province. Even if the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
           did not  err  in  his  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
           appellant's account, he failed to consider whether  there  might
           be a general risk considering the background  evidence  relating
           to the heightened security situation in his home  area,  and  if
           there was a  risk,  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
           appellant to relocate to Kabul."

5.    The appellant is represented  by  Sohaib  Fatimi  Solicitors.  I  have
    received no  response  to  the  directions  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. The respondent filed written submissions  on  08  June  2020
    conceding that there was a material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in the following terms.

          "2. The respondent has taken into account the grant of permission
          and UTJ Canavan's preliminary view in the directions and does not
          oppose the appellant's application for permission to  appeal.  It
          is accepted that the FTTJ has fallen into  error  by  considering
          the plausibility of the appellant's account and  then  dismissing
          the documents, namely a Mibanga error. It is also  accepted  that
          the FTTJ has not considered risk on  return  to  the  appellant's
          home area and relocation to Kabul.

          3. Given that the errors of law are  accepted,  it  is  contended
          that an oral hearing for the error of law decision  will  not  be
          necessary. It is asserted that given the extent of the error, all
          credibility findings will need to be  remade  and  therefore  the
          appropriate forum for the remaking should be in the FTT.

6.    In light of the respondent's concession I  am  satisfied  that  I  can
    determine the question of whether there is an error of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal decision even though the appellant's  representative  has
    failed to respond to the directions. The appellant gains all he  sought
    from this application. For the  reasons  given  above,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of  law
    because the judge failed to consider the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    failed to consider other relevant considerations. The decision  is  set
    aside. Given that those errors go to the credibility of the appellant's
    account, it will be necessary for the case to be heard afresh. Although
    the normal course of action would be for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake
    the decision, in such circumstances, a wholesale fact finding  exercise
    will need to be carried out. On this  occasion  it  is  appropriate  to
    remit the case for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   M. Canavan          Date 17 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
