
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11964/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 29 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      N
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr V Jagadesham (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) of 14 September
         2018 to dismiss his appeal against the Secretary of State, made on
         28 September 2018, refusing to grant international protection.

      2. The tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  Nothing  was  said
         about that before me but, in the circumstances, I have decided  to
         maintain the status quo.

      3. Having  had  his  appeal  dismissed,  the  claimant,  through  his
         representatives, sought and obtained permission to appeal  to  the
         Upper Tribunal. The granting judge relevantly said this:

         "2.      The first ground makes several discrete challenges to  the
         judge's conclusions on the medical  evidence.  When  considered  in
         light of the judge's self-direction at [79] - [80] it  is  arguable
         that at [107] the  judge  did  impermissibly  compartmentalise  his
         credibility assessment contrary to the principle in Mibanga v  SSHD
         [2005] INLR 377, and further  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
         failing to have regard to Y v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  That  last
         argument additionally applies to Ground 3.  Where  does  the  judge
         have  numerous  other  reasons  for   rejecting   the   appellant's
         credibility, it cannot be said  that  his  overall  conclusion  was
         inevitable".

4.    Permission having been granted, the case  was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could  be  given
as to whether the tribunal had erred in law and, if  so,  what  should  flow
from that. Representation at that hearing was  as  stated  above  and  I  am
grateful to each representative.

5.    In the event the hearing was short because Mrs  Pettersen,  on  behalf
of the Secretary of State, accepted that  the  tribunal  had  erred  in  the
first way in which the granting judge had suggested it might have done.  She
invited me to set aside the tribunal's decision on that basis and  suggested
that if I were to do that, the appropriate further course would be to  remit
for a re-hearing. Mr Jagadesham,  unsurprisingly,  had  nothing  further  to
add.

6.    The tribunal's written reasons demonstrate that it considered  matters
carefully and  diligently.  But  Mrs  Pettersen  is  a  Senior  Home  Office
Presenting Officer and she did not seek  to  oppose  the  appeal.  In  those
circumstances and with the agreement of the parties I have decided  the  set
aside the tribunal's decision and to remit  for  a  complete  re-hearing  as
urged.

7.    Since I am remitting I am statutorily obliged to give  directions  for
the re-hearing. But I have given only brief directions as  it  seems  to  me
that matters relating to, for example, the mechanics  with  respect  to  the
listing of the appeal and the time to be allocated for it to be heard,  will
be best left to a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS FOR THE RE-HEARING

A.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which it made on 14  September
2018 has been set aside. I do not preserve any of  the  tribunal's  findings
or conclusions.

B.    Accordingly, there shall be a complete re-hearing of  this  appeal  in
the First-tier Tribunal. The re-hearing shall  not  involve  the  individual
judge who decided the appeal on 14 September 2018.

C.    These directions may be amended or supplemented by further  directions
given by any judge of the First-tier Tribunal in the Immigration and  Asylum
Chamber.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The decision shall  be
remade by way of a complete re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  identify  the
claimant or any member  of  his  family.  Failure  to  comply  may  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Dated: 22 January 2020

M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

