
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11265/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th January 2021                  |On 4th March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                    Mr AA
                         (anonymity direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by Times PBS Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Farmer promulgated on 12th February 2020 in which she
dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
State dated 31st October 2019 to refuse asylum, humanitarian protection and
protection under the European Convention.  The appellant claims to have
left Afghanistan in May 2015 with the assistance of an agent and arrived in
the UK on 8th January 2016, promptly claiming asylum.  His appeal was
dismissed on 20th January 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin and
both the First-tier and the Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal and
he was appeal rights exhausted on 27th April 2017.  In October 2017 he
filed further submissions and they were refused on 31st October 2019 and
that decision is the subject of this appeal.

The grounds for permission to appeal assert that (1) there was a failure to
take into account material matters before reaching findings, and when
assessing credibility it was axiomatic that before core findings are
reached, all material evidence is considered.  The determination showed
that such findings were made without regard to the evidence concerning the
appellant's medical condition both documented and oral.  HH (medical
evidence; effect of Mibanga) Ethiopia [2005] UKAIT 00164 was referenced, in
particular paragraph 19.  It was an error of law if the judge failed to
treat the medical report as part of the overall evidence which should be
considered in the round.

Further, at paragraph 40 the judge stated after first finding the evidence
and documents not credible: "I must therefore view the conclusions of Dr
Giustozzi in light of my findings of fact."  This was the wrong approach
and the findings of fact should only have been reached after considering
the background and expert evidence which was relevant to the credibility
and plausibility of the claim.

The judge failed to consider both the medical evidence and the expert
evidence before finding the findings on credibility.

Ground 2, asserted there were unreasonable findings and those contrary to
Devaseelan approach; the starting point for the judge was that though First-
tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin had rejected aspects of the appellant's account
he had nevertheless accepted that the appellant's father probably was, for
a comparatively short time a police officer but was killed in the line of
duty in 2015 "eighteen months ago".  The judge also accepted the
documentary evidence that the appellant had submitted in this regard and
the judge stated at paragraph 23: "The ministry letters do however indicate
that 'A...' had been made the subject of an award for his honest and
tireless effort by July 2014 and was killed in face-to-face fighting a year
later by which time he was a team leader."

Judge Farmer at paragraph 38 decided that she was entitled to depart from
these findings for the reasons she identified at 33 to 37 but her reasoning
was flawed because at paragraph 33 the judge's observations are a
distortion.  In his oral evidence the appellant stated that he started work
for his father around the end of 2014.  This was hardly a discrepancy with
his witness statement where he stated that this was at the start of 2015.
Five years on, this being a month or so out was hardly a discrepancy worthy
of damaging credibility.  Indeed the reference in his witness statement the
appellant had referred to 2014-2015.  Notwithstanding Judge Baldwin had
been aware of those discrepancies when he made his findings.

At paragraphs 36 to 37 Judge Farmer notes discrepancies of a few months'
period as to when the appellant's father was killed but the point was never
put to the appellant and of course involved giving evidence years later
when memories may fade.

More importantly, no consideration was given to the medical evidence before
reaching a view on discrepancies and such evidence included the letter from
the Refugee Council dated 30th January 2020 which confirmed that the
appellant had received counselling and that he had "exhibited symptoms of
PTSD including intrusive distressing memories, recurring nightmares,
dissociative reactions, mood swings and physiological reactions to
reminders of traumatic events he had experiences".

At paragraph 39 the judge then dismissed the new documentary evidence as
not being credible in light of her new credibility findings which were not
open to her.  This was a woefully inadequate approach and the judge failed
to even identify and consider the nature of the documents.

In relation to internal relocation, the judge detached her factual findings
from the medical evidence.  The judge referred to some of the medical
evidence but the findings were flawed as she had already reached unlawful
credibility findings.  There was no reference to the numerous references to
PTSD, suicidal ideation and depressive condition along with other ongoing
mental health conditions referred to by numerous practitioners over a four
to five year period.  It was evident that the appellant was prescribed
medication due to his 'ongoing problem and is associated with a number of
flashbacks to his time in Afghanistan.  As a result he was 'struggling to
sleep properly'.  The GP letter of 28th November 2016 and the GP records of
June 2016 showed the appellant was prescribed zopiclone, medication for
troubled sleep.

Submissions

At the hearing before me Mr Bazini emphasised that the judge failed to take
into account the expert evidence and the documentary evidence in the round
and failed to apply the medical evidence until paragraph 52 of the
decision.  The decision was fundamentally flawed.  I pointed out that the
judge had made findings in the alternative such as paragraph 43 where the
judge found that if she was wrong about his father's involvement with the
government, then the appellant had not established to the lower standard of
proof that his scant involvement with the father over two and a half months
would be of any interest to the Taliban five years later.  That finding was
made at paragraph 43, and separately from the finding which rejected First-
tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin's conclusions that the appellant's father did
indeed work for the government and therefore was at risk from the Taliban
and consequently so was his son.

Mr Bazini responded that at paragraph 53 the judge described some of the
symptoms and problems in relation to his mental health but concluded that
the evidence was not credible, finding that the timing for the request for
medical evidence, that is immediately prior to the last decision of Judge
Baldwin's and immediately prior to this appeal hearing, was 'suspicious'.
Mr Bazini took me through the medical evidence to which the judge had
failed to refer and noted that there was no medical evidence before First-
tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin that the appellant had a long history of
attempting to seek medical assistance for his mental health condition.
There were references to his severe mental health from 2016 and these were
not mentioned by the judge.  For example, at page 89 of the appellant's
bundle there was a letter from Natasha Moskovici dated 30th January 2020
which stated that the appellant scored:

"32 out of 40, which is a high response and indicated high mental distress.
 Of particular note were Mr A feeling he could not cope when things go
wrong; feeling tense, anxious or nervous; feeling despairing or hopeless
and unhappy; and being distressed by unwanted images or memories as well as
strong concerns about his family back home."

In the bundle of subjective evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  I
note there was a referral by the Enfield IAPT Team, Barnet, Enfield and
Haringey NHS for cognitive behavioural therapy and a letter dated 20th June
2016 from Let's Talk, Barnet, Enfield and Haringey NHS inviting the
appellant for an appointment (this post-dated a letter that he had failed
to attend).  Mr Bazini indicated the appellant had been seeking
psychological assistance since April 2016.  There was no reference by the
judge to the letter of the GP from the Charlton House Surgery confirming
the ongoing mental health problems of the appellant.  Mr Bazini submitted
that the approach to the mental health of the appellant was flawed in terms
of internal relocation because AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 873 as identified by the judge and AS
(Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 confirmed that in any
assessment it was necessary to consider the age, nature and quality of the
support network or connections in Kabul and Afghanistan, physical and
mental health, his language, education and vocational skills when
determining whether it would not be unduly harsh for relocation to Kabul.

Mr Bazini reiterated that the judge had erred in approach to the report of
Dr Giustozzi and had only factored in that report after making adverse
credibility findings, which is plainly an error of law.

Mr Avery submitted that the challenge was simply a disagreement with the
findings.  There were serious discrepancies in the evidence of the
appellant which went to the core of his case.  Judge Baldwin understood the
case to be that the appellant's father did not start work until 2014 but
the evidence before the judge was that the appellant's father worked from
2010.  As the judge stated at paragraph 35, this had seriously damaged the
appellant's case.  This would not arise from the mental health issue or
from Dr Giustozzi's report, which primarily went to plausibility.  The
judge did go through the medical evidence and looked at it in detail and
just because she did not mention all parts was not a material error.  The
judge did refer to that which was relevant and referred to the GP records
and noted that the appellant was not on any medication for depression.

Analysis

I am mindful of the reminder, in Lowe v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 62 by McCombe
LJ at paragraph 29, that appellate courts should exercise caution when
interfering with evaluative decisions of first instance judges.  UT (Sri
Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 held at [19]

         'although "error of law" is widely defined, it is not the case that
         the UT is entitled to remake the decision of the FTT simply because
         it does not agree with it, or because it thinks it can produce a
         better one'.

Despite the judge's preliminary directions at paragraph 25 that he or she
should look at all the evidence in the round before making any findings,
that regrettably does not appear to have been done.

Between paragraphs 35 to 39 the judge made a series of credibility
findings. That was prior to addressing the medical or expert evidence.

Even some of the credibility findings were criticised in their own right.
For example, some of the inconsistencies/discrepancies found in the
appellant's evidence were in fact already within the evidence considered by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin but Judge Farmer made a finding that,
"his evidence in his witness statement which he confirmed was correct" ...
"directly contradicts the case he put before First-tier Tribunal Judge
Baldwin as summarised in his decision".  It is correct that some of the
contradictions were between the witness statements and the further oral
evidence. For example, when making adverse credibility findings, at
paragraph 37 Judge Farmer found inconsistency between evidence as to when
the appellant's  father was killed given before Judge Baldwin (July 2015)
and further evidence submitted in the witness statement before Judge Farmer
(April 2015 and as a result the appellant was taken in May) and he states:

         "The appellant now says it was April 2015 and I find this material
         inconsistency damages his credibility."

Nonetheless the appellant gave oral evidence at court and there appeared to
be no factoring in of the mental health evidence when assessing this
credibility and latterly a rejection of that evidence on the very grounds
of the previous adverse credibility finding.

By paragraph 39, having already made credibility findings, the judge
states:

         "I assess the new documentary evidence in the light of my findings
         on credibility."  ...  "I find that in the light of the evidence
         before me I can and do find that these are not credible documents.
         I find this in the light of the inconsistencies and the
         discrepancies I have highlighted."

The judge then at paragraph 40 continues:

         "I must therefore view the conclusions of Dr Giustozzi in light of
         my findings of fact."

The hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin was conducted on 13th
January 2017.  There was, however, evidence dating from April 2016 that the
appellant had mental health problems.  When rejecting the evidence at
paragraph 55, the Judge Farmer found, however, that:

"The timing of the appellant's request for counselling just prior to his
January 2017 asylum appeal and just prior to his February 2020 appeal is
suspicious.  I put the timing of these requests alongside my general
credibility findings and I am not satisfied that the appellant has a
genuine mental health condition.  I find it very surprising that if he did
he would tell his doctor he was otherwise well and he would have no
medication for depression."

That finding does not sit easily with the chronology of the evidence.

In effect, the medical evidence is addressed from paragraph 52 onwards and
is not taken into account before the judge makes general credibility
findings.  From the structure of the determination it is clear that the
treatment of the medical evidence is contrary to Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ
367 ; in a nutshell when assessing credibility, the evidence, including
medical evidence (and expert evidence) should be considered in the round.

As stated in MN and IXU v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2020] EWCA Civ 1746 at paragraph 250:

         "The point made by Mibanga is not that the expert evidence and the
         issue of credibility must be considered in a particular order but
         that the former must be allowed to feed into the latter."

I can accept that there remain some serious difficulties with the
appellant's account to which the judge was entitled to give real weight.
However, it is not clear from the face of the decision that the judge has
factored in that the appellant is a vulnerable witness or the medical
evidence.  Overall the expert evidence was considered serially rather than
feeding into the credibility analysis as required by MN and IXU.

The judge proceeded to reject the mental health evidence as being
'suspicious', having already made the adverse credibility findings but
having omitted consideration of the medical evidence or that it dated from
2016 when considering credibility.  That approach was flawed.

I considered whether the alternative finding of relocation rescued the
determination. The judge stated:

"If I am wrong about his father's involvement with the government, then the
appellant has not established to the lower standard of proof that his scant
involvement with this father over two and a half months would be of any
interest to the Taliban five years later [43]"

and

         "I find that in any event the appellant could safely relocate to
         Kabul, or whether that would be unduly harsh" (sic).

At paragraph 61 the judge stated that she had been addressed by Mr Bazini
that she could properly depart from country guidance in circumstances where
there are very strong grounds.   Even so, when assessing the position on
relocation the judge had to make an accurate assessment of the medical
evidence which would in turn influence whether this appellant could return
to Kabul.  His mental health was a relevant factor but had been rejected
owing to the flawed credibility findings. The assessment of whether the
appellant can return to Kabul must take into account a proper assessment of
the mental health evidence and, even if the expert report of Dr Guistozzi
is less helpful, that too, for  the proper application of Mibanga.     The
assessment and its impact on the prospects of the appellant's return was
not conducted in a sustainable way and that error was material.

For these reasons I find that there was a material error of law.



Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Direction

Skeleton arguments of no more than 10 pages (A4) should be filed with the
First-tier Tribunal and served at least 14 days prior to any substantive
hearing together with any further evidence.


Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 19th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
