
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11268/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by "Microsoft Teams"  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2021                       |On 18 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MANH PHU TRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born on 6 April 1990.  He sought
    asylum in the UK, asserting that the Vietnamese authorities were likely
    to persecute him for taking part in protests on 29 June 2017 and on  10
    June 2018.

 2. The respondent refused the claim by a decision dated 31  October  2019.
    It was accepted that the appellant might  have  been  arrested  at  the
    first protest, but he had been released without charge and that was not
    considered to create a risk.  It was not accepted that he took part  in
    the second protest.  The respondent  also  relied  on  the  appellant's
    failure to seek asylum while in France.

 3. FtT Judge MacKenzie dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 June 2020.  She declined to accept that the appellant
    took part in the second protest.  The appellant relied also on evidence
    of attending a protest outside the  Vietnamese  Embassy  in  London  in
    April 2019.  The judge considered that his activities in the  UK  would
    not place him at risk, because the  authorities  would  identify  those
    activities as opportunistic.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  UT,  on  the  grounds
    that the judge overlooked the issue of  risk  arising  from  the  first
    protest; gave inadequate reasons for holding that activities in the  UK
    would be seen as opportunistic; and reached adverse  conclusions  prior
    to considering a letter from a priest, and an expert report.

 5. The FtT refused permission.  The appellant applied to the UT,  slightly
    amplifying his grounds.  The UT also refused permission.

 6. The appellant petitioned the Court for reduction of the UT's refusal of
    permission.  Parties entered into a joint minute:

         "The respondent accepts that the argument ... that the judge failed
         to provide adequate reasons for her conclusion that the  Vietnamese
         authorities would view the [appellant's] sur place  activities  ...
         as opportunistic identified an arguable material error of  law  ...
         and that this ground of challenge was  sufficiently  identified  in
         the ... grounds submitted to the UT ...

         For avoidance of doubt, the [appellant] maintains ...  all  grounds
         submitted to the UT ..."

 7. On 30 March 2021, the Court reduced the UT's refusal of permission,  in
    terms of the joint minute, and remitted the application to the  UT  for
    consideration anew.

 8. On 21 April 2021, the Vice President of the UT granted  permission,  in
    that light.

 9. Ms Isherwood conceded that the grounds identified  error  of  law,  but
    only on the issue specified in the joint minute.

10. Mr Bradley submitted that all the grounds were made  out.   He  further
    argued that based on the acceptance of attendance at the first protest;
    evidence of sur place activity; and the expert  report  and  background
    evidence on the low level of opposition required to establish  a  risk,
    the  UT  should  allow  the  appeal,  as  brought  to   the   FtT;   or
    alternatively, remit to the FtT for rehearing.

11. Ms Isherwood contended that there were no other errors, and that on all
    the evidence which was before the FtT, and correcting for its error, no
    risk was disclosed, so the UT should dismiss the appeal.

12.  In  his  reply,  Mr  Bradley  mentioned  that  although  there  is  no
    application before the UT to admit further evidence (either on error of
    law, or in remaking) the appellant has received a  warrant  or  summons
    from Vietnam, which is in  course  of  translation.   Absence  of  such
    evidence was treated by the FtT at [34] as adverse.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. The error conceded, absence of  reasoning  for  the  finding  that  the
    Vietnamese authorities would not take an adverse view of the appellant,
    is so material as to require the decision to be set aside  and  remade.
    Ms Isherwood did not press any argument to the contrary.

15. The wording of the FtT's decision at [31], that nothing in  the  expert
    report alters the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  evidence,  is
    unfortunate.   This  suggests  a  process  of   reaching   an   adverse
    conclusion, then looking  to  whether  it  is  displaced,  rather  than
    considering the  evidence  as  a  whole.   The  appellant  has  similar
    justification, although more faintly, for challenging the evaluation of
    the priest's letter at [32].  As the decision falls to be set aside  on
    the error conceded, it is unnecessary to  consider  the  other  grounds
    further than that.

16. Mr Bradley did not take me to anything in the  background  evidence  or
    expert report by which the appellant's evidence, to the extent to which
    it has been accepted by the respondent, makes his  case.   Equally,  Ms
    Isherwood did not establish that his case was bound to fail.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside,  other  than  as
    record of what was said at the hearing.  In that light, and as  further
    evidence is likely to be forthcoming, it is appropriate  under  section
    12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit  to  the
    FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

18. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge MacKenzie.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


    7 June 2021
    UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

