
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/11648/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|By Microsoft Teams                   |On the 28th June 2021                |
|On the 10th June 20201               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                     BHM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkin, Counsel instructed by Barnes, Harrild and
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 January 1988. He is of Kurdish
ethnic origin.  He appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Ghandi sent on 19 February 2020 dismissing his appeal against a
decision dated 5 November 2019 to refuse a protection and human rights
claim.  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 1 July
2021 by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.

The hearing was held remotely and neither party objected to the hearing
being held in this manner.  Both parties participated by Microsoft Teams.
I am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held because it was
not practicable and that all of the issues could be determined in a remote
hearing.  Neither party complained of any unfairness during the hearing.

Appellant's Background

The appellant arrived in the UK and claimed asylum on 21 February 2016. His
claim for asylum was refused on 11 May 2018 and he had no further rights of
appeal after 9 July 2018. He submitted a fresh claim for asylum on 11
September 2019. The respondent admitted the submissions as a fresh claim
but refused the protection claim.

The appellant claims that there is a real risk of serious harm to him if he
is returned to Iraq. He is a Sunni Muslim of Kurdish ethnic origin from
Kirkuk. He would be at risk of Article 15(c) treatment in Kirkuk and would
be at risk of serious harm in Baghdad because of his ethnicity and
destitution elsewhere in Iraq including in Baghdad and the IKR where he
would not be able to access housing or employment because he has no
documentation and could not obtain documentation within a reasonable time.

The Respondent's decision

The appellant's return to Kirkuk would not breach Article 15(c) of the
Qualification Directive. He is not at risk of serious harm for a Convention
reason, he can obtain a passport or laissez passer from the Iraqi Embassy
in London in order to travel to Iraq. He can also obtain a CSID card from
the UK in order to travel to his home area.

In respect of Article 8 ECHR, there are no very significant obstacles to
the appellant reintegrating into Iraq and his private life in the UK does
not outweigh the public interest in maintaining immigration control.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The hearing took place on 5 February 2020 and the decision was sent on 19
February 2020.

The judge's starting point in respect of the asylum claim in accordance
with the principles in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKAIT 702 was the previous
determination of the First-tier Tribunal on 9 July 2018. The appellant was
found to be wholly lacking in credibility in respect of claimed events in
Iraq. The judge did not accept that there had been a breakdown between the
appellant and his family. The judge found that the appellant could obtain a
CSID card albeit from Iraq.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Ghandi found that the appellant gave an
inconsistent account about what happened at the Iraqi Embassy when he tried
to redocument himself; that the appellant had previously been found to be
lacking in credibility by an immigration judge and that his attempt to
trace his family was made late in the day. She did not accept the
appellant's evidence that he does not remember his family book details. She
found that the appellant could obtain a CSID card from the Iraqi Embassy in
the UK. She also found that the appellant was still in contact with his
family, could obtain documents from Iraq including a passport which would
enable him to obtain a laissez passer to travel to Iraq. Since she found
that the appellant could obtain a CSID card from the UK, she did not
address whether he would be able to obtain the document from inside Iraq.
There were no very significant obstacles to reintegration in Iraq and no
exceptional circumstances which would result in unjustifiably harsh
consequences for the purposes of an Article 8 ECHR assessment.

The judge dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

Ground 1: Misapplying/Failure to take into account Country Guidance of SMO,
KSP & IM (Article 15(c), identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400
(IAC)

It is asserted that the judge erred by finding that the appellant could
travel in Iraq using a laissez passer and could redocument himself with a
laissez passer. It is said that in accordance with the Country Guidance of
SMO, in order for the appellant to travel within Iraq the appellant would
need a CSID or INID and that he would only be able to obtain this by
attending his local CSA office in person. The judge erred in law by failing
to take into account the lack of assistance a laissez passer would provide.
This is a material error.

The judge also failed to take into account a material factor relevant to re-
documenting himself namely the destruction of records in Kirkuk, an area
which was the subject of significant fighting.

Rule 24 response

There was no rule 24 response.

 Submissions

Mr Parkin repeated the grounds of appeal in his oral submissions. He agreed
that there was no challenge to the negative credibility finding of the
judge. In respect of materiality he contended that the judge had failed to
have to regard to the guidance in SMO when considering whether the
appellant could obtain a CSID card from the UK. The appellant does not
simply require his family book number, he also requires documentation which
he would have difficulty obtaining from Iraq. The judge did not take into
consideration the references in SMO about the destruction of records in the
appellant's home area.

Mr Walker after initially appearing to concede that the judge's approach
the laissez passer was flawed, then defended the decision as a whole
submitting that the judge's findings on the appellant's ability to obtain a
CSID card in the UK were sustainable. In these circumstances, the appellant
could travel to Iraq using a laissez passer and could travel within Iraq
without encountering treatment or conditions contrary to Article 3 ECHR and
to his home area of Kirkuk where he faces no real risk of serious harm.

Discussion and conclusions

    Ground 1

In my view the grounds misconstrue the decision and the reasoning of the
judge.

It is manifest that the judge's starting point was the findings of the
previous First-tier Tribunal in 2019. This was the proper approach and it
is not asserted by the appellant that there was any error by the judge in
this respect. She summarises these findings at [18] where she states;

         "In summary the previous Immigration Judge did not find the
         appellant to be an impressive or even credible witness (paragraph
         26 of their determination). The Immigration Judge accepted the Home
         Office's claims about the inconsistences in the appellant's claim
         and also found that the parts of the claim that he could have
         supported with evidence, he did not do so. The Immigration Judge
         did not accept that there was a breakdown in relationships between
         the appellant and his family (paragraph 27 of the determination).
         The Judge did not accept that the appellant worked at a casino
         (paragraph 28 of the determination) or that he abandoned Islam and
         was drinking alcohol (paragraph 29 of the determination) The Judge
         did not accept that the appellant had come to the attention of
         Daesh (paragraph 30). In summary the Judge found that the appellant
         had given a wholly false account of the problems that beset him in
         Iraq and found that the appellant had chosen, of his own accord to
         leave Iraq (paragraph 32 of the determination). The Judge also
         found that the appellant would be able to obtain a CSID (paragraph
         37 of the determination)".

The judge then at [19] summarised the appellant's case which was firstly
that the appellant was not removeable from the UK because he does not have
a passport or laissez passer and cannot obtain one and secondly in the
alternative that the appellant does not have and is unable to obtain a CSID
or an INID within a reasonable length of time. It is unduly harsh for him
to live in Iraq as he will not be able to travel to Kirkuk. He cannot live
in Baghdad because he has no-one to sponsor him, and without a CSID or INID
card he will be unable to find work or accommodation and will be destitute.

The judge considered the second issue first. At [20] the judge explicitly
states that she will address the ability of the appellant to obtain a CSID
card in the UK. At [21] she records that the appellant's evidence is that
he cannot remember the volume and page reference of the entry in the Family
Book in Iraq and that the Iraqi Embassy cannot redocument him.

The judge finds at [22] that whether the appellant is able to remember his
family book details is an important consideration.

The judge then goes on to consider the appellant's account of what happened
when he attempted to redocument himself at the Iraqi embassy on 6 September
2019 accompanied by an interpreter who acted as his witness. The judge
points to inconsistencies between the appellant's and the interpreter's
account of what happened at the Embassy as well as internal inconsistencies
between the appellant's oral evidence and his written statement. The judge
states that both representatives asked her to accept the witness account,
which was that the appellant was asked for his family reference book number
but did not know it.  The judge pointed to the appellant's most recent
statement in which he states that he cannot obtain any information about
his family book from Iraq to assist his application to redocument himself
in the UK because he does not have contact with friends or family in Iraq.

At [27] the judge records;

         "Mr Parkin accepts that this was not the finding of the previous
         Immigration Judge and that I am bound by those findings of fact."

The judge points to the fact that the visit to the Embassy was recent. She
draws an adverse credibility inference from his failure to have a
reasonable recollection of the visit. She also takes into account that the
appellant's attempts to contact his family in the UK via the Red Cross are
also recent, particularly since the first Immigration Judge found he had
family in the UK in July 2018.

The judge does not accept the appellant's account of what happened at the
Embassy. She states at [31];

         "Given what happened at the Embassy is central is to his claim and
         I do not believe him, I also do not accept that he does not
         remember the page and volume number of the family book. In light of
         this, I find that the appellant could obtain his CSID card from the
         Iraqi Embassy in the UK. I therefore do not need to go on to
         consider whether he could obtain it upon return to Iraq".

It is not the appellant's case that these findings are flawed or deficient
in any way.  I am satisfied that the negative credibility findings are
manifestly sustainable in light of the previous judge's negative
credibility findings, the inconsistencies in the appellant's account of
what happened at the Iraqi Embassy and the timing of the Red Cross tracing
application. The judge's ultimate finding that the appellant can remember
his family book and page number and that he is still in contact with his
family is adequately reasoned and grounded in the evidence.

When considering the second issue of the laissez passer the judge made
further findings on the appellant's ability to obtain documents from Iraq.
At [32] she refers to the previous immigration judge's reference to the
screening interview in which the appellant had stated that his documents
were in Iraq. The previous judge rejected the appellant's account that he
could no longer obtain those documents. Again, the judge takes this finding
as her starting point and Mr Parkin takes no issue with this.

She states at [33],

         "The appellant has not provided any new evidence which would cause
         me to reach a different conclusion to the previous judge."

At [34] she states;

         "Even if I am wrong about this, I have not found the appellant
         credible for the reasons set out above. I have no evidence before
         me why, when he initially said he could obtain his documents from
         Iraq, he then says he cannot. I do not accept this due to the lack
         of any satisfactory explanation. I find he could obtain his
         documents, including his passport from his family in Kirkuk
         (screening interview of 21 February 2016 paragraphs 1.7 and 6.3.)"

In the screening interview referred to by the judge the appellant states at
1.7 "No - all my papers are in Iraq". At 1.8 he is asked where is your
passport? He replies, "In Iraq". At 6.3 he states regarding additional
documents. "I will try to have some sent to me - my Iraqi passport and ID
card and Iraqi nationality certificate. I don't know how long it will
take".  The judge's finding on the basis of this evidence is also
adequately reasoned and open to her and Mr Parkin does not assert
otherwise.

In summary the judge's unchallenged findings are;

      a) The appellant left his documents in Iraq when he travelled to the
         UK.

      b) The appellant stated in 2016 that he would be able to obtain his
         documents. The appellant is still in contact with his family and
         friends and could arrange for his family to send his documents,
         including his passport, to him in the UK.

      c) The appellant knows the page number and reference of his family
         book.

It is trite law that appeal courts should be hesitant to interfere with
findings of fact by the First-tier Tribunal unless there is a material
misdirection of law and Mr Parkin agreed that he could point to no error of
the judge in the assessment of these facts.

Mr Parkin's main submission is that even on these factual findings, the
judge's ultimate conclusion that that the appellant can obtain a CSID from
the Iraqi Embassy in the UK is not in line with the Country Guidance in
SMO. He pointed the judge's bare statement at [35] in this respect which
states;

         "Further the appellant is able to obtain a CSID in the UK from the
         Iraqi Embassy."

His submission is that this finding is not fully reasoned given the Country
Guidance. Firstly, I am satisfied that this sentence has been taken out of
context by Mr Parkin. Reading the determination as a whole, the judge is
referring back to the totality of her findings for which she has given
adequate reasons as set out above. Secondly, the judge has directed herself
directly in respect of SMO at [9](i) where she states;

         "Mr Parkin also relied on what was said in SMO, KSP & IUM (Article
         15(c) identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) regarding
         documentation and internal relocation. In his oral submissions he
         carefully took me through the relevant paragraphs of this case".

The judge was manifestly aware of the Country Guidance and applied it to
the facts of the case.

Mr Parkin's submission before me was that even if the appellant knew his
family book reference, he would require other documentation in order to
obtain his CSID card from the UK. This is apparent from headnote 13 of SMO
which states;

         "Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
         replacement CSIDs remain available through Iraqi Consular
         facilities.  Whether an individual will be able to obtain a
         replacement CSID whilst in the UK depends on the documents
         available and, critically, the availability of the volume and page
         reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq, which system
         continues to underpin the Civil Status Identity process.  Given the
         importance of that information, most Iraqi citizens will recall it.
         That information may also be obtained from family members, although
         it is necessary to consider whether such relatives are on the
         father's or the mother's side because the registration system is
         patrilineal".

I have considered the headnote at 13, as well as [383] of SMO which states
that the previous guidance at [26] of AAH (Iraqi Kurds- internal
relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 and [173] to [177] of AA (Article 15(c)
Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) remain in place. From this, I am satisfied
that, on the evidence before the judge at the hearing the guidance in SMO
was that it was still possible to obtain a CSID card from the Iraqi Embassy
in the UK by contacting family members in Iraq to send documents such as
birth certificates and passports or copies of such documents as well as
providing the family book and page reference number. Since the judge has
made unchallenged findings that the appellant is still in touch with his
family members, that he left his documents in Iraq and has access to them
and that he knows his family book and page reference number, her findings
that he can obtain a CSID care in the UK is both in line with SMO and
adequately reasoned.

I am not satisfied that there is any error in the approach of the judge. Mr
Parkin alluded to the fact that many of the records offices have been
destroyed and that this would affect the possibility of obtaining a CSID
and the judge had failed to take this into account. However, this was not
the way he argued the case before the First-tier Tribunal. Additionally,
since the judge found that the appellant already had access to documents
and was aware of the family book and page reference number, his own family
would have no need to access the local records office. It is for the
appellant to demonstrate that his local records office was destroyed and
that this would impact on his ability to redocument himself in accordance
with [394] and [395] of SMO. Mr Parkin did not point me to any specific
evidence put before the judge in this respect or any passage of SMO which
would indicate that the Iraqi Embassy would not be able to redocument the
appellant because of this problem. The judge does not refer to a skeleton
argument.

I am not satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that there has been
a material error of law in respect of her finding that the appellant can
obtain a CSID card from the UK.

As far as the laissez passer is concerned the guidance in SMO in respect of
these documents is to be found at [375] where it is said;

         "Further enquiries made by Dr Fatah in London suggest that this is
         no longer the case and that an individual must simply be able to
         establish their nationality in order to obtain a laissez passer. In
         the absence of documentation, an Iraqi national can request family
         members in Iraq to present documents to the Ministry of Foreign
         Affairs to prove the individual's nationality or failing that
         "legal procedures will then be started to prove the individual's
         nationality if the failed asylum seeker through a list of questions
         in relation to their life in Iraq".

Given the judge's unchallenged findings that the appellant can obtain his
documents including his passport from Iraq, he would clearly fall into the
category of people who have documentation and can establish their
nationality and therefore simply obtain a laissez passer. The assertion
that the judge has erred in this respect is not made out.

Indeed, Mr Parkin's grounds asserts that the judge finds that the appellant
can redocument himself in Iraq by using a laissez passer. However, this is
to misstate the findings of the judge. The judge's finding is that the
appellant can obtain a laissez passer by obtaining a document from family
members in Iraq to establish his nationality and then use the same
documents as well as his family book details to obtain a CSID card from the
Iraqi Embassy.

I am satisfied have read the decision as a whole that if the sentence at
[35] quoted above is placed in context, the judge clearly meant there is no
reason why the appellant cannot 'obtain' a laissez passer. The judge at no
point, as is asserted in the grounds, finds that the appellant can travel
to Kirkuk on a laissez passer and use that document to obtain mandatory re-
registration under the INID scheme at his home CSA office. The grounds
misconstrue the judge's findings and reasoning in this respect. At no point
does the judge suggest that the appellant can return to Iraq without a CSID
card, redocument himself in Baghdad in a reasonable timescale or travel
safely within Iraq without a CSID or INID card.

I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the approach of the judge
and I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is dismissed.

The anonymity order is maintained.



Signed                 R J Owens                         Date 15 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens
