
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11039/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On 29 July 2020                      |On 6 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                    F M A
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms. R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant, who claims to be a citizen  of  Iran,  appeals  with
         permission  against  the  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  the  10  February
         2020.

      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 22nd July 2020, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

      4. Whilst Ms Petterson was missing some of the documents, Counsel  for
         the appellant was able to provide the relevant documents to her  by
         email and it was confirmed by her that she had  the  documents  she
         required to proceed with the hearing.

      5. I am grateful to Mr Schwenk and Ms Petterson for their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:

      6. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ at
         paragraphs 3-15.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on
         the 7 September 2017. He applied for asylum whilst in detention. He
         was encountered a second time and detained in 2018 and the claim
         was refused on 30 October 2019.

      7. The respondent accepted that the appellant was of Kurdish ethnicity
         but in relation to his claim to be a national of Iran, the
         respondent noted that it was not possible to verify that claim. As
         to the events in Iran/Iraq, the respondent did not accept that the
         appellant's father had encountered any issues on account of any
         political activities and therefore his account of his father being
         taken by the authorities in May 2017. Thus, it was not accepted
         that he was of any interest to the authorities as a result of his
         father. As to his involvement in activities on behalf of the KDPI
         in the UK, it was noted that whilst he claimed to have supported
         the party in the UK, he was not currently a member and had not
         attended any meetings. His political activity was considered to
         have been limited and at times inconsistent. Thus, it was
         considered by the respondent that he would not be of interest to
         the Iranian authorities and would not be at risk of harm. The
         decision letter also set out why he could not meet the immigration
         rules in relation to any Article 8 claim or why there were any
         circumstances which would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for him on return.

      8. The appellant appealed against this decision and it was dismissed
         by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on the 10
         February 2020.

      9. In that decision the FtTJ considered the issue of nationality and
         noted that there was no supporting evidence in relation to his
         claim. In particular at [55] he outlined the difficulties with the
         account given by the appellant that he lived in Iraq for a
         substantial amount of time with his family members without any form
         of documentation. However, the FtTJ gave consideration to the
         objective material upon which he accepted did demonstrate that
         Iranian Kurds lived in Iraq for prolonged periods (see [54)). After
         considering the evidence he concluded at [58] that notwithstanding
         the difficulties in the account, when applying the lower standard
         of proof, he was satisfied that he was Iranian as claimed. He
         therefore considered the decision on the basis that he was an
         Iranian national and would be returned to that country rather than
         to Iraq.

     10. The FtTJ considered the events in Iran but rejected the appellant's
         account that he had been of interest to the Iranian authorities in
         May 2017 for the reasons given at paragraph [63 - 67]. As to his
         sur place activity, the FtTJ considered that any activities
         undertaken were not out of any genuine conviction. In this context,
         the judge rejected his account to be able to properly engage with
         Facebook material on the basis that he was illiterate, and that the
         material would not be seen by anyone other than his Facebook
         friends as it was not public. When considering his activities at
         the highest he found it was "fairly low level" and considered his
         pattern of behaviour was "dishonest". Having considered the country
         guidance he did not consider that the appellant would be at risk of
         return as a result of his Kurdish ethnicity or because of the very
         low level and opportunistic activity in which he had engaged. The
         FtTJ therefore dismissed his appeal.

     11. Permission to appeal was issued and on 25 March 2020 permission was
         granted by FtTJ Kelly.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     12. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     13. Mr Schwenk, Counsel on behalf of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the
         written  grounds  of  appeal.  There  were   no   further   written
         submissions. There was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf  of  the
         respondent.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I
         am grateful for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     14. Mr Schwenk began his submissions by setting out the mistakes of
         fact that he stated had been made in the decision of the FtTJ which
         were material to the judge's assessment of credibility. They are
         set out in the grounds and were also highlighted in the grant of
         permission by FtTJ Kelly.

     15. Having had the opportunity to hear the submissions and to have the
         documentation that had not been previously forwarded, Ms Petterson
         conceded that the FtTJ had made errors of fact which she considered
         were fundamental to his decision and the assessment of credibility
         and as such would have been likely to affect the outcome. That
         being the case, she invited me to find that there was a material
         error of law in the decision and that the appeal should be remitted
         for a rehearing before the FtTJ.

     16. Mr Schwenk in his reply agreed with Ms Petterson that the appeal
         should be remitted to the FtT as a result of the fact finding that
         would be required. He also made submissions as to the paragraphs
         which should be preserved findings.

     17. He submitted that the findings of fact made by the judge which
         relate to the issue of nationality should be preserved. In
         addition, he submitted that the past history relating to the
         appellant's father also appeared to have been accepted by the FtTJ
         in the last sentence at paragraph 62.

     18. Ms Petterson submitted that in view of the errors of law outlined
         in the grounds, a sensible course would be for the entire decision
         to be remade by the FtT.

     19. Given the agreement between the parties that the decision of the
         FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point of law, it is only
         necessary for me to set out in brief terms why I am in agreement
         with that view.

     20. The grounds set out factual mistakes that were made in the FtTJ's
         assessment. The first concerned the appellant's level of literacy.
         The FtTJ recorded the appellant's evidence at [27] that the
         appellant was not educated and that he did not go to school. It
         stated that he learnt to read and write with his father at home.
         Asked if you could read or write he said that he only knew a little
         bit in the Kurdish language.

     21. At [59] the judge referred to the appellant as "illiterate in his
         own language" and then later confirmed that he considered the
         appellant's account on the basis of his illiteracy.

     22. When making an assessment of the credibility of his account in the
         context of his Facebook activity, the FtTJ found at [76] that the
         difficulty with believing his account was that he was illiterate.
         The judge also made reference to the point that he did not know he
         had an email address and reached the conclusion that he shared the
         respondent's incredulity that the appellant could engage with
         Facebook posts "if he were entirely illiterate".

     23. However, as Mr Schwenk submits, the appellant's evidence was not
         that he was entirely illiterate. In his witness statement at
         paragraph 6 he referred to his level of language skills and that
         his father had taught him to read and write in the Kurdish language
         as it was important to know his mother tongue. Also, the post set
         out in the Facebook evidence within the bundle are also written in
         Kurdish.

     24. The second area also relates to evidence that expressly concerned
         his sur place activities. At [82] the FtTJ stated that there was no
         evidence of the appellant's attendance at demonstrations. However,
         the appellant's bundle exhibits a schedule at page 14 of the
         demonstrations that he attended in 2019. Furthermore, in the bundle
         there were a number of photographs of the appellant attending
         demonstrations and his particular place in them showing the
         appellant holding material arguably relevant to the KDPI. There was
         also reference to this at paragraph 17 of his witness statement.

     25. Also, at [82] the judge found that there was no evidence of his
         Facebook account would be open to the world or that it would be
         seen by anyone other than his Facebook friends. However, the
         evidence before the FtTJ in the appellant's interview at questions
         207-208 when asked about this point the appellant made plain that
         the posts were made public and made similar references to posting
         publicly his account to others. The grounds also make reference to
         the global icon shown on the posts.

     26. Whilst Mr Schwenk also refers to mistake of fact set out at
         paragraph 76 where the FtTJ stated that it was not possible to open
         a Facebook account without an email and this was incorrect,  he
         relied on material that was not available to the judge (this being
         annexed to the grounds (Facebook help sheet)). However, I would
         accept that the finding made was not based on any proper evidence
         and appears to have been based only on a submission made on behalf
         of the presenting officer without any material in support.

     27. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent concedes that the mistakes
         of fact undermined the judge's assessment of the appellant's
         credibility and particularly when considering the appellant's sur
         place activities.

     28. It was also accepted that the judge erred in his assessment of the
         credibility of the appellant's account by stating there was no
         objective evidence of the authorities targeting family members (see
         ground 2 at paragraph 6). The CPIN report on Kurds in Iran (dated
         January 2019) includes a section on family members at 10.5. 10.5
         Treatment of family members

             '10.5.1 The Landinfo report stated:

             'Asked about the consequences for family members of political
             activists, an international organization in Ankara informed
             that 'If a person is deemed to be affiliated to a separatist
             party, he would be at risk. Family members could be regarded
             as oppositional as well. In the Kurdish regions, families are
             larger and links are closer. If a person is affiliated to the
             KDPI, one would expect to find other actibists [sic] within
             the family. It is the general trend of the authorities to seek
             out family members in the event that an activist is a
             fugitive. Going after families also creates an example of fear
             as well.''

     29. Whether that mistake was material or not would depend upon other
         factual issues including that of his mother's continued residence
         in Iraq.

     30. Other issues related to the assessment of risk consequent to the
         factual findings. However, as Mr Schwenk submits if there were
         mistakes of fact, they would necessarily affect the assessment of
         risk.

     31. One aspect of risk on return relates to the likely knowledge that
         the Iranian authorities would have of the appellant and whether it
         was reasonably likely that they would have information concerning
         his father who was said to be a member of the KDPI (see ground
         five). It is unclear whether the FtTJ accepted the appellant's
         father had a profile as asserted by the appellant and on the
         factual matrix that he advanced and consequently this was not a
         factor that was considered in the assessment of risk.

     32. For those reasons, it is agreed by the parties that the decision
         demonstrates the making of an error on a point of law and should be
         set aside.

     33. I have considered the submissions made by each of the advocates as
         to what findings should be preserved. One aspect of the appeal
         related to the appellant's claimed nationality in the lack of
         evidence to demonstrate that he was an Iranian national. The judge
         was clearly troubled about that issue based on the appellant's own
         evidence that he lived as an Iranian Kurd in Iraq and did so
         without any documentation (a civil status identity document known
         as a "CSID", or a biometric Iraqi national identity card (INID)
         both of which are considered to be essential part of life in Iraq
         as set out in the country guidance decisions that relate to that
         country (see FtTJ's decision at [55]). However at paragraphs of 52
         to 58, whilst the FtTJ found that there were difficulties in the
         appellant's account of how he lived for 19 years in Iraq and how
         the family survived without documentation, he accepted "to the
         lower standard" that he was Iranian as claimed and thus the
         decision was predicated on the basis that he was Iranian and would
         be returned to Iran rather than Iraq.

     34. In the light of that assessment, which is not affected by the error
         of law, it seems to me that those paragraphs should be preserved.

     35. However, I am not satisfied that any other paragraphs of the
         decision should be considered as preserved findings. Having
         considered the decision as a whole it is not clear to me whether
         the judge did in fact accept the appellant's evidence relating to
         his father's past history or his likely profile. The judge
         certainly did not accept the events which he referred to as the
         "core events" that referred to May 2017 (see paragraph 63]. In the
         light of the assessment of the appellant's credibility, in my
         judgement the past history forms part of that global assessment and
         I am not satisfied that there were clear findings in relation to
         the appellant's father and his past history. Such findings are
         necessary when considering the issue of risk on return in light of
         the relevant country guidance decisions.

     36. Therefore, the only issue that I consider is capable of being
         preserved is that relating to nationality.

     37. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade in the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In
         reaching that decision I have given careful consideration to the
         Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-

             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

     38. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal should
         be the FtT. I have considered their submissions in the light of the
         practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the
         appellant  to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential
         issues, further fact-finding will be necessary alongside the
         analysis of risk on return in the light of the relevant law and in
         my judgement the best course and consistent with the overriding
         objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a further
         hearing. The Tribunal will be seized of the task of undertaking a
         credibility assessment relating to events in Iraq/Iran and also in
         United Kingdom and will be required to do so on the basis of the
         evidence as at the date of the hearing. If either party seek to
         provide further evidence, any arguments as to fresh evidence are
         likely to be considered by the FtTJ.

     39. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtTJ save
         that the finding made as to his nationality shall be preserved.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision shall be set aside  and  to  be
remitted for a further hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 30 July 2019





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email




