
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/11187/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Thursday, 17 September 2020                |On Tuesday, 22 September 2020 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                  MR A N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, Counsel instructed by Quality
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

This is an appeal against the decision issued on 9 March 2020 of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hembrough which refused the appellant's asylum and human
rights claim.

The appellant is a national of Egypt born in 1953.  The background to this
matter is that the appellant came to the UK from Egypt on 6 October 2013
with leave as a visitor.  On 15 November 2013 he made a refugee claim.
This was refused by the respondent on 13 August 2015.  The appeal came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox, who in a decision issued on 16 May
2016 refused the appeal on all grounds.  The decision of Judge Fox was
upheld by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson in a decision issued on 9
September 2016.

On 21 July 2017 the appellant made further submissions to the respondent
which were not found to show a need for international protection but were
accepted as a fresh claim.  The appellant exercised an in country right of
appeal and the appeal came before Judge Hembrough on 17 February 2020.

The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum is that he and his family
were supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood.  He maintained that his wife and
their three adult sons were leading members of the Muslim Brotherhood.
After President Morsi was deposed on 3 July 2013 the appellant took part in
demonstrations organised by the Muslim Brotherhood between July and October
2013.  On 4 October 2013 his son received a telephone call advising the
family that a warrant had been issued for the appellant's arrest.  He then
fled to the UK.  He maintained that following a hearing in absentia on 15
January 2014 he and two of his sons had been sentenced to nine years and
six months in prison with hard labour and a fine of 30,000 Egyptian pounds
because of their involvement with the Muslim Brotherhood.  His wife
received a sentence of five years and six months with hard labour and a
fine of 20,000 Egyptian pounds.  When interviewed by the respondent he
indicated that his wife and sons were still at large in Egypt, however.

The appellant also maintained that he had worked for a textile company
where he was a "syndicate" member, which appears to have involved him in
the equivalent of union activities, advocating for the rights of employees.
 He had written a number of newspaper articles during the 80s and 90s
critical of the government policies of the day but had not faced
mistreatment on that basis prior to the events of 2013.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

The First-tier Tribunal set out the basis of the appellant's asylum claim
in paragraphs 7 to 20 of the decision.  The respondent's refusal letter is
summarised in paragraphs 21 to 23.  In paragraphs 24 to 26 the First-tier
Tribunal sets out material details from the decisions of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Fox and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson from the
appellant's previous appeal.  At paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge summarised
the appellant's further submissions that led to the current appeal.  The
judge summarised the current refusal decision under challenge in paragraphs
29 to 40.  The proceedings from the hearing on 17 December 2019 are set out
in paragraphs 41 to 43 and at the hearing on 17 February 2020 in paragraphs
44 to 63.

The judge's findings are set out in paragraphs 64 to 86.  The judge makes a
correct legal self-direction in paragraph 65, taking the starting point for
his consideration as the decisions of Judge Fox and Judge Monson which had
found the applicant to lack credibility.  The judge noted in paragraph 66
that there were factors in the appellant's profile that he had to hold in
mind when assessing the evidence, namely the appellant's age, his chronic
health conditions and history of depression.

In paragraphs 67 to 70 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough found that it
had not been shown that the appellant or members of his family were members
of the Muslim Brotherhood.  He provided a number of cogent reasons for
finding the appellant's account lacked credibility.

In paragraphs 67 and 68 the judge indicates that the appellant's claim that
his sons were high-ranking members of the Muslim Brotherhood was not
documented in any way. This was notable where the appellant claimed that
his sons were senior members of the Muslim Brotherhood. A video on which
the appellant relied was not relevant and did not support the claim; see
paragraph 69.  In paragraph 70 the judge points out the country evidence
showed that the authorities both prosecuted and persecuted very actively
leading members of the Muslim Brotherhood. This was highly inconsistent
with the appellant's claim that he, his wife and two of his sons had been
sentenced to lengthy jail sentences but his wife and his sons had been able
to remain living in Egypt, apparently in plain sight, and working.  The
evidence concerning the appellant's syndicate activities did not show
anything that might lead to difficulties on return' see paragraph 73. It
was found in paragraph 74 that it was not credible that the appellant's
brother in law, a retired army officer, would have given shelter to the
appellant's wife after she was convicted because of her involvement with
the Muslim Brotherhood. It was also not credible that the appellant's third
son was never charged with anything even though he was said to be secretary
for education within the Muslim Brotherhood.

The appellant's new documents were not reliable when assessed against the
evidence as a whole. Many of the documents were handwritten and not capable
of being verified by any of the experts approached by the appellant's
solicitors. There was country evidence indicating that this kind of
documents are readily available; see paragraph 75. In paragraph 76, the
judge noted that the appellant's daughter who lives in the UK "claimed to
have no knowledge of the claimed problems in Egypt beyond what he had told
her despite being in contact with her mother". In paragraph 77 the judge
points out that the appellant's third son, who has never been charged with
any offence, could have provided evidence, either a witness statement or by
coming to the UK but there was nothing from him at all.  The appellant
maintained that there was difficulty with communication but this was
undermined by the daughter's evidence who said that she last spoke to her
mother in Egypt a few weeks ago.

In paragraph 78 the judge notes that having pointed out to the appellant's
representatives that it was open to them to contact the lawyers in Egypt
that the appellant claimed to have been involved with his case, nothing had
been done.  The judge found in paragraph 81 that evidence of the family
home being sold, which was not accepted, even at its highest did not show
that this was not in connection with some other process, for example non-
payment of the mortgage. Nothing explained why the appellant was prosecuted
again in 2016; see paragraph 80. Documents showing that the family home had
been sold did not clarify whether this was merely due to failure to pay the
mortgage or some other reason unconnected with political activity; see
paragraph 81.

The judge concluded in paragraph 82 that the new evidence was not capable
of distinguishing the adverse credibility findings of the previous
Tribunals.

The judge went on in paragraphs 82 to 84 as follows:

"82. Looking at the evidence before me in the round I find nothing in the
fresh submissions or the new evidence presented that would undermine the
findings of the previous Tribunals.  I find his claim to be a fabrication
with the aim of achieving refugee status in the UK.  As I have noted his
daughter is a failed asylum seeker who achieved status on discretionary
grounds.  There is therefore a track history within the family.  I also
note that he has been receiving free treatment for a variety of chronic
conditions via the NHS to which he is not entitled.

83.  As regards the Appellant's claimed sur plas (sic) activity I find the
evidence points to him having attended possibly three demonstrations in six
years.  Given my findings in relation to his lack of credibility and the
lengths to which he has gone to manufacture what I have found to be a false
asylum claim I find his attendance to be nothing more than a cynical
attempt to bolster his claim.  There was no evidence to show that any of
his claimed political activities had come to the attention of the Egyptian
authorities.

84.  I have not been satisfied that he has any sort of profile that would
bring him to the adverse attention of the Egyptian authorities on return or
that he will engage in any form of political activity in Egypt such as to
bring him to adverse attention.  I find that he will refrain form (sic) in
(sic) so not because of fear of persecution but because of a lack of any
ongoing commitment to the opposition cause."

None of the findings set out above was challenged by the appellant.

The appellant's grounds of challenge maintained that the judge's findings
in paragraphs 83 and 84 on his sur place activity and refraining from being
politically active on return to Egypt because he had no genuine political
motivation.

The error arose where the First-tier Tribunal found as follows in paragraph
71 of the decision:

         "71.     Taken at it (sic) very highest I accept that the Appellant
             may have been a low level supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood
             who attended a few demonstrations in 2013.  He was never
             arrested and I find that there was nothing in his profile that
             would have brought him to the adverse attention of the
             authorities in the aftermath of the demise of the Morsi
             regime.  The reality is that he was one of over a million such
             people."

It was submitted for the appellant that it was accepted that the appellant
had some political motivation in 2013 when he had attended largescale
demonstrations when President Morsi was deposed. The grounds argue that
Judge Hembrough appears to have assumed that "the political commitment that
A had to the Muslim Brotherhood cause just before his entry to the UK in
2013 had completely evaporated" and that this was an error of law.  Where
it was accepted that he had demonstrated some level of political motivation
that had to be assessed and reasons given for finding it to be insufficient
to show that he had attended demonstrations in the UK on a purely cynical
basis and that he would not demonstrate on return because he had no
interest in doing so.

In my view the First-tier Tribunal judge did not err in his conclusion that
the appellant had operated on a cynical basis when attending demonstrations
in the UK and in finding that he would engage in any form of political
activity that would bring him to adverse attention because he is not
motivated to do so.  The judge gave the cogent and detailed reasons set out
above for finding that the appellant had fabricated the claim that he was a
much more active supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood, that he had been
sentenced in absentia for this, that his family were high ranking members
of the Muslim Brotherhood and had also been convicted and given long prison
sentences. Those findings stand. Reading the decision fairly, Judge
Hembrough considered that given "the lengths to which he has gone to
manufacture" a false asylum claim, the appellant's claim of some ongoing
political motivation was cynical. Judge Hembrough was very clear in
paragraph 84 that he did not accept that the appellant had any ongoing
commitment to the opposition cause.  That was a rational finding open to
the judge and he was not required to do more than he did in paragraphs 83
to 85 to clarify his finding that the appellant's claim to have ongoing
political commitment was cynical.  It is sufficiently clear from the
decision why the First-tier Tribunal did not accept the genuine nature of
the appellant's sur place activities in the UK or that he would refrain
from taking action on return because of a fear of reprisals rather than
lacking any genuine political motivation.

For these reasons I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does
not disclose an error on a point of law and shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 17 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
