
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12878/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2019                  |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mr Sho [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Sobowale, Counsel, instructed by NIDO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

We shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.
Thus, the Secretary of State is the Respondent and Mr [O] is once more the
Appellant.

This is a challenge by the Respondent against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chana ("the judge"), promulgated on 17 July 2019, by which
she allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 28
February 2018, refusing his protection and human rights claims.

The context to this case is that the Appellant, a national of both Japan
and the United States, had, during his residence in this country, committed
a number of offences.  This led to deportation proceedings being instigated
against him by the Respondent on the basis that his presence in the United
Kingdom was not conducive to the public good.  It was determined by the
Respondent that the Appellant was a persistent offender.

Initially the Appellant raised a protection claim but this is no longer a
live issue.

In respect of the deportation legal framework, the Respondent accepted from
the outset that the Appellant had resided in the United Kingdom lawfully
for more than half of his life, therefore, paragraph 399A(a) of the
Immigration Rules ("the Rules") was satisfied.  The Respondent did not
accept either that the Appellant was culturally and socially integrated in
this country, nor that there would be very significant obstacles to his
reintegration into Japanese society with respect to paragraph 399A(b) and
(c) of the Rules.



The judge's decision

In what is a relatively brief decision, the judge sets out elements of the
background to the case and makes certain findings of fact in relation to
the length of the Appellant's residence in this country, his status whilst
here (he had had indefinite leave to remain for the majority of the
residence), that he had relatives in Japan, and that in light of a pre-
sentence report prepared in February 2018 he was an immature individual.
The judge concluded that the Appellant was "somewhat of a persistent
offender" and noted that his offending, which related to the supply of
relatively small amounts of cannabis, had been done when he was a child and
he had apparently had no understanding of his actions.  It was noted that
the Appellant was at the date of hearing an adult and the judge clearly
took the view that any future offending would result in very serious
consequences for him.

For the purposes of this appeal, the most important paragraph in the
judge's decision is 16, and it is worth quoting this in full:

"I find that the Appellant comes within the exception that his removal to
Japan given his immaturity would constitute very significant obstacles to
his integration into the country that he would be removed to.  Even though
the Appellant has relatives in Japan, having lived in this country since he
was a child, it would be difficult for him to integrate into Japan which
has a very different culture to the United Kingdom as a 19 year old who
needs the support of his family to kick his marijuana habit.  However as an
adult and if he continues to commit such offences there would be no
impediment to his integration into Japan in the future."

The appeal was allowed, although we note that under the sub-heading of
"Decision" it is said that the basis of this was "under the Immigration
Rules".  This of course is an impossibility, given the statutory framework
relating to appeals after the amendments brought into force in 2014.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal on the
basis that the judge had failed to apply the relevant legal test in respect
of paragraph 399A(c) of the Rules.  It is said that there was insufficient
analysis and/or reasons in respect of the conclusion that this exception
applied to the Appellant.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-
Hutchison on 14 August 2019.



The hearing

At the hearing before us Mr Walker relied on the grounds and submitted that
the judge had simply failed to apply the relevant threshold as set out for
example in the case of Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Particular 5A -
compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC).

Mr Sobowale submitted that a number of the comments made by the judge were
in reality simply an expression of her thoughts by way of "advice" to the
Appellant in terms of his future conduct.  He submitted that the judge had
heard from both the Appellant, his parents and then had considered all
evidence, none of which had apparently been challenged at the hearing, and
took account of the pre-sentence report.  In light of this, the judge's
decision was sustainable.



Decision on error of law

We conclude that the judge has materially erred in law in respect of what
was a core issue in the appeal, namely whether there were very significant
obstacles to the Appellant reintegrating into Japanese society, with
reference to paragraph 399A(c) of the Rules and section 117C(4) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.

It is right that in the first sentence of paragraph 16 the judge states
that the Appellant came within the exception on the basis that his removal
to Japan would result in very significant obstacles to his reintegration
into the society of that country, based, it appears, largely on his
apparent immaturity.  However, in the very next sentence she concludes that
it would be "difficult" for the Appellant to integrate on return.  In the
final sentence of the same paragraph the judge states that as an adult
(which of course the Appellant was as at the date of hearing), and if he
continued to commit such offences, there would be no impediment to his
integration into Japan in the future.

In our view, this constitutes a confused and erroneous approach.  In
particular, the use of the term "difficult" is, we find, directly linked to
the issue of integration into Japanese society.  The test is not of course
whether it would be "difficult", but whether there would be very
significant obstacles.  That imposes a significantly higher threshold, as
is made clear not simply in Treebhawon but in paragraph 14 of the Court of
Appeal's judgment in Kamara [2016] 4 WLR 152, [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  We
conclude that whilst the phrase very significant obstacles is stated at the
beginning of paragraph 16 of the judge's decision, what follows
significantly undermines what might appear at first blush to be a correct
approach.

Given the importance of the need to apply the correct (and clear) test in a
case such as this, we conclude that the judge has erred and that the error
is material.

We appreciate Mr Sobowale's submission that the judge heard evidence and
that it may be the case that much of this evidence, if not all, went
unchallenged at the hearing.  This does not detract in any way from our
view on what the judge actually did when analysing that evidence and
applying it within the relevant legal framework.  We would note that whilst
there are certain findings set out in particular in paragraph 14, it must
be said that there was no particularly detailed analysis of the Appellant's
circumstances as they relate to the issue of reintegration into Japanese
society.  The issues of family members living in Japan is dealt with almost
in passing only and the issue of immaturity, whilst clearly of relevance,
has not really been subjected to the analysis that is warranted,
particularly in the context of the high threshold represented by the very
significant obstacles test.

We also note that the judge appears to have proceeded on a factually
erroneous basis, given that whilst most of the Appellant's offences were
committed when he was a minor, the last two were not.

In light of the above, the judge's decision must be set aside.



Disposal

Having considered the appropriate course of action for the next stage of
the process, we conclude that remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is
warranted. Whilst there have been certain findings of fact by the judge, as
observed previously, these are brief and do not cover all relevant matters
in any event. There has been no specific finding that the Appellant is
socially and culturally integrated in this country. Further, the judge's
finding that the Appellant was a persistent offender is couched in less
than clear-cut terms. There is, to our mind, a respectable argument to be
had that the offences committed as a minor may have a material effect on
the persistent offender assessment.

In light of the above, the Appellant's Article 8 claim must be looked at
again with a clean slate, save for the uncontroversial fact that he has
been in the United Kingdom lawfully for most of his life.

The protection claim is not pursued and is not to be considered on
remittal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

We remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

    1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;

    2. The Appellant's Article 8 claim is to be considered afresh, save  for
       the fact that he has been in the United Kingdom lawfully for most  of
       his life;

    3. The protection claim is not to be reconsidered;

    4. The remitted appeal shall not be  conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Chana;

    5. A Japanese interpreter is required;

    6. There is a whole-day time estimate for the remitted hearing.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 9 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

