
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/12135/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th April 2019                       |On 8th May 2019                   |
|                                        |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                    W C C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, instructed by Milestone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Malaysia born in November 1978.  She
appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy, dated 12
December 2018, dismissing her protection claim on asylum, humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.


2.   Permission to appeal was sought on four grounds.

(i)  The judge's negative credibility findings are mostly based on detail
that the judge expected to be contained in the witness statements or
evidence that does not exist.

(ii) The judge's reasons for rejecting the evidence of the Appellant's ex-
partner are perverse.

(iii)    The judge failed to give adequate reasons for many of her
findings.

(iv) The judge's negative credibility findings are mostly based on
assumptions and/or are perverse and the judge failed to take into account
material evidence.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum for the
following reasons:

"It is arguable that the judge was not rationally entitled to rely on some
of the assumptions that appear to underlie her findings identified in
ground (iv).  For example, simply because one is a lesbian does not mean
that one would be involved in lesbian organisations, even if openly living
as a lesbian.  While the judge's overall conclusions were comprehensive and
well-reasoned, and while some of the grounds appear to be little more than
disagreements with the judge's conclusions, given the nature of the overall
challenge I am persuaded to grant permission on all grounds."


Immigration History

4.   The Appellant came to the UK in February 2006 as a working
holidaymaker. She applied for leave to remain as a student, which was
refused with no right of appeal.  On 6 December 2012 she applied for leave
to remain as a spouse of a settled person.  This was refused on 7 February
2013 with no right of appeal.  Permission to apply for judicial review was
refused on 4 April 2014.  The Appellant remained without leave.  On 31
August 2018 she was encountered working illegally, arrested and detained.
She claimed asylum on 5 September 2018.  Her screening interview took place
on 10 September 2018 and her substantive interview was on 24 September
2018.

5.   The Appellant claimed asylum on the basis that she had a well-founded
fear of persecution in Malaysia on the basis of her membership of a
particular social group, namely, she was a lesbian.  It was accepted by the
Respondent that if the Appellant was homosexual, as she claimed, she would
be at risk on return.

6.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy did not find her claim to be a
lesbian credible. She rejected the Appellant's evidence on the basis that
the Appellant had provided a very limited account of her history of when
she became aware of her sexual orientation.  There was no supporting
evidence from lesbian witnesses except for the witness R, the Appellant's
ex-partner.  The Appellant came to the UK to work and was not fleeing
persecution. The evidence of the Appellant's witnesses was very brief and
she attached little weight to it.


Submissions

7.   Mr Briddock accepted that a challenge to credibility was always
difficult and the judge had provided a very full and lengthy decision. The
Respondent's reasons for rejecting the Appellant's credibility were that
the Appellant had delayed in making her asylum claim and she had previously
been married to a man. However, at the hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal a number of witnesses attended and there was lengthy cross-
examination. Further, the judge asked a number of questions, some of which
were inquisitive rather than seeking clarification. Mr Briddock submitted
that the judge utterly disbelieved the Appellant. He accepted that there
were some discrepancies. For example, the witness did not know of the
Appellant's marriage, but the Appellant stated that she had told the
witness of her marriage. However, the judge basically disbelieved the
Appellant, mostly based on evidence which was not in the witness statement
or which the Appellant did not expand upon in interview.

8.   In addition, the judge was struck by the absence of non-lesbian
friends apart from the Appellant's partner. The judge erred in finding that
a lack of lesbian friends damaged the Appellant's credibility. The judge's
finding suggested that evidence from lesbian friends would have been more
probative. The Appellant had lost touch with her lesbian friends and was in
detention at the time of the appeal, so it was more difficult to get in
touch with them. It was not implausible that she had lost touch and the
judge should have taken this into account in assessing credibility.

9.   Mr Briddock submitted that there were four witnesses who gave evidence
of the Appellant's sexuality. The judge did not say why the Appellant
should be involved in LGBT groups, which was the exact point made at
paragraph 60 of A B C CJEU C-145/13 to C-150/13:

"As regards, in the first place, assessments based on questioning as to the
knowledge on the part of the applicant for asylum concerned of
organisations for the protection of the rights of homosexuals and the
details of those organisations, such questioning suggests, according to the
applicant in the main proceedings in case C-150/13, that the authorities
base their assessments on stereotyped notions as to the behaviour of
homosexuals and not on the basis of the specific situation of each
applicant for asylum."

The judge was not assessing the specific situation of the Appellant but her
findings were based on stereotypical notions.  The judge failed to explain
why the fact that the Appellant had no lesbian friends and was not
associated with a lesbian organisation damaged her credibility.

10.  At paragraph 53, the judge stated that the witness's knowledge of the
Appellant's sexuality seemed to rely on what the Appellant herself had told
him. Mr Briddock submitted that the witness had no reason to doubt the
Appellant's claim to be lesbian. She told him this in 2007.  Further, the
witness gave examples of why he believed the Appellant was lesbian. It
would be extraordinary for the Appellant to state that she was lesbian in
order to make a claim ten years later. Further, the judge asked the witness
a strange question, namely, if he had seen the Appellant with men, would he
have assumed she was not lesbian? This was a natural assumption and should
not be held against the Appellant or the witness. It was irrational for the
judge to suggest that just because he was told she was lesbian that is the
basis of his belief when in fact the witness stated that the Appellant
would make comments on females whom she found attractive. It was not the
case that the witness's evidence was based purely on what the Appellant had
told him.  Further, the witness stated that he had met the Appellant's
girlfriend.

11.  At paragraph 58 the judge stated: "It would have been more credible if
her husband had been unaware of her sexuality and I do not find it very
likely that he would have pursued his relationship with her knowing that
she was lesbian." The Appellant's evidence was that her husband knew she
was homosexual when they married. Since heterosexuals marry others who were
not heterosexual it was not incredible that the Appellant's husband would
marry someone who was homosexual. The judge speculated on what would be
more credible. In this respect the judge was relying on inherent
implausibility from the judge's own perspective. It was very dangerous to
make assessments of credibility based on inherent implausibility.

12.  Mr Briddock submitted that, although the judge could take into account
a lack of evidence, in this case there was extensive cross-examination of
all the witnesses but the judge found the lack of detail in their witness
statements damaged their credibility. This was the fault of the Appellant's
representatives not a lack of knowledge on the part of the witnesses.  For
example, when one witness was asked in cross-examination why he had not
mentioned the Appellant's husband in his witness statement he stated that
he did not know he had to. The witnesses appeared in court, gave evidence
and were cross-examined. It was improper for the judge to attach little
weight to their evidence on the basis of a lack of detail in the witness
statement.

13.  The judge also criticised the Appellant for failing to describe her
realisation of her sexuality at paragraph 48. The judge failed to indicate
how the Appellant should have expressed herself in this regard. The judge
was indicating that the Appellant would have had a process of realisation.
This came from the API, which accepts that there are different experiences
of sexuality. The judge failed to say why the Appellant should have had a
gradual realisation or what she should have realised. In any event, the
Appellant indicated that she did have a gradual realisation of her
sexuality. There was no need to specify this. What the judge set out at
paragraph 48 showed the Appellant's gradual realisation. It was not clear
what the judge thought to be lacking. The judge has not identified the
difficulties with the witness's evidence but just says that it is vague.
The judge should have given reasons for why the witness was vague. She only
indicated the lack of detail in the witness statement.

14.  The Appellant's friends and her ex-partner, R, gave evidence. However,
the judge rejected the Appellant's evidence. Mr Briddock submitted the
judge must, therefore, have concluded that the witnesses were lying. The
entirety of the judge's reasons for rejecting R's evidence is contained in
paragraph 36:

"(1) It is not credible that the Appellant would not have known R's full
name when asked at the interview.

(2)  There was a discrepancy as to whether they, when a couple, celebrated
their first year's anniversary."

This was the only consideration of R's evidence and the reasons for
rejecting her evidence were woefully deficient. These two reasons did not
explain why the judge rejected her account of the relationship as a lie.

15.  There was extensive cross-examination and many points of
clarification, but there were no reasons for why the judge found that R was
not a reliable witness and it was an error of law not to have considered
the evidence in the round. The judge rejected R's evidence and should have
given better reasons for not believing that she had been in a relationship
with the Appellant. The judge had probative evidence and extensive cross-
examination. Nothing arises from R's inability to remember how they
celebrated the first anniversary. This was a minor discrepancy and not
enough to reject her evidence in its entirety.

16.  Mr Briddock submitted the judge had failed to give adequate reasons
for finding the Appellant's claim to be incredible. This was not a forensic
examination, but the judge had generally relied on inherent implausibility
and a perception of what she thought the Appellant should have done and her
conclusions were generally lacking reasons.  Overall, taken cumulatively,
the grounds amount to a material error of law.

17.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the evidence should be assessed in the
round and that is exactly what the judge had done. There was a great deal
more in the decision and the judge's reasons were adequate. The judge had
not acted contrary to A B C.  Although he accepted that the wording at
paragraph 49 was clumsy it was clear from the judge's other findings that
the judge was aware she should not be stereotypical. For example, the issue
of the marriage was considered at paragraph 58, the judge was not
approaching this from an adverse position and paragraph 48 should be looked
at in the round. The API suggested that the judge should look at the
realisation of sexuality. Her finding that it was vague and lacking in
detail was open to her and relevant to the assessment of the Appellant's
credibility.

18.  At paragraph 51 the judge acknowledged the limitation of the witness
statements, the evidence of the witnesses and, in particular, that the
Appellant did not know her partner's surname when interviewed. The
Appellant's credibility should be assessed against the background of
significant delay, two further applications for student leave after having
arrived in the UK as a working holidaymaker and two applications for
judicial review. It was therefore surprising that the Appellant had not
made an asylum claim earlier than she did. The judge's finding, at
paragraph 60, that she was struck by the fact that the Appellant has been
unable to say when her fear of return to Malaysia manifested itself was a
relevant consideration.

19.  The Appellant's circumstances and what the Appellant declared to the
authorities, combined with the evidence of the witnesses, was such that the
judge was entitled to find that the Appellant was not lesbian. Cumulatively
and in the round, the grounds were not sufficient to establish an error of
law.

20.  In response, Mr Briddock submitted that the judge's view, however
progressive, was irrelevant. It was not possible to remedy the difficulties
in the judge's finding that there was no objective evidence from lesbians.
The major findings were not properly made. Paragraph 49 was more than
clumsy. The judge was imposing a test of sexuality on the Appellant. The
judge may be purporting to say that there was a lack of evidence and no
other evidence but she had not given proper reasons for that conclusion.
When looking at the Appellant's case the judge's findings lacked an
explanation for why her account was vague. The Appellant had explained her
realisation of her sexuality. The fact that she could not remember her
partner's surname in interview and her claim was very late was very
circumstantial and did not go to the heart of the claim.

21.  Mr Briddock submitted the judge dismissed the Appellant's evidence on
insubstantial points. The fact that one of her witnesses did not know about
her husband (paragraph 44) demonstrated that the question was unclear and
it was not apparent what the witness understood from the judge's question.
There was no discrepancy and no reason for disbelieving the witnesses. The
judge's findings were not open to her on the evidence. The Appellant had
brought the best evidence, namely that of her ex-partner, and her ex-
partner's evidence had been totally rejected on one minor point. There was
not a single point when the Appellant realised she would be at harm in
Malaysia. Her fear of persecution had arisen when she realised she could
not live openly as a gay person in Malaysia.

Discussion and Conclusions

22.  The judge set out the oral evidence of the Appellant and her three
witnesses. It is apparent from that record of the evidence that the
Appellant's claim is vague and lacking in detail. Although Mr Briddock
refers to extensive cross-examination to supplement any lack of evidence in
the witness statements the witnesses' knowledge of the Appellant's
relationships and sexuality was limited. The judge assessed the evidence of
the Appellant and her witnesses in the round and found, overall, that it
was vague and lacking in credibility. That is clear on the face of the
recorded evidence. There was no need for the judge to give any further
reasons. A vague account is one which is lacking in detail and that point
is adequately made out in the decision.

23.  The judge rejected the Appellant's evidence of her sexuality for
several reasons:

(a)  The Appellant's account was vague and lacking in detail;
         (b)  The Appellant could not remember the surname of her partner
         with whom she claimed to have had relationship for one year in the
         UK;
(c)  The delay in claiming asylum;
         (d)  The Appellant had been married and made applications to remain
         on the basis of that marriage.
         (e)  The Appellant challenged the refusal of those applications
         through legal proceedings, but did not claim asylum until 2018.

24.  It is apparent from the judge's decision that the lack of detail in
the Appellant's account, judged against the background of delay and
numerous applications, is such that the judge was entitled to reject the
Appellant's claim to be lesbian. The judge does deal with the evidence of
each of the witnesses and, in essence, finds that although they claim to be
longstanding friends they had little knowledge of the Appellant's life and
relationships such that their evidence that she was lesbian attracted
little weight.  Whilst I accept Mr Briddock's submission that there would
be no reason for the witnesses not to believe the Appellant's claim to be
lesbian, the judge has to look at all the evidence in the round and she did
so. Overall, there was a lack of evidence from the Appellant and her
witnesses to support her claim to be lesbian.

25.  The judge did not find that the Appellant had to produce evidence from
lesbian friends or lesbian organisations. She found that the lack of such
evidence damaged the Appellant's credibility, not because the Appellant
should be a member of those organisations and should have lesbian friends,
but given the lack of evidence from the witnesses and the Appellant of her
homosexuality, there was no other evidence from either lesbian friends or
lesbian organisations to support the Appellant's account. It was not the
case the judge found that evidence from lesbian organisations or other
lesbians would have been more probative than the witnesses produced. The
Appellant's account was rejected on the basis that it was vague, lacking in
detail and unsupported. The judge's rejection of the Appellant's claim to
be homosexual was open to the judge on the evidence before her and she gave
adequate reasons for coming to that conclusion.

26.  The judge was entitled to find that there was insufficient evidence of
the Appellant's homosexuality. She was lacking in credibility because her
account was vague and lacking in detail and the Appellant had failed to
provide details which she should have been able to provide if her account
was true. The judge was entitled to attach little weight to the evidence of
the Appellant's witnesses. It was not incumbent on the judge to make a
finding that the witnesses were in fact lying. The judge found that,
considering the length of their claimed relationship with the Appellant,
their evidence was significantly lacking in detail such that little weight
could be placed on their evidence as to her sexuality.

27.  Although the Appellant had called her ex-partner to give evidence, the
judge attached little weight to such evidence because it was lacking in
detail and there were significant discrepancies as to whether the couple
celebrated their first year's anniversary. This was not circumstantial. It
was relevant evidence which the judge was entitled to take into account.
On reading the decision as a whole, the judge gave adequate reasons for her
findings and she did not require corroboration in the form of evidence from
lesbian friends or membership of lesbian organisations. The judge was
merely pointing out that such evidence did not exist and the evidence of
the Appellant and her witnesses was insufficient to support a finding that
the Appellant was homosexual.

28.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error of law in the judge's
decision of 12 December 2018 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
              J Frances

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances                                   Date:  3  May
2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed
              J Frances


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances                                    Date: 3  May
2019
