
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/12481/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     MG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel, instructed by Leonard Cannings
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

The appellant, a Turkish national of Kurdish ethnicity, was born on 1 May
1999 and is aged 19.  He applied for asylum in September 2015.  In a
decision dated 10 October 2018 the Home Office refused his protection
claim.  In a decision promulgated on 2 April 2019 a panel consisting of
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal G Browne and Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal N J Osborne dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds that, in summary:

the Tribunal erred in failing to assess the appellant as a vulnerable
witness in the assessment of the evidence relating to his claim of possibly
having been trafficked and the arrangements as to his passport and travel
to the UK;

that the assessment as to his political activities was fundamentally flawed
and that it was illogical and irrational to state that he had a reasonable
geographical knowledge, given that he had worked as a shepherd;

that it was irrational to reject his claim of beatings in Turkey because
there was no supporting objective or expert evidence;

that the rejection of the account because there were no supporting
statements from family members in Turkey was an error of law.



Error of Law Discussion

Although Ms Smith valiantly tried to persuade me otherwise, including
attempting on a number of occasions to introduce new grounds of appeal
which were not before me, I am satisfied that that the grounds amounted to
no more than an attempt to re-argue the appeal.

The core of Ms Smith's submissions, including as set out in her skeleton
argument, related to the panel's approach to evidence and vulnerability.
What I found to be her main argument, was not a ground before me:  she
argued that in effect the panel did not properly interpret the expert
evidence before it in respect of the appellant's vulnerability.  However,
that ground was not argued in the grounds for permission to appeal.
Although Ms Smith reluctantly accepted this was the case, this did not
prevent her from trying to shoehorn this ground into the existing grounds,
albeit unsuccessfully.

In any event, even if this new ground was before me I am not satisfied that
it is made out; the Tribunal undertook a comprehensive consideration of the
appellant's appeal including extensive consideration of the appellant's
vulnerability.  This included at [12] and [13] the approach that was taken
to the appellant's vulnerability.

The panel then went on to make detailed findings at [14] to [18] on the
medical assessments in the UK relevant to the appellant's account, recall
and credibility, including that a psychologist confirmed he did not meet
the diagnostic criteria for a learning disability and that there were no
significant symptoms of PTSD.  Nevertheless, contrary to Ms Smith's
submissions, the Tribunal did take into consideration the appellant's
functional difficulties and his young age on arrival and considered how his
difficulties may impact on the clarity of his answers including remembering
dates but was entitled to find that a requirement for additional support in
a learning environment did not significantly affect the appellant's
understanding of questions and the clarity of his answers or his memory of
names and places.  The Tribunal was also entitled to take into
consideration as it did the appellant's ability to provide clear
information at the hearing.  The Tribunal took into consideration that
there was evidence including from college tutors that the appellant is
forgetful in relation to appointments and has concentration problems but
that there was otherwise no medical evidence of a significant cognitive
problem or memory problem and that he was not referred for a further memory
test by the neurologist and that he was discharged, having made
recommendations in relation to managing excessive daytime sleepiness.  The
Tribunal reviewed the evidence including that an MRI was normal, an
endocrinologist had not diagnosed any abnormality and the neurologist did
not verify the appellant's claim that he had had a head injury with no
expert or medical evidence to confirm a head injury or lasting injuries.

There is no error, material or otherwise, in the Tribunal's very
comprehensive approach to that evidence.  The new submission that Ms Smith
sought to introduce before the Upper Tribunal was an attempt to revisit the
reasoned conclusions reached by the panel, because the appellant disagrees
with them. Even if that ground were before me it is not made out, and I do
not accept that the fact that the Tribunal did not mention each and every
part of the expert evidence, means that they did not properly consider it
where this panel undertook a particularly detailed consideration of the
expert evidence in relation to the appellant's difficulties and reached
evidence-based findings on the basis of that consideration.  Weight was
clearly a matter for the panel and there is no arguable error in the
panel's consideration of the appellant's vulnerability.  There is no merit
in that submission.

The Tribunal properly directed itself as to the appellant's vulnerability.
Whilst I accept, as Ms Everett did, that a self-direction in itself does
not mean that a Tribunal might not subsequently fail to follow that
direction or otherwise fall into error, that is not what this panel did.

It is more than evident that, having made reasoned and sustainable findings
as to the extent of the appellant's difficulties: including finding at
[18], that they took into account the appellant's functional difficulties
together with his young age when coming to the UK in their findings on
credibility; including that they considered whether his difficulties
affected the clarity of his answers at every stage of his claim and might,
when coupled with trauma, affect his recall of past events; including
accepting that the appellant may have difficulties remembering precise
dates; and then going on to otherwise find that the appellant's visual
problems and requirement for additional support in a learning environment
did not significantly affect his understanding of questions and the clarity
of his answers or his memories of names and places.  The panel took into
account that the appellant could recall information at his oral hearing
without any apparent difficulty and was able to provide clear information
in answer to all the questions and that although he required reasonable
rest breaks required no other adjustments at the hearing.

The panel went on to take into consideration the appellant's vulnerability
throughout the Decision and Reasons, and this was accepted by Ms Smith.
The grounds as pleaded take issue with the panel's conclusions including
where they found the appellant not to be credible.  I agree with Ms Everett
that it was the role of the panel, having found the appellant to be a
vulnerable witness and having made reasoned findings in relation to the
extent and effect of that vulnerability, to go on to assess the evidence,
through that prism, and make findings.  I further agree that Ms Smith's
characterisation of the grounds at the oral hearing seemed to suggest that
in effect those vulnerabilities meant that no weight could be placed on the
various discrepancies and difficulties with the appellant's evidence
outlined by the panel, although Ms Smith disavowed such a submission.

The grounds argue that at [37] to [44] the Tribunal had erred in its
consideration of the screening interview and states that the Tribunal
commented adversely that there was no further supporting information to
confirm that the appellant was suspected of having been the victim of
trafficking and that this explained why he had not provided supporting
details of his claimed political activities and why he had provided
contradictory information in his initial screening interview to his
subsequent asylum claim.  Although Ms Smith drew my attention to the
respondent's bundle at B9, 4.4, where it is recorded in answers that the
appellant was not allowed to have contact at this time with his family in
Turkey, I agree with Ms Everett that this does not in any way address the
Tribunal's finding that there was no supporting information which might
confirm such a claim where such ought to have been available.

Whilst the grounds note that the initial interview recorded that the
appellant was distressed and unable to explain his reasons for claiming
asylum, the panel clearly took this into consideration as recorded at [42]
and again took into account his vulnerability as they did throughout their
deliberations.

The panel was entitled to reach the reasoned conclusions it did in relation
to the multiple difficulties with the appellant's evidence and claim,
notwithstanding his vulnerability.

It is simply not the case, as argued at paragraph 4 of the grounds, that
despite acknowledging the appellant's age and that he was a vulnerable
witness that the Tribunal appeared to have had "no regard" to this in its
assessment of the appellant's evidence when such regard is given not only
in the very detailed assessment of his vulnerabilities as referred to above
but throughout the decision including as mentioned above at [42] and again
at [55].

It cannot be properly said that the panel failed to properly take into
account the appellant's vulnerabilities.  Such an argument flies in the
face of the findings and perhaps explains why Ms Smith attempted to change
the grounds to introduce her, ultimately flawed, argument that the expert
evidence was not properly considered.

Equally, whilst at paragraph 5 of the grounds it was argued that the
Tribunal erred in its consideration of the issues surrounding the
appellant's passport whilst acknowledging that the appellant may well have
been following instructions, yet going on to state that it was surprised
the appellant would throw away his passport, there was no inconsistency in
that reasoning.  The Tribunal went on to find that the appellant had time
to consider his actions and plan his route and arrangements were made to
undertake the last part of the journey clandestinely.  It is not the case,
as submitted by Ms Smith, that this led to a negative credibility finding
in itself whereas the Tribunal's reasoning demonstrates that this was taken
into consideration with other factors.

The Tribunal undertook a detailed consideration of all aspects of the
appellant's claim including his journey to the UK, events since coming to
the UK, his asylum claim grounds and screening interview, his passport
identity documents, his 2018 asylum interview, his political activities and
claimed police involvement, his involvement with the Turkish authorities,
his knowledge of Kurdish issues, of political involvement and his claimed
political activities with detailed findings set out on each of these
issues.  There has been no real challenge to the majority of those
findings, which comprehensively find the appellant not to be credible.

In that context, it is not the case, as was argued at paragraph 6 of the
grounds, that the appellant's claim for asylum was found to be contrived
because of his journey, whereas the Tribunal took this into account as one
of the factors, and was entitled for the reasons it gave, to not accept the
appellant's claim.

Although again it was argued that from [53] to [59] (paragraph 7 of the
grounds for permission) that the Tribunal erred in failing to treat the
appellant as a vulnerable witness, this is manifestly not the case.  As
already noted, despite having comprehensively considered the vulnerability
issue the panel went on to consider it again at [55] and to take that into
consideration.  It was clear that the vulnerability of this particular
appellant was at the forefront of the panel's mind.

Whilst it was argued on the appellant's behalf, that at [56] it was
illogical for the panel to reach the conclusion that the appellant has a
reasonable geographical knowledge because he worked as a shepherd, that is
to take the findings out of context.  The Tribunal considered, at [56], the
appellant's evidence to be conflicting.  The appellant's father hid him in
a house of a family friend in the mountains after the meeting house had
been raided but the appellant could not name the area where the house was
located or the nearest village despite staying there for a month.

The Tribunal was entitled, considering all the evidence in the round, to
not accept this argument including taking into consideration the
appellant's answers to other questions about places in Turkey and that,
given he was a shepherd, he might have a reasonable geographical knowledge.
 The appellant had not proffered any adequate explanation to explain why he
could not remember, other than his vulnerabilities, which the Tribunal
adequately considered and made sustainable findings on including that he
did not meet the diagnostic criteria for a learning disability and that
there were no significant symptoms of PTSD.

At paragraph 9, the final ground in the grounds for permission, it was
argued that the Tribunal accepted at [59] that the appellant had given
accounts of beatings which were "broadly similar".  It was further argued
that the Tribunal was irrational to go on to reject this aspect of the
account.  However, it was open to the Tribunal to find as it did that these
'broadly similar' accounts were self-serving.  The Tribunal properly
directed itself that corroboration in relation to harm suffered and the
risk of harm in Turkey is not a requirement.  Equally, the Tribunal was
entitled to find as it did, that where evidence including objective or
expert verification of past harm and injury was not available, the Tribunal
had to make findings on the appellant's assertions which it found not to be
credible.  It is not the case that the panel rejected the appellant's
account due to lack of evidence, rather the panel, have considered the
evidence properly and in the round, rejected the appellant's claim on the
basis of the evidence before it.

There was further discussion before me in relation to an additional ground
added by the permission judge, arguing that the panel arguably erred in
failing to give reasons, at [48], why it was unlikely that the appellant
would face severe beatings, death threats, yet not be arrested.

Even if that ground were before me, which I am not satisfied it was (see
including AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT
00245 (IAC)) the Tribunal had set out the background country information
summary at [5] to [8], which included that members of opposition groups
continued to be arrested and charged, which is consistent with the finding
at [48] that it is unlikely that he would face such severe beatings and
threats without being arrested whereas the appellant claims to have just
been detained.  In any event, any arguable error could not be material,
given the extent of the panel's credibility findings including on this
issue, which went on to find at [48] that there were further difficulties
with his account of his claimed beating and his account including that none
of his other family members faced trouble from the authorities despite
their claimed political affiliation.

In the context of all the evidence considered in the round, as the Tribunal
did, considering the Decision and Reasons holistically and fairly, the
panel was entitled to reach the finding it did that the appellant's claims,
including as set out at [48], were an attempt to bolster his claim that he
would be of interest to the Turkish authorities over three years later.

The Tribunal also made findings, which were not substantively challenged,
that in any event, it would be unlikely he would be of any interest due to
the lapse in time since his alleged activities.  There is no error in those
findings.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law
and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
