
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/12356/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 September 2018                     |On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                           Mr Sayd Hashem Quoreshi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss B Faryl, Counsel, instructed by Johnson's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Afghanistan, has permission to challenge
the decision of Judge Hudson sent on 17 May 2018 dismissing his appeal
against the decision made by the respondent on 14 November 2017 refusing
his protection claim.

2.   The appellant's grounds as amplified by Ms Faryl raise essentially six
points, contending that the judge (i) wrongly fixed the appellant with the
adverse findings of fact made by IJ Herwald in January 2004; (ii) wrongly
characterised the appellant's evidence as being that he was not at risk due
to family connections; (iii) failed to take into account that the appellant
was a minor at the time of the key events he was recounting; (iv) wrongly
relied on mere speculation in rejecting the appellant's evidence that his
father had been kidnapped and his father's brother had been imprisoned by
the Taliban but had managed to escape and wrongly rejected the appellant's
evidence regarding his father being deliberately killed by a landmine and
for political reasons rather than due to any dispute over land; (v)
incorrectly identified an inconsistency in the evidence given by the
appellant regarding his claimed atheism; (vi) failed to take account of the
copious evidence supporting the appellant's claim that he had not
absconded.

3.   As regards ground (1), I cannot agree that Judge Hudson erred in
concluding that the findings of fact made by Judge Herwald in January 2004
were still valid.  The appellant was unsuccessful in challenging the
decision of Judge Herwald, becoming appeal rights exhausted on 10 February
2005.  He made further submissions to the respondent which were considered
and refused on 10 December 2007; these were not challenged successfully.
In response to the respondent's decision of 14 November 2017, the appellant
did not produce any further evidence from Afghanistan relating to any of
the assertions he had advanced unsuccessfully before Judge Herwald.  Whilst
his grounds of appeal did include an Appendix entitled "Discrepancies and
misunderstandings evident from the papers" this contains no explanation for
why (to the extent they sought to rely on points not made in the original
appeal) they had not been raised earlier.  Bearing in mind the guidance
given in the starred case of Devaseelan this ground fails to identify any
legitimate basis for the judge departing from or revisiting the findings of
fact made by Judge Herwald.  The judge properly noted at paragraph 16 that
Judge Herwald had found the appellant's evidence unreliable and
implausible.  Judge Hudson went on to conclude that taking Judge Herwald
findings of fact as a starting point "I conclude that Mr Quoreshi is not at
risk of persecution in Afghanistan due to the political or property
activities of his relatives."  In the absence of any new cogent evidence or
a clear explanation for why points were now being raised against Judge
Herwald's findings when they had not been raised earlier, Judge Hudson was
unarguably right to reach this conclusion.

4.   Seen in this context the appellant's other grounds, save for (v) and
(vi), have no traction since they, in one way or other, take issue with
Judge Hudson's own stated reasons for finding the appellant's claim lacking
in credibility.

5.   In this regard it can be said, as a criticism of the judge, that
having concluded that there was no basis for departing from the findings of
fact made by Judge Herwald (which is the effect of her paragraph 16), it
was superfluous (and somewhat confusing) for her to have revisited the
evidence regarding the political and property activities of the appellant's
family.  Be that as it may, I cannot see that this resulted in any material
error because none of the arguments raised in the appellant's grounds (ii)
- (iv) contained any justification for revisiting the underlying facts as
found by Judge Herwald.  (I would observe that in any event I consider they
really amount to no more than mere disagreements with Judge Hudson's
findings and, to the extent that they complained of the judge relying
unduly on speculation, they in turn rely unduly on mere counter-
speculation, they also fail to make any challenge to important negative
findings of Judge Hudson at paragraph 21 regarding submission of dishonest
and misleading documentation purporting to be from the "General Director of
Espionage").

6.   Ground (v) does stand on its own because it was essentially a fresh
ground of asylum based on fear of persecution as an atheist.  The basis of
the appellant's challenge is that the judge wrongly rejected this ground
because the appellant's evidence in his 2016 witness statement on this
matter was not inconsistent.  However, it is clear from paragraph 20 that
inconsistency about this matter was only one of the difficulties.  The
judge also rejected it because the assertion had not been made until 2016,
fourteen years after the appellant entered the UK and the appellant's
attempted explanation for this omission was unsatisfactory.  First of all,
I consider the judge was entirely right to reject the appellant's
explanation for this (in terms of being unable to raise it because all his
previous representatives were Muslim): in point of fact that was incorrect
but even if all his previous representatives were Muslim (and even assuming
a complete lack of professionalism on the part of such persons), there was
nothing to stop him obtaining non-Muslim representation.  Second, it was
open to the judge to find inconsistency in the appellant's witness
statement on the issue of whether his family went to the mosque or not.  I
also find that the judge was entitled to find at paragraph 24 that in
addition to inconsistency, there was also vagueness in the appellant's
account.

7.   As regard ground (vi) (which concerned whether he was an absconder),
it has no bearing on the issue of the appellant's credibility; nor was it
relied on by the judge in the context of her adverse credibility finding.
It is at best a complaint against the respondent's reliance on his record
of non-compliance, but that was confined to the issue of whether there were
any compassionate circumstances warranting a grant of leave outside the
asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights contexts.  Further, as Mr
Tan correctly observed, it is beyond dispute - compliance or no compliance
- that the appellant's immigration status has always been precarious.

8.   Ms Faryl has also sought to argue that the judge failed to properly
evaluate the medical evidence but not only was that not a ground raised in
the appellant's grounds. but the judge addressed the medical evidence in
paragraphs 28 - 32 in very considerable detail and reached entirely
sustainable conclusions based on a close analysis of the medical evidence
and relevant COI.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the grounds fail to identify a
material error of law in Judge Hudson's decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 September 2018
           [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

