
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13572/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 March 2020                              |On 27 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by Immigration Aid
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. However, as this  is
an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G J
Ferguson promulgated on 17 October 2019 ("the Decision") dismissing his
appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 17 November 2018, refusing
the Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

This matter first came before me on 16 January 2020 at which time the
Appellant was unrepresented and had apparently received contradictory
advice from those advising him.  I therefore adjourned the hearing to a
later date to allow him to find representation.  My adjournment decision is
annexed hereto for ease of reference.

As I explained in the adjournment decision, the Judge who granted
permission to appeal almost certainly intended to refuse it (see the
substance of the decision cited at [3] of my decision).  However, as I also
explained, the position in law is that permission is granted as that is
what the decision says.  Accordingly, I have to determine whether the
Decision contains an error of law.

By way of brief factual background, the Appellant is a national of
Bangladesh who came to the UK as a student on 14 November 2009.  Following
various applications, refusals and an appeal, his leave in that capacity
came to an end on 10 October 2014 and he has remained since without leave.
 Having made an unsuccessful human rights' claim in 2016, based it appears
on his relationship with a Ms B who was expecting his child (which
application was refused finally in November 2016), the Appellant claimed
asylum on 31 May 2017.

The basis of the Appellant's asylum claim is that he is a gay man who fears
return to Bangladesh as he says he is at risk from Islamic extremists or
his family members on account of his sexuality.

Although the Judge expressed doubts about the Appellant's sexuality, he
nonetheless accepted based on the lower standard of proof and the benefit
of the doubt, that the Appellant "has established that he identifies as
being gay" ([7] of the Decision).

The Judge went on to apply the guidance laid down in HJ (Iran) v Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 ("HJ (Iran)") and reached
findings as to how the Appellant could be expected to behave on return to
Bangladesh and why.  He concluded at [21] of the Decision that "[o]n return
to Bangladesh, if [the Appellant] chooses to have a partner at all, he will
conduct the relationship discreetly simply for social or cultural reasons,
not out of a fear of persecution."

The Judge then turned to consider the background evidence concerning the
position for a gay man who chose to live discreetly as such in Bangladesh.
 In that regard, he found at [23] and following of the Decision that the
Appellant could relocate to areas of Bangladesh away from his family and
that in general the evidence did not make out a risk from Islamic
extremists.  He therefore concluded that the Appellant did not have a well-
founded fear of persecution on return and therefore dismissed the appeal.

The Appellant appeals on two pleaded grounds.  Ground one challenges the
Judge's conclusions concerning the protection claim.  Ground two challenges
the dismissal of the appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).  Mr
Khan expanded on the pleaded grounds in his oral submissions.  I deal with
those submissions below.

The matter comes before me to assess whether the Decision does disclose an
error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to the First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

Ground One: The Protection Claim

In essence, the Appellant's case is that, having been accepted to be gay,
applying HJ (Iran) and taking into account the background evidence, he is
entitled to succeed. Accordingly, he says, the Judge erred in law by
dismissing the appeal.

It is common ground that homosexuality is a criminal offence in Bangladesh.
  However, that is not the end of the matter.  As the Judge pointed out at
[22] of the Decision, "the law prohibiting sexual activity between men is
not enforced and .. there has been no case of legal proceedings resulting
in any punishment under Section 377 of the Penal Code".

Although whether there would be sufficient protection for the Appellant
from the police in Bangladesh forms no part of the pleaded challenge to the
Decision, Mr Khan's oral submissions were largely directed at that issue
and I deal with them for completeness.

Mr Khan relied on the Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note
entitled "Bangladesh: Sexual orientation and gender identity" published
November 2017 ("the CPIN") which appears at [AB/177-212].  Section 6 of the
CPIN deals with "State attitudes and treatment".  That refers first to
reports of physical and sexual assault by the police dating back to 2015
and earlier.  At [6.3] of that report, reference is made to official
discrimination including harassment and a reluctance of LGBT individuals to
identify as such to the police if reporting a crime.  However, the point is
made at [6.3.3] that it is difficult to know whether such persons are
treated worse by the police than anyone else in Bangladesh.  Section [6.4]
of the CPIN also refers to unwillingness of LGBT individuals to approach
the police for support.  The point is made however at, for example, [6.4.4]
that "members of the press noted that the police were obliged to take on a
case, irrespective of the sexuality of the reporter of the crime; and the
Bangladesh Legal Aid and Services Trust (BLAST) noted that there was 'very
little research on these issues'".

In any event, the prior issue is whether the Appellant would have cause to
seek protection from the authorities.  It is doubtless due to the Judge's
findings on that issue that the sufficiency of protection or otherwise was
not considered by the Judge other than peripherally at [24] of the
Decision.

The first issue for the Judge to consider was that directly raised in the
pleaded ground one, namely how the Appellant would behave on return.  As I
have already recorded, the Judge's conclusion in this regard is that the
Appellant would conduct any relationships discreetly ([21]).

The Appellant's pleaded ground can be summarised as follows.  First, the
conclusion that the Appellant would conduct himself discreetly was not open
to the Judge on the evidence (as set out at [4] of the grounds).  Second,
that because there is a risk of prosecution, there is a risk of
persecution.  Third, the Judge has failed to consider whether the
Appellant's behaviour would arise because of a fear of persecution. Fourth,
because the Appellant would have to modify his behaviour, the appeal should
have been allowed.

The Judge's findings on this issue appear at [20] and [21] of the Decision
as follows:

         "20. The second aspect of the HJ test is a group of questions for
         which the focus is what will happen in [the Appellant's] country of
         origin: 'the question is how each applicant, looked at
         individually, will conduct himself if returned and how others will
         react to what he does'.  [The Appellant's] actions in the UK, where
         he accepts he has lived with freedom are a guide as to how he will
         conduct himself if returned.  He has not established that he has
         had any same sex relationship in the ten years he has resided here.
          The only relationship about which there is any evidence is with a
         woman.  He claims that he was compelled into a relationship with
         her to satisfy his family but the evidence does not establish that
         he was acting under any compulsion in 2015 other than the pressure
         he imposed on himself of wanting to have some basis on which to
         make a further application for leave to remain in the UK.

         21.  The reasons for the breakdown of that relationship are also
         not established.  [The Appellant] claims it ended in acrimonious
         circumstances but that does not establish the cause of the
         acrimony.  It is significant that [the Appellant] has provided no
         evidence of any same-sex relationship prior to the date of the
         refusal on 17th November 2018.  The evidence that he has provided
         to demonstrate that he is gay post-dates that event.  That evidence
         (contained in an addendum bundle) amounts to receipts for drinks in
         bars which he says are 'gay bars'.  Leaving to one side that buying
         a drink in a gay bar does not establish that a person is gay, the
         dates of the receipts are significant.  They are dated in December
         2018 (shortly before his first listed appeal) and in July 2019
         (shortly before his adjourned appeal hearing).  These have been
         obtained to use as evidence but are not evidence of his habitual
         behaviour, even habitual behaviour in the six months between listed
         appeal hearings.  The ticket and evidence of his attendance at a
         'Pride' event in July 2019 also highlights that he did not attend
         any similar events in any of the other nine years he has lived in
         the UK.  On return to Bangladesh, if [the Appellant] chooses to
         have a partner at all he will conduct the relationship discreetly
         simply for social or cultural reasons, not out of a fear of
         persecution."

That reasoning has to be read alongside what the Judge says about the
Appellant's claim to have been in a relationship with a man whilst in
Bangladesh.  He deals with this at [26] of the Decision as follows:

         "[The Appellant's] description of his relationship with [M] is not
         easy to reconcile with his fear of persecution on return.  By his
         own account, [the Appellant] was able to conduct a 'happy
         relationship' with [M] for 8 years between 2000 and 2008.  When
         they were discovered by a mob who attacked them [the Appellant] was
         stabbed with sharp objects and still carries 'horrible scars'.  Yet
         he did not provide any evidence of these scars which are material
         evidence which would have been at his disposal.  The 'punishment'
         of the religious community was simply to ask him to leave the
         village.  It is not clear that he did, since his witness statement
         refers to his contact with his family immediately afterwards and
         being scared to go outside.  In any event he resided in Bangladesh
         for between one and two years afterwards without any further
         problems.  Again, the evidence that he was in a relationship which
         was discovered is finely balanced but must be resolved in his
         favour to the low standard giving him the benefit of the doubt.
         That evidence does not establish that [the Appellant] will be at
         risk from anybody who is aware of his sexuality in his home area:
         if they wished to persecute him they would have taken the
         opportunity in 2008 or 2009.  There is no risk to [the Appellant]
         from his family or the wider community in his home area."

The foregoing passage deals mainly with the issue of risk from others but
also demonstrates that the Appellant was able to conduct a relationship
with another man as he chose for a lengthy period of eight years whilst in
Bangladesh.  That evidence and the way in which the Appellant has conducted
himself whilst in the UK (where he cannot claim to have any fear of
persecution) is a clear indicator of how he would behave on return.

Mr Khan submitted that the conclusion reached was not open to the Judge
based on what the Appellant himself says in his witness statement dated 15
July 2019 at [51] to [53] ([AB/60]) as follows:

         "51. The Respondent does not give due consideration to my entire
         circumstance and the persecution I will face in Bangladesh.  I
         could not relocate in Bangladesh as Bangladesh is predominantly an
         Islamic country.  Homophobia is inherently built into the
         Bangladeshi Society.  It is illegal to be Homosexual and is a
         criminal offence according Bangladeshi Laws.  The respondent has
         not adequately considered the risk of my return in light of recent
         up rise and incidents against homosexual people back in my country
         of origin.

         52.  Under the circumstances, I am scared to return to my native
         country due to my sexuality.  I have no choice but to claim for
         Asylum in the United Kingdom.  Being homosexual is a punishable
         crime in my country of origin, Bangladesh.  Being gay was not a
         choice I made; it was a part of me that I couldn't help.  Should I
         return to Bangladesh, my family would never be welcome me.  I fear
         being killed by religious extremists and I know I will not be safe
         at all throughout Bangladesh.  As being gay is considered immoral
         and unacceptable there.  There is a chance; I will also be tortured
         by my own family as they will never accept my homosexuality.
         Suppressing my sexuality will deprive me of my freedom and my life
         would be purposeless.

         53.  Furthermore, the current social and political regime will
         offer no protection due to my sexual orientation.  In addition, the
         recent rise of Islamic fundamentalism has been very hostile to
         homosexual people in Bangladesh.  Notably, in year 2016, an editor
         (Xulhas) and his partner, of an only Bangladeshi gay magazine
         called Roopban were brutally murdered by a machete attack. The
         homosexual community in general hide away because of growing
         religious extremism..."

Insofar as that evidence deals with the Appellant's attitude to his own
sexuality at all (as compared with the general position for homosexuals in
Bangladesh), the high point is the last sentence of [52].  However, that
says only that suppression of his sexuality would deprive him of freedom.
As I have already noted, the extent to which he is open about his sexuality
has to be considered on the evidence.  The Judge was entitled to explore
what that evidence shows rather than accepting the Appellant's assertion
that he would be subject to any suppression of the way in which he chooses
to conduct himself in that regard.

The Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that the Appellant would
conduct himself discreetly in Bangladesh and would do so because that is
the way in which he chooses to behave and not because he is compelled to do
so due to any fear of persecution.

I have already cited [26] of the Decision which deals with the isolated
attack which the Appellant claims to have suffered twelve years ago whilst
in Bangladesh.  He claims to fear both Islamic extremists and his family on
return.  The Judge dealt with the risk from those sources at [23] to [25]
of the Decision as follows:

         "23. In the light of all those findings the answers to the
         questions about how the appellant will conduct himself and what his
         situation will be in Bangladesh are that if he chooses to have a
         partner at all he will conduct the relationship discreetly simply
         for social and cultural reasons, not out of a fear of persecution.
         The evidence establishes that he has always lived discreetly in
         Bangladesh and the UK: he will not have to modify his behaviour in
         any significant way.  If he wishes to live less discreetly, he
         could relocate to Dhaka where there are LGBT support groups and
         where he will have the ability to live more openly than in other
         areas of Bangladesh.  His family will not pursue him there because
         they took no action against him for a lengthy period of time in
         2009.  His evidence was that people from his village did not even
         go to Sylhet city.

         24.  The 'final and conclusive question is: does he have a well-
         founded fear that he will be persecuted?'  The risk from Islamic
         extremists is not made out on the evidence provided for the appeal.
          The brutal attack on two gay activists in 2016, one of whom 'had
         founded a gay magazine for the country's gay and lesbian community'
         is an example of an attack by extremists on a gay activist.  This
         does not establish that [the Appellant] is at the same risk simply
         on account of being a gay man.  Page 131 of the appellant's bundle
         is entitled 'an analysis of homosexuality in Bangladesh' published
         in 2009.  It states that the country: 'is perceived to be one of
         the few Islamic states which exercises considerable tolerance
         towards the issue of homosexuality'.  The article analysis [sic]
         the tension between the government which almost never enforces the
         criminal law for homosexual activity but does not take positive
         action to change societal attitudes towards LGBT rights.  This
         means that homosexual relationships are concealed.  The article at
         page 138 of the appellant's bundle concludes that: 'More and more
         groups are advocating for the rights of the LGBT community in
         Bangladesh.  Religious as well as social groups are part of this
         movement. While the country is still relatively behind compared to
         countries such as the US on LGBT rights, people are making certain
         strides'.  The article refers to an online forum which arranges
         events for gay men to meet and socialize.  [The Appellant] may not
         be able to do everything there that he could do openly in the UK,
         but that is 'not the test'.

         25.  [The Appellant's] stated fear is also based in part on a fear
         of his family.  His witness statement sets out that 'there is a
         chance I will also be tortured by my own family as they will never
         accept my homosexuality'.  This is not established to the low
         standard.  On his account his family have known that he was gay
         since sometime in 2008 after he was attacked by a group of people
         and given an ultimatum to leave the area or face death by the
         religious elders in the village.  Despite this level of social
         opprobrium, and [the Appellant] claiming that 'in our culture
         people would kill if their family was dishonoured' he was able to
         continue to have the support of his family for somewhere between
         the next eleven months and the next two years depending on when in
         2008 the alleged attack took place.  He claims that his family were
         'hostile and angry' but all it took was for him to say that he
         would not cause them humiliation and they became helpful to him,
         encouraging him to become financially independent by helping him
         with money to invest in shares.  When that did not produce
         significant returns they assist him in 'sending him overseas to
         pursue higher education'.  These are not the actions of family
         members who feel dishonoured, of people who will harm their son or
         brother when he returns.  If they had any intention of harming [the
         Appellant] they would have done so before 2009."

As that passage shows, the Judge did not accept that there was any general
risk to the Appellant from the section of the population he claimed to fear
nor any specific threat from his family.  The latter finding is based on
the evidence in the Appellant's case.  The former is, I accept to be
considered against the background evidence.  In that regard, I was taken by
Mr Khan to the following articles appearing within the background evidence
at [AB/129-176] as follows

A survey of LGBT individuals conducted in 2014 ([AB/144]) - the passage
relied upon reads:

         "The survey revealed that 59% of respondents never faced
         discrimination due to their sexual orientation.  However more than
         50% say they live in constant fear of their sexual orientation
         being discovered.  Some 25.8% of respondents said they did face
         discrimination and a higher percentage said they either had no
         knowledge of or no access to legal support."

    That passage has to be read in the context of this case where the Judge
    found that the Appellant would choose to live discreetly in any event.
    Further, discrimination does not necessarily amount to persecution
    unless it reaches the requisite threshold.  In any event, the survey
    dates back to 2014.

An article entitled "Nowhere to turn for Bangladesh's LGBT" ([AB/148]). The
article dates back to 2016 and in any event deals with the murder of two
gay activists leading to their death (to which the Appellant also refers in
his statement as set out at [21] above).  That is the event recorded at
[24] of the Decision but, as the Judge there points out, the Appellant is
not within that category. Similarly, the article at [AB/151] concerns the
murder of "secular bloggers and liberal activists".  The Appellant does not
claim to actively promote homosexuality even in the UK.

At [AB/150] is an article dealing with the law criminalising homosexual
acts in Bangladesh.  However, that only records the existence of that law
and not its use.  The Judge recognised that this law exists at [22] of the
Decision but there noted that "there has been no case of legal proceedings
resulting in any punishment under Section 377 of the Penal Code".  I was
not taken to any article which shows that this conclusion is wrong in fact.

The Appellant has failed to show that the Judge has wrongly analysed the
risk on return based on the background material.  Paragraph [24] of the
Decision is an accurate summary of what that evidence shows about the
general risk.   The findings at [25] of the Decision were open to the Judge
on the evidence about the specific risk.

It follows from the foregoing that the Judge was entitled to find that the
Appellant would not be at risk based on an analysis of the Appellant's case
and evidence looked at against the background of the law as stated in HJ
(Iran).  The Appellant would behave discreetly on return as he has in the
UK.  His family do not pose a threat and he does not fall within the
category of gay activists who might be at risk from religious extremists
generally as he is not open about his sexuality and would not actively
promote it.

I began this discussion with consideration of Mr Khan's oral submissions
regarding the sufficiency of protection of the Bangladeshi authorities
against a risk arising to a gay man in Bangladesh.  As I have already
noted, this did not form part of the pleaded grounds.  In any event, for
the foregoing reasons, there is no error on the part of the Judge because
he expressly found that the Appellant would not be at risk on return to
Bangladesh, in part because he would conduct himself discreetly, not due to
any fear of harm but because that is the way he chooses to (including in
the UK) and in part because the case-specific and background evidence does
not demonstrate that he is at risk on this account.  For that reason,
sufficiency of protection does not arise.  The Judge did not err by failing
to consider it as a separate issue.

Mr Khan also sought to challenge the Judge's finding that the Appellant
could safely relocate to Dhaka rather than go to live in his home village.
He drew my attention to   an article dating back to 2017 entitled "A
Deliberate Attempt to Silence the LGBT Community in Bangladesh" at
[AB/161].  That refers to arrests of those attending a gathering of young
gay men on "the outskirts of Dhaka".  That records that "[w]hile it has
been widely circulated that they have been arrested because they were found
with illegal drugs and condoms - and not charged with homosexuality - an
officer has informed that AFP that these men were arrested because they
were homosexuals".

The Judge touched upon internal relocation at [23] of the Decision and
reached the following conclusion at [27] of the Decision as follows:

         "In the alternative, [the Appellant] has already successfully
         utilised internal relocation.  One version of his evidence was that
         after this event in 2008 he moved to the city of Sylhet.  He could
         therefore return there without undue hardship.  In the alternative
         he could choose to relocate to Dhaka, which is described as having
         areas which are a supportive environment for the LGBT movement."

Leaving aside that, yet again, this was not part of the pleaded grounds
challenging the Decision, there are three answers to this point.  First,
the source of the statement in the article is not clear and, in any event,
the article dates back nearly three years.  Second, it relates to an
isolated incident and does not show that the situation is not better in
Dhaka (and see [8.7.2] to [8.7.3] of the CPIN at [AB/206-7]).  Whilst I
appreciate that the position is certainly not as liberal as in the UK,
there is at least some support for the LGBT community there.  Third, and
most importantly, though, the issue of internal relocation only arises if
the Judge's conclusion as to risk in the Appellant's home area was flawed.
The Judge found that there was no such risk (see [25] and [26] of the
Decision as recorded above at [19] and [24] respectively).  The finding in
relation to internal relocation is expressed in the alternative.  Since  I
have concluded that the Judge did not err in law in relation to the prior
issues of discretion and risk, it follows that, even if there were an error
in relation to internal relocation (which I am satisfied there is not), it
would not make any material difference.

For those reasons, the Appellant has failed to show that there is any error
of law in relation to the Judge's reasoning or findings in relation to the
dismissal of the appeal on protection grounds.

Ground Two

Mr Khan did not make any submissions on ground two but nor did he abandon
it and I therefore deal with that ground as pleaded.  The Appellant says
that the Judge failed to deal with paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
Rules ("the Rules") and in particular paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which
provides for leave to remain to be granted where "there would be very
significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into" Bangladesh.  He
also says that the Judge has failed to consider the Appellant's case based
on his private life under Article 8 ECHR generally and in particular his
sexuality.

I note firstly that there is nothing to suggest that the Appellant's
advocate before Judge Ferguson put forward any positive case based on
Article 8 (see record of submissions at [13] of the Decision).  However,
and in any event, the Judge dealt with this at [29] and [30] of the
Decision as follows:

         "29. Regarding Article 8, there was no evidence of any family life
         in the UK, or any particular private life beyond the length of time
         he had lived here.  [The Appellant] does not have any family life
         which might give him a basis to remain in the UK under Appendix FM.
          His private life is to be considered under paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi).  His claim under this paragraph is based on his
         assertion that there are very significant obstacles for him to be
         able to relocate to Bangladesh for the reasons connected to his
         asylum claim.  However, those circumstances have not been
         established to be at real risk of happening and so do not amount to
         very significant obstacles.

         30   Although he has lived in the UK since 2009 he previously lived
         in Bangladesh for 28 years.  The evidence did not show very
         significant obstacles to his reintegration.  In assessing the
         proportionality of the decision outside the Immigration Rules at
         stage 5 of the Razgar test, regard has to be given to section 19 of
         the Immigration Act 2014 which sets out a statutory duty on the
         Tribunal to have regard in all cases, to the considerations listed
         in section 117B.  The first is that the maintenance of effective
         immigration control is in the public interest.  No other section is
         of particular assistance to the appellant's claim: he speaks some
         English, but is not financially independent.  The Act requires that
         little weight is given to his private life because it was
         established at a time when he knew his status in the UK was
         precarious.  [The Appellant] did not provide any evidence to show
         he had any significant private life in the UK on which greater
         weight could be placed.  Nothing in the evidence provided by the
         appellant outweighs the public interest in the maintenance of
         effective immigration control.  His removal will not be a
         disproportionate breach of his Article 8 rights."

That passage deals with the claim both under and outside the Rules.
Insofar as the Appellant relies on the Respondent's guidance at [15] of the
Decision (which guidance is not included in the Appellant's bundle), the
elements to be considered are looked at by the Judge under the heading of
the protection claim.  As such, as the Judge observed, the "very
significant obstacles" factors are already considered and rejected.

There is no justification or authority cited for the proposition at [17] of
the grounds that "[t]he Appellant's private life outside of the rules is
likely to be given significant weight".  That is contrary to Section 117B
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and case-law.  The Appellant's
presence in the UK has been precarious and more recently unlawful.  Indeed,
the citation which follows in the grounds does not support the assertion
made.  It simply records that "a private life developed or established
during periods of unlawful or precarious residence might conceivably
qualify to be accorded more than little weight".  As Judge Ferguson pointed
out, though, it is for the Appellant to show the strength and intensity of
the private life which he has formed and the interference with that private
life occasioned by removal.

The Judge did not therefore err in his consideration of the Appellant's
Article 8 claim and was entitled to reject that claim for the reasons he
gives.  Ground two is not made out.

CONCLUSION

For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the grounds do not disclose
any material error of law in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision
with the consequence that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson promulgated on 17 October 2019.  I
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.


Signed   [pic]             Date: 2 April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                       APPENDIX: ADJOURNMENT DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13572/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |21 January 2020                      |
|On Thursday 16 January 2020          |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. However, as this  is
an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTION

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    GJ Ferguson promulgated on 17 October 2019  dismissing  his  appeal  on
    protection and human rights grounds ("the Decision").

 2.  Ground  one  of  the  Appellant's  grounds  challenges  the   Decision
    dismissing the protection appeal.  It is asserted that  the  Judge  has
    misapplied HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2010]  UKSC  31  in  reaching  his  conclusions.   The  second  ground
    challenges the Decision dismissing the human rights appeal on the basis
    that it  is  said  that  the  Appellant  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles in integrating in Bangladesh and that his private life in the
    UK is deserving of more than just little weight.

 3. Permission to appeal was, on the  face  of  the  decision,  granted  by
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure on 29 November 2019.   The
    following reasons were given so far as relevant:

         "... 3. The appellant had come to the United Kingdom as  a  student
         in November 2009 but had ceased studying by  October  2014  at  the
         latest.  He had made several applications after that date to remain
         on the basis of human rights which were refused.  It was not  until
         May 2017 that he sought to claim international protection.

         4.   In paragraph 22 the  judge  highlights  that  there  are  LGBT
         groups in Bangladesh.  Those groups have reported  upon  harassment
         and discrimination but they do provide a supportive environment for
         LGBT people.  The judge has gone on to indicate that the  appellant
         would as he had done in the past live discreetly.   The  judge  had
         also considered the background information in which it was  pointed
         out that the provisions of the penal code were not enforced against
         LGBT individuals.  The judge had noted that the  appellant  claimed
         in the past to have moved out of his home village and had relocated
         thereby avoiding harassment and discrimination.

         5.   The  judge  has  properly  considered  the  evidence  and  was
         entitled to conclude that the appellant would act discreetly as  he
         had done in the past not by reason of the risk of persecution.  The
         judge did consider the background evidence and on the basis  of  it
         was entitled to conclude that the appellant would not be at risk in
         such circumstances.

         6.   In paragraph 29 the judge noted that there was no family  life
         and that the only evidence of private life was the length  of  time
         the appellant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  did
         consider whether there were any very significant obstacles  and  on
         the basis of the findings of fact found that there was not.

         7.   The judge has considered all of the evidence and  given  valid
         reasons for the conclusions reached.  There is no arguable error of
         law.  For the reasons set out the application is refused."

 4. As is apparent from the final paragraph, and indeed the  reasons  as  a
    whole, the Judge did not intend to  grant  permission  to  appeal.   He
    intended to refuse  it.   However,  the  decision  as  stated  is  that
    permission is granted.  What then is the effect of that decision?

 5. The Respondent by her rule 24 reply invites  me  to  agree  with  Judge
    McClure's assessment of the Decision on the basis  that  the  grant  of
    permission was an administrative slip.  I accept that the  grant  is  a
    typographical error but it does not resolve the issue  of  how  I  must
    treat the decision apparently granting permission.

 6. The Appellant's representatives invited the Tribunal  to  consider  the
    permission application  either  on  the  basis  of  it  being  a  valid
    permission grant or submitting that I should set it aside and remit the
    application for permission for a properly formulated  decision  on  the
    application for permission to appeal.  Their "rule 24"  reply  dated  7
    January 2020 invites me to consider  the  effect  of  the  grant  as  a
    preliminary issue as it is said that the Appellant  is  vulnerable  and
    impecunious and should  not  be  forced  to  pay  for  a  barrister  to
    represent him if the Tribunal is not intending to consider the  grounds
    substantively.

 7. In response to a communication on 13 January 2020 querying the approach
    of  the  Tribunal  to  the  permission  grant,  the  attention  of  the
    Appellant's representatives was drawn by a Tribunal lawyer to the cases
    of Isufaj (PTA decisions/reasons; EEA  reg.  37  appeals)  [2019]  UKUT
    00283 (IAC) ("Isufaj")  and  Safi  and  others  (permission  to  appeal
    decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC).  Although the lawyer  properly  did
    not offer advice, she informed the representatives that  the  Appellant
    should be prepared to argue the grounds substantively  at  the  hearing
    before me.  She also booked an interpreter in response to their request
    for one on the basis that it was said that the Appellant  would  be  in
    person.

 8. In relation to the effect of the permission grant, the  guidance  given
    in Isufaj is as follows:

         "(1) Judges deciding applications for permission to  appeal  should
         ensure  that,  as  a  general  matter,   there   is   no   apparent
         contradiction between the decision on the application and  what  is
         said in the 'reasons for decision' section  of  the  document  that
         records the decision and the reasons for it.  As was said  in  Safi
         and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388  (IAC),
         a decision on a permission application must  be  capable  of  being
         understood by the Tribunal's administrative staff, the parties  and
         by the court or tribunal to which the appeal lies.  In the event of
         such an apparent contradiction or other  uncertainty,  the  parties
         can expect the Upper Tribunal to treat the decision as the  crucial
         element."

 9. Although Isufaj is not on all fours with this case and it might be said
    that the permission to appeal decision was not unclear particularly  in
    light of the final sentence of the reasons, it  was  sent  out  by  the
    Tribunal as a permission grant with directions  indicating  that  there
    would be an appeal hearing in this Tribunal.  Accordingly, if  it  were
    now not treated as a permission grant, there would be prejudice to  the
    Appellant  who  might  otherwise  have  renewed  his  application   for
    permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal.   Accordingly,  I  follow  the
    guidance there given with the  consequence  that  I  treat  the  appeal
    before me as being one to consider whether there is an error of law  in
    the Decision, permission having been granted.

10. A problem however arose in proceeding with a  hearing.   The  Appellant
    appeared in person assisted by an interpreter.  The Appellant was  able
    to communicate via the interpreter.  However, he explained that he  was
    confused about the hearing.   He  had  received  contradictory  advice,
    first telling him that he need not attend and then telling him that  he
    should.   He indicated in a letter handed to me and signed by him  that
    he had not wished to pay for  a  barrister  to  attend  until  he  knew
    whether the hearing would proceed substantively.  He told me  that  the
    information given to his representatives that he should be prepared  to
    argue the grounds substantively had not been passed on to him.  He  was
    not prepared to argue the grounds substantively.

11. Although as Mr Tufan pointed out, if the grounds are indeed as weak  as
    Judge McClure considered to be  the  case,  it  might  not  be  in  the
    Appellant's best interests to adjourn to pay for a barrister to attend,
    the  Appellant  himself  indicated  that  he  wished  to   incur   that
    expenditure.  I made plain that I had not pre-judged the outcome of the
    appeal but asked him to note Judge McClure's comments when  considering
    his position.  He indicated nonetheless that he wished  to  be  legally
    represented.

12. Mr Tufan did not oppose the adjournment sought.

13. It is not clear to me why  the  Appellant's  representatives  took  one
    month from the sending of the notice of hearing (12 December 2019)  and
    over one month from the sending of the permission grant and  directions
    (5 December 2019) to query the terms of the grant of permission nor why
    they had not properly advised the Appellant  following  the  Tribunal's
    communication on 14 January 2020 nor why they did not see fit to advise
    him to be legally represented in  light  of  the  indication  that  the
    Appellant should  be  prepared  to  argue  the  grounds  substantively.
    However, I accept that confusion has been caused in this  case  by  the
    Tribunal itself and it is therefore in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    allow the Appellant to be legally represented for consideration of  the
    grounds substantively if that is his wish.  I accept that  there  is  a
    big difference between arguing the effects of an  administrative  error
    and a legal one and it would be unfair to proceed where  the  Appellant
    was not properly prepared to do so.

14. For those reasons, I granted the adjournment request and indicated that
    the appeal would be relisted on the first available date after 28  days
    (13  February  2020)  to  give  the  Appellant  time  to   seek   legal
    representation at the next hearing.

DIRECTION

The appeal will be listed before me for  a  resumed  hearing  on  the  first
available date after Thursday 13 February 2020 with a time estimate  of  1.5
hours.


Signed            [pic]         Dated: 16 January 2020

     Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

