
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/13002/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2020                  |On 16 June 2020                      |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Dayib [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Radford, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Secretary of State appeals with permission against a decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated on 6 November 2019 allowing the
respondent's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse
a human rights claim consequent upon a decision to make a deportation order
against him which in turn was precipitated by the index offence, causing
grievous bodily harm, for which he was convicted and sentenced to six
years' imprisonment.  That was subsequent to an earlier appeal against a
deportation order which had been allowed, that order being made on account
of the respondent having amassed 23 convictions for 36 offences.

The respondent's case is primarily, as set out in the decision, that his
deportation to Somalia would be in breach of the United Kingdom's
obligations pursuant to Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  This is
because, it is said, he has suffered from serious mental illness,
particularly, complex post-traumatic stress disorder, and schizophrenia,
which appears to have been diagnosed at some point when he was in prison.
This resulted in the prescription of antipsychotic and antidepressant
medication and his referral on release to specialist treatment within the
community.  He appears also to have been referred to the Traumatic Stress
Clinic.  The medication which he receives is set out in the report of Dr
Balasubramaniam and includes quetiapine, which is prescribed for
schizophrenia, as well as other drugs, particularly mirtazapine, diazepam
and zopiclone.

The Secretary of State's case as set out in the refusal letter focuses
primarily on the respondent not being at risk in his home area, in this
case Somaliland, the respondent having originated from Hargeisa.  The
Secretary of State rejected the protection claim, concluding that he would
not be at risk at any time spent in Mogadishu awaiting a connecting flight
were that the case, that he could travel directly to Somaliland and that
there was no reason why he would be at risk as a result of what had
happened to him in Somalia prior to his departure, noting that the
respondent was a member of the Isaaq clan, who are the primary inhabitants
of Somaliland.

The Secretary of State then went on to consider Article 8, concluding that
in light of the respondent's criminal behaving he did not meet any of the
exceptions set out in the Immigration Rules; that there were in fact no
very compelling circumstances in this case; and, with respect to Articles 2
and 3 that although he claimed to have suffered from mental health issues
he had failed to provide any medical evidence in support of his claim.

The situation had, however, changed when the appeal came before Judge Ross.
 By this point there were medical reports including an independent
psychiatric report, a letter from the respondent's mental health social
worker in Camden as well as extensive medical records from the general
practitioner.  I shall turn to these in due course but it is sufficient to
note that the diagnosis of complex posttraumatic stress disorder,  the
diagnosis of schizophrenia are mentioned in the letter from Camden and
Islington NHS and that the long-term prescription for antipsychotics were
referred to in the report of Dr Balasubramanian, and .  It is also apparent
from the notes from the GP at page 65 that the respondent has seen
psychiatrists.  It is also evident that the diagnosis of paranoid
schizophrenia was made certainly by 10 August 2017.  In addition to the
medical evidence the judge had before him a significant amount of material
regarding the position of the mentally ill in Somalia.  I will turn to that
in detail in due course.

The judge noted this evidence and the submissions from the respondent's
representative that the evidence shows that the mentally ill in Somalia are
contained by the use of chains both in rural and urban areas and that it
was common both in Somaliland and Puntland where people were chained for in
excess of six months.  The judge then went on to conclude that:

it was likely that due to the nature of the respondent's mental health
conditions he would be identified as a mentally ill person in Somalia, be
stigmatised and would not receive proper care;

the lack of acceptable care was not determinative, what being required are
substantial grounds for believing that the respondent, although not at
imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk on account of the absence of
appropriate treatment or the lack of access to such treatment of being
exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his/her state of
health, resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction in
life expectancy;

the country evidence in relation to Somalia is such that there is a lack of
access to treatment for mental ill health and that generally people who
suffer from mental ill health are at real risk of suffering inhuman or
degrading treatment.

The judge then went on to allow the appeal on the basis that the Article 3
threshold had been met and subsequently to allow the appeal on Article 8
grounds.  It is of note in passing that the judge had upheld the Section 72
certificate.  There is no challenge to that.

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal against the decision
with respect of Article 3 on two principal grounds:

          i) the judge misdirected himself in law on a material matter in
             that he had failed to apply the correct test of N v the
             Secretary of State and that he had wrongly relied at paragraph
             40 on the decision in Paposhvili v Belgium in the light of the
             Court of Appeal having held in AM (Zimbabwe) confirming that N
             v the Secretary of State is still binding precedent, it being
             averred also that Article 3 would only prevent removal of
             someone with a naturally occurring illness to a country with
             inferior facilities for treatment in deathbed cases, "in the
             appellant's case where he suffers from PTSD, depression and
             schizophrenia, there is no such prognosis to suggest that this
             would be a deathbed case";

         ii) the respondent could not succeed on the basis of Paposhvili
             and had found that there was a lack of access to treatment for
             mental health at paragraph 41 that the judge had failed to
             undertake in reaching that conclusion any assessment on the
             evidence with respect to the three elements identified in
             Paposhvili, it being said that glossing over the test without
             properly applying it to the facts is insufficient.

A third ground is parasitic on the first two as it submits that the Article
8 findings are defective in that they rely on the findings pursuant to
Article 3.

At the outset of the hearing Ms Cunha for the Secretary of State sought
permission to amend the grounds of appeal and to seek the admission of a
witness statement from the Presenting Officer who had appeared below.  In
essence, although the ground was not put to me in any written form and was
not made in any formal, nor on notice, permission was sought to permit the
Secretary of State ought to be allowed permission to challenge the finding
that Article 3 would be breached in paradigm ill-treatment grounds on the
basis that there had been a failure to make proper findings of fact as to
the extent to which family could assist the respondent on return to
Somalia, it  being said that they had returned there in the past to assist
an ill relative and that they would be able to assist in providing adequate
mental health which would in effect result in him not being identified as
mentally ill, and  appropriate medication being available such that he
would remain symptom-free as he is relatively symptom-free in the United
Kingdom given support from his family.

I am not satisfied that it was appropriate or in the interests of justice
to permit at this stage of the proceedings an amendment to the grounds of
appeal.  The Secretary of State did not make the application on proper
notice and no proper reason appears to have been given as to why this was
so. This is not a new issue as the averred defect  must have been apparent
from the decision being received by the Secretary of State, yet did not
form part of the grounds or the renewed grounds. Further, it is difficult
to discern that the grounds have merit.  The witness statement records only
that one of the respondent's witnesses in cross-examination informed the
Tribunal she had visited Somaliland with her mother and stayed for
approximately three months to care for her grandmother.  The evidence
showed that the family had travelled to Somaliland on their British
passports. It does not record that any of the points that the Secretary of
State now wishes to rely upon as points the judge did not address were in
fact put to him.

It is thus difficult to construct from Ms Cunha's submissions that any
arguable error of law is disclosed  If the Secretary of State's case had
been that the family could assist the respondent this would need to have
been made as a submission to the judge.  There is no indication that that
was the case.  There is no indication that it was put to the judge that
medication could be made available or any submissions as to the risk or
otherwise of the respondent being chained as was raised by the respondent
and is described in the material put before the judge.  Given the lack of
merit in the grounds and given the late stage at which it has been
introduced, I am not satisfied that it was in the interests of justice to
permit this ground to be raised nor for that matter for the witness
statement of Ms Godfrey to be introduced.

I turn to the grounds as pleaded.  I am satisfied that the judge did
materially err in law in his approach to N and Paposhvili insofar as it was
relevant to this case.  For reasons to which I will turn in due course I am
not satisfied that that error was material.  The judge should when
considering the scenario within N or Paposhvili, that is whether there
would be an Article 3 breach if someone did not receive proper care for his
condition, have applied N, which is binding on him.  He should not have
approached the case on the basis of Paposhvili.  The court decision of AM
(Zimbabwe) makes that clear.  The fact that that might be overturned by the
Supreme Court is beside the point.  On no basis should the judge have gone
down that route.  Ground 2, insofar as it relates to Paposhvili, is also
made out but the criticism of what the judge found at paragraph 41 is
framed entirely of a failure to apply the test in Paposhvili and, for the
reasons to which I intend to turn, that was not a material error.

It is important to stand back and reflect on what this appeal is about.  It
is, as Ms Radford submitted, about the ill-treatment that the respondent
would receive on return to Somalia, specifically in this case, Somaliland.
The case as put to the judge as set out in the skeleton argument put to the
First-tier Tribunal is that there are in this appeal  substantive grounds
for believing that the respondent, if removed faces a real risk of being
subject to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the
country of deportation.

The judge had found that there was a real risk of that occurring and I
conclude that that was a conclusion open to him.  There is substantial
evidence put before him of the ill-treatment of those who are mentally ill
in Somalia.  It is evident from the U.S. State Department Human Rights
Report which appears in the bundle at page 300, from extracts that appear
at pages 315 to 316, that

         "without a public health infrastructure few services existed to
         offer support or education for persons with mental disabilities.
         It was common for such persons to be chained to a tree or
         restrained within their homes.  Local organisations advocated for
         the rights of persons with disabilities with negligible support
         from local authorities."

Again, in the UNHCR report which appears in the bundle at page 480 it said
that containment of the mentally ill through the use of chains is a
widespread practice throughout Somalia in both urban and rural areas and
also in refugee camps.

         "Chaining people with a mental disorder is a harmful practice that
         often amounts to the violations of the human rights of the person.
         Chaining is practised for both men and women, is often an act of
         despair by family members who feel they have no other way to handle
         the problem."

The report in question also records that chaining is also widely practised
within both public and private mental health facilities in Somalia,
commonly used as a form of punishment when patients refuse to follow
orders, exhibit aggressive behaviour or try to escape.  It is also widely
practised in religious healing centres, with the use of restraints often
not monitored or recorded, and used for prolonged periods, sometimes
indefinitely.

Further, there is an article from the Channel 4 News at pages 508 to 509
which confirms that it occurs in Hargeisa and it is not unusual.  It is
also confirmed by an article from the Globe and Mail from 30 April 2018 at
pages 514 to 516.

The World Health Organization's analysis of the situation of mental health
in Somalia, which although it is from 2010 is the most recent such report
which is available,  reports that people with mental illness may be
ostracised, the fear of stigma may be even more powerful, mental illnesses
are widely addressed solely in a repressed and outmoded manner, the
mentally ill are generally chained and/or confined, that this occurs in the
North East as well as South Central Somalia. Detailed statistics at section
3.3.2 show how often this happens.  The level at which this occurs is such
that, 90% of the treated patients were treated by chaining.  The statistics
in the tables show that certainly in Hargeisa that at least 31% of people
were chained, which is the second highest of all limited facilities there
are.  Chaining, it is said, also leaves psychological scars and physical
injuries, that people are chained not only during an acute crisis but
throughout their life and that the practice leads to increased societal
stigma.

There is also limited evidence of any support by the state.  There is no
public health infrastructure and there is no indication of the state taking
any steps to prevent the chaining of people.

I consider that the judge was in light of the evidence entitled and to
which he referred, to conclude that there was evidence that people who
suffer from mental ill health such as the respondent were at real risk of
suffering inhuman or degrading treatment.  I conclude that it was open to
him given the chances of somebody being chained for an extensive if not
unknown period meet that threshold.  Even were I to have permitted the
amended to the grounds proposed by the Secretary of State's, which I have
not admitted, it is difficult to see how family would be able to prevent
this.  That would be unduly speculative, there being no indication that
there would be family in Somalia or Somaliland prepared to look after the
respondent, who could prevent him from being chained and there is little or
no evidence that appropriate medication would be available.  Still less was
there evidence that the family from the United Kingdom would be able to be
with him indefinitely to look after him.

Going back then to the case law, I consider that what was made out here and
was open to the judge to conclude was that this was a case of the type
referred to in N at paragraph 31 in the Court of Human Rights decision that
Article 3 principally applies to prevent a deportation or expulsion where
the risk of ill-treatment in the receiving country emanates from
intentionally inflicted acts of the public authorities there or from non-
state bodies when the authorities were unable to afford the applicant
appropriate protection.  That is of course the paradigm Article 3 test and
I conceded that it was made out in this case, albeit that the reasoning
from the judge could have been more detailed.

On the basis of the material the conclusion was justified.  The respondent
suffers from serious mental health problems.  He is a paranoid
schizophrenic.  The evidence records that he hears voices and has in the
past acted out on that.  He also suffers from complex posttraumatic stress
disorder.  The evidence was sufficient to show that the respondent was
consequently at risk of being chained up in Somaliland.  On that basis that
would be an inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  Whilst that
would appear to flow from non-state bodies, there being no public health
authorities, although that is less clear in the case of the hospitals in
Hargeisa, there is no evidence of any willingness to afford appropriate
protection to those in their situation.  It is evident from the material
that this is how the mentally ill are treated in Somalia.  There is no
indication of any state intervention to prevent it.

In the circumstances, the criticism raised in ground 2 is not made out
because it relates to what the Secretary of State says was an improper
approach to Paposhvili in reaching the conclusion at paragraph [41].

For these reasons I conclude that the errors of law complained about in
grounds 1 and 2 were not material.  As I have found that the judge's
decision that the respondent's deportation to Somalia would engage article
3 and thus that the appeal was properly allowed on human rights grounds.
For that reason, the findings with respect to Article 8 are irrelevant and
it follows that ground 3 is not made out.  Accordingly, I conclude that the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error
of law and I uphold it.

    Addendum

I do, however, wish to record my concern that the respondent's
representatives do not appear to have approached the issue of whether the
respondent required a litigation friend properly.  If they were concerned
that the respondent did not have capacity, then a proper application should
have been made to the First-tier Tribunal and/or to the Upper Tribunal if
there had been a material change in circumstances.  That was not done.

Perhaps as worryingly, the medical report does not set out adequately or
properly in any way the appropriate test for capacity under the Mental
Health Act 2005.  The test for capacity is in respect of a particular
matter.  That is not addressed or specified and while the report refers to
the first part of the test including that the respondent's mind is
disordered, it does not adequately explain why, by reference to section 3
(1) he is unable to make a decision, a decision which in any event is not
specified.

Given the failure to analyse in any way what decisions the respondent could
make in respect of his appeal or his understanding of what was happening,
it is difficult to see that this report could have founded a successful
application for the appointment of a litigation friend.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.


Signed                                  Date 28 February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
