
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/14069/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 June 2017                           |  On 20 June 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |MN                                                |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|           |                                                  |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|       |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT         |           |
|       |                                                       |Respondent |


Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms T. Jaber, of Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer.

                                  ANONYMITY

Given that the appellant is a child, I make an order under  r.14(1)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure
or publication of any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify him. No report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him.  This direction applies to  both  the  applicant  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings. The parties at liberty to apply to discharge  this  order
with reasons.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania whose date of birth is 1 January
    2000. He has been granted permission to appeal against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Woodcraft and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  George,  hereafter  the
    "panel")  dismissing  his  appeal  on  asylum   grounds,   humanitarian
    protection grounds and human rights grounds against a decision  of  the
    respondent of 6 December 2016 to refuse to grant him asylum.

 2. In her  response  under  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the "UT Rules"), the respondent stated  that  she
    did not oppose the appellant's application for permission to appeal and
    invited the Upper Tribunal to determine the appeal with  a  fresh  oral
    (continuance) hearing.

 3. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Duffy  accepted  that  the  panel  had
    materially erred in law for the reasons given in the grounds, that  its
    decision should be set aside in its entirety and that the appeal should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to re-make the
    decision on all issues on the merits.

 4. The grounds are well summarised by Designated Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal McCarthy at para 3 of  his  decision  granting  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal which reads:

            "The grounds of application allege that the panel erred by:  (i)
        speculating as to the ability of the appellant's maternal uncle  to
        provide financial support in Tirana, (ii)  ignoring  the  extensive
        background country information about the failure  of  the  Albanian
        police to deal effectively with domestic violence, (iii) conflating
        the "very significant obstacles to integration" test  in  paragraph
        276ADE(1)(vi) with the threshold for  ill-treatment  in  article  3
        ECHR, (iv) treating the appellant as a young adult rather than as a
        child, and (v) taking the wrong approach to the test  for  internal
        relocation."

 5. Judge McCarthy considered that all of the  grounds  were  arguable.  In
    addition, Judge McCarthy considered that it was arguable that the panel
    may have erred at para 47 when it said that it found no reason why  the
    appellant's maternal uncle could not assist the appellant in Tirana  as
    this appeared to overlook the evidence recorded by  the  panel  in  the
    same paragraph the uncle did not want the appellant to  live  with  him
    because of trouble the appellant's father might cause. I agree.

 6. I am satisfied that the panel materially erred in law for  the  reasons
    given by Judge McCarthy. I therefore set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    panel in its entirety.

 7. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

 8. In my judgement, this case  falls  within  para  7.2(b).  In  addition,
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing on the merits on  all  issues  is  the  right
    course of action. Ms Jaber agreed.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that it is set aside in its entirety.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appellant's appeal on the merits on all  issues  by
a judge other than Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Woodcraft
and Judge of the First-tier Tribunal George.



[pic]

Signed                                             Date: 20 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill



