
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/14267/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2019                           |On 10 January 2020            |
|Extempore decision                            |                              |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE GOSS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     GR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbola, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal of the Secretary of State.  In a Decision and Reasons
promulgated on 2 September 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn allowed on
human rights (Article 3) grounds an appeal brought by the claimant before
the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent before these proceedings, against a
decision of the respondent to refuse his asylum and human rights claim made
in response to a decision that the respondent took to deport him to Sri
Lanka.  We will refer to the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal as
"the claimant", and will continue to refer to the Secretary of State as the
respondent.

The claimant was born on 8 December 1974.  He arrived in this country in
2002 and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused by the Secretary of State
and his subsequent appeal against that refusal was dismissed by the
Adjudicator on 4 December 2002.  The basis of this claim was that he had
been detained as a Tamil in the years leading up to and during the initial
stages of the civil war in Sri Lanka.  He fled the persecution that he
claimed would have awaited him in that country, seeking asylum here.  The
claimant submitted another appeal, this time on human rights grounds, which
was dismissed in 2004.  The 2004 adjudicator found that the claimant's
return to Sri Lanka would not entail a breach of Articles 3 or 8 of the
European Convention on Human Rights.

The claimant committed a number of criminal offences following the refusal
of his appeal before the Adjudicator in 2004.  Initially, the offences
committed by the claimant were at the lower end of the spectrum of
severity.  In March and May 2006, he was convicted of assault and sentenced
to three months' imprisonment and 120 days' imprisonment respectively.  In
December 2006, the claimant was again convicted of assault and given a
hospital order under Section 37 of the Mental Health Act 1983.

The claimant went on to commit a far more serious criminal offence in 2010.
 He stabbed a man who was living with him at the sheltered accommodation
they shared 21 times.  The victim died.  The claimant pleaded guilty to the
offence of manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility.  He was
subject to a hospital order.

The decision of the Secretary of State to refuse the claimant's most recent
human rights and protection claim was premised primarily on section 72 of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  Under
section 72, a person is presumed to have been convicted of a particularly
serious crime and to be a danger to the community of the United Kingdom,
for the purposes of the construction of Article 33 of the Refugee
Convention, when the individual has been sentenced to a period of
imprisonment in excess of two years.  It is a rebuttable presumption.
Judge Flynn found that the claimant had not rebutted the presumption.  The
effect of having reached that finding was that section 72 required the
judge to dismiss the claimant's appeal to the extent it related to the
refusal of his asylum claim: see section 72(10).

Section 72 does not affect the separate obligation upon the First-tier
Tribunal to consider every matter raised as a ground of appeal, pursuant to
section 86(2)(a) of the 2002 Act.  See Essa (Revocation of protection
status appeals) [2018] UKUT 00244 (IAC) at [21].  As such, it was necessary
for the judge to make substantive findings of fact on the claimant's asylum
claim.    The judge rightly proceeded to analyse the claimant's claim under
relating to the likely risk he would face upon his return to Sri Lanka, in
light of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT
00319 (IAC).  The judge found that the risk profile the claimant was likely
to experience combined with his mental health conditions was such that it
was likely that he would face a real risk of cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment at the border.

The Secretary of State appeals against that finding.  She contends that the
judge failed to have proper regard to the two previous decisions of the
adjudicators which formed the starting point for the judge's analysis.

Secondly, the Secretary of State submits that the judge's application of GJ
and others was flawed.  Mr Avery contends that the judge reached findings
which were not open to her on the evidence.  At [66] of the decision the
judge said:

"It is well-established that anyone returned after a long absence from Sri
Lanka, especially someone returning from a lengthy residence in the UK,
will be interrogated by the authorities about their activities overseas;
and also that such a person cannot be expected to lie.  It is the
perception of the authorities that is the deciding factor, not the level of
activities."

Mr Avery submits that that was a finding which was made without evidence
and there was no basis for the judge to find that there was routine
questioning from those subject to enforced return from this country.

Mr Avery also relies on the account that the claimant gave to the judge
considering the appeal in 2002, stating that it was materially different
from that he advanced before Judge Flynn.  There are details provided in
the account provided by the claimant in 2002 relating to initially having
lived on a small island off the coast of Sri Lanka before moving to Tamil-
controlled areas on the mainland.  Mr Avery submits that that is an account
which was inconsistent with the account that the claimant provided to Judge
Flynn.  As such, he submits that the judge should have reached adverse
credibility findings against the claimant.  It was not open to the judge,
he submits, to find that the claimant was now an essentially credible
individual.

The judge had found at [63] of the decision that the mental health symptoms
exhibited by the claimant provided a full explanation for the discrepancies
in the evidence that he provided to the judge in 2002, which therefore
permitted Judge Flynn to depart from those findings, which otherwise formed
the starting point.  Mr Avery's submission is that a proper examination of
the decision of the Adjudicator in 2002 reveals that it was not
inconsistencies in the account provided by the claimant on that occasion
which led to the rejection of his account, it was simply broader
credibility concerns that the judge had.  Similarly, Mr Avery submits that
the account provided by the claimant to Dr Agarwal, who had provided a
report which was produced before Judge Flynn, was at odds with the account
that he had provided both in 2002 to the first judge, and on this occasion
during the appeal we are concerned with in these proceedings.

In our view, Judge Flynn reached findings of fact which were open to her on
the evidence she heard.  The suggestion before us that the account advanced
by the claimant was materially different cannot be sustained, following a
comparison of the accounts provided by the claimant on each occasion.  It
is true to say that there was additional detail and additional emphases in
the account provided by the claimant to the judge in the decision in 2002.
However, we note that at [32] of Judge Flynn's decision the following is
recorded: "In Ms Lambert's submission [on behalf of the Secretary of
State], the asylum claim was not materially different from 2002."  It seems
to us, therefore, that the position that the Secretary of State adopted
before Judge Flynn in the First-tier Tribunal was that the claimant had
advanced a narrative which was broadly similar to that which the 2002
adjudicator previously considered and dismissed.  It is surprising,
therefore, that the submissions of the Secretary of State before us have
now departed from the position that she took before the First-tier
Tribunal, when she submitted to the judge that the two claims were in
essence materially the same and, therefore, by implication the factors
which applied in the judge's analysis in 2002 which led to the dismissal of
the original appeal should apply with equal force on this occasion.  There
is no material inconsistency.

Turning to the complaints relating to the report of Dr Agarwal, we do not
consider that the explanations the claimant provided of the experiences he
claimed to have endured in Sri Lanka were so significantly at odds with
what was before Judge Flynn so as to render the judge's reliance on the
report by Dr Agarwal irrational.  We remind ourselves that the task of the
Upper Tribunal is not simply to substitute our own view in relation to the
findings of the judge below, but rather to consider whether the judge
reached findings of fact which were irrational or otherwise not open to her
on the evidence.  In relation to the claimed disparities between the 2002
narrative provided by the claimant and that which he provided before the
judge below in these proceedings, we do not find that this is a submission
which is made out.  There was additional detail in 2002.  There were no
inconsistencies.

In relation to the judge's general treatment of the 2002 and 2004
decisions, we do not accept Mr Avery's submissions that the judge
materially erred.  The judge rightly recorded that those decisions
represented the starting point for her analysis, pursuant to Devaseelan
(Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT
00702.  She then considered the developments in the evidence, and in
particular the report from Dr Agarwal and a country expert report from Dr
Smith, which she outlined in detail at [69] of the decision.  Those were
all factors which post-dated the earlier decisions of the adjudicators and
of which the first two adjudicators did not have the benefit when
considering the claimant's initial appeal in 2002 and his human rights
appeal in 2004.  It follows therefore that, having correctly directed
herself as to the import of Devaseelan in [50] of her decision, the judge
then rightly considered that any facts happening since the earlier
determination may properly be taken into account for the purposes of
departing from the starting point which had previously been adopted by
different judges.

Mr Avery submits that the judge failed to apply the country guidance case
of GJ in relation to the likely risk of the claimant at the border.  It is
true that the conclusions of GJ focussed primarily on those who are
perceived to be a significant threat to the post-conflict unitary state in
Sri Lanka.  However, country guidance cases such as this cannot cater for
every eventuality.  In particular, the headnote guidance in GJ was
addressing the case of returned asylum seekers generally, and not those
with the significant and extensive mental health difficulties experienced
by this claimant.  We have already documented how the claimant pleaded not
guilty to murder, and guilty to manslaughter, by reason of diminished
responsibility on account of his paranoid schizophrenia.  The medical
evidence demonstrates that that is a condition which has not improved, and
which continues to trouble the claimant to a very significant extent to
this day.

Dr Smith's report, which was before Judge Flynn, concluded that it was
reasonably likely that the claimant's name was a on a "stop list".  Other
than referring to the headnote of GJ in order to support his submission
that the claimant would not be sought by the authorities in Sri Lanka, Mr
Avery did not engage with the detail of Dr Smith's findings.  He did not
seek to demonstrate, for example, that Dr Smith had erred in his
conclusions, or that the judge had misread Dr Smith's conclusions in order
to support a finding which could not be sustained on the contents of the
report.  Accordingly, it was well within the range of findings open to the
judge to find that the significant mental health conditions experienced by
the claimant, combined with the likely questioning which the claimant would
be likely to face at the border (see [66] of the judge's decision), that
there was a risk that the claimant would be subject to cruel, inhumane or
degrading treatment.  The judge then proceeded to allow the appeal on
Article 3 grounds.  In our view, that was a conclusion she was entitled to
reach on the evidence before her.

For those reasons, the decision of Judge Flynn does not involve the making
of an error of law and stands.

We make a direction for anonymity in light of the risk findings of the
judge below.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Flynn did  not  involve  the
making of an error of law.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 19 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
