
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00135/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 March 2019                        |On 04 April 2019                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Stevens, Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Mr SA is a citizen of Saudi Arabia.  I shall refer to him for convenience
as the appeal. He has appealed against a decision of the SSHD (referred to
as the respondent) dated 20 October 2017 to cease his refugee status
because he claims that he continues to have a well-founded fear of
persecution for reasons relating to his religion and his imputed political
opinion.

In a decision sent on 12 February 2019, I found that the First-tier
Tribunal (FtT) made an error of law insofar as it failed to adequately
reason the conclusion that the appellant is a genuine convert from Islam to
Christianity.

The FtT made a number of other findings, including that the appellant had
voluntarily re-availed himself of the protection of Saudi Arabia when he
returned there.  I need not go into any detail about the other findings of
fact made by the FtT because both parties now accept there only one
straightforward issue in dispute: the genuineness of the appellant's
conversion to Christianity.

Issues in dispute

Mr McVeety made it clear at the beginning of the hearing that if I accept
that the appellant's conversion is genuine, the country background evidence
is such that he is at risk of persecution.  Mr McVeety also clarified that
if I accept that the Saudi Arabian authorities were aware of the various
online religious and political opinions that the appellant had articulated
then he would also be at risk of persecution for that additional reason.  I
now remake the decision in relation to those two issues.

Background

The background to this matter is lengthy and complicated but it is
helpfully set out in detail in the appellant's skeleton argument, drafted
by Mr Stevens.  I merely summarise the background here.  The appellant
converted to Christianity in 1998.  He left Saudi Arabia in 2009 and
claimed asylum in the UK.  His appeal was allowed by the Tribunal, who
found that the appellant was a genuine Christian.  That Tribunal ('the 2010
Tribunal') noted that there were three witnesses who had spent time with
the appellant and each had satisfied themselves that he was a genuine
Christian convert.  Reverend Skinner did not hesitate to baptise him.  The
2010 Tribunal accepted all three witnesses had given truthful and reliable
evidence and concluded that the appellant is a genuine convert to
Christianity and would be at risk for that reason.  As a result of this
allowed appeal, the appellant was granted refugee status valid until May
2015.

The appellant, however, travelled to Saudi Arabia because his daughter was
very ill indeed.  The appellant is said to have travelled there shortly
after obtaining his refugee status.  Whilst in Saudi Arabia he obtained a
new Saudi Arabian passport valid from 2012 to 2017.  In July 2013, some two
and a half years after leaving the United Kingdom ('UK'), the appellant
returned via various European countries and claimed asylum once more in the
UK.  The appellant explained in his interviews why he had not claimed
asylum in the other EU countries and why he had sought to lie about his
Saudi Arabian passport.  The appellant applied for settlement in April
2015, before the expiry of his refugee status.  There was various
correspondence as to whether that refugee status should cease, which
resulted in the decision that is under appeal.

As I have said, the matter then came before the FtT on 2 January 2018.
Although the FtT made a number of adverse findings, it nonetheless allowed
the appeal, having accepted the genuineness of the appellant's
Christianity.  As I have set out, I set that decision aside because of
insufficient reasoning.

Hearing

At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety accepted that there were two narrow
issues to be determined.  I have set those out above.  The appellant
adopted his witness statements and gave evidence.  He was very briefly
cross-examined by Mr McVeety.

Dr Ibrahim also adopted his witness statements.  In answer to my question
clarifying his evidence, Dr Ibrahim explained that he did not regard the
appellant to be a genuine Christian merely because he attended church and
various Christian activities but because of his behaviour, in particular
the way that he behaved when he was a regular attender of prayer meetings
on a regular basis every Tuesday since 2013.

Mr McVeety did not cross-examine Dr Ibrahim.  Mr McVeety made very brief
submissions, during which he repeated that if I accepted the appellant to
be a genuine Christian then the appeal would have to be allowed and it was
a matter for me to decide whether or not he was genuine.  Mr McVeety
clarified that even if the online activities that the appellant had
participated in whilst in the UK were not genuine, if I accepted the
country background evidence to the effect that these activities would be
monitored by the Saudi Arabian regime, then he was similarly at risk.
After hearing from Mr McVeety indicated that I did not need to hear from Mr
Stevens.  This is because I accepted that the two issues in dispute should
be resolved in the appellant's favour.  Having had the opportunity to read
all of the evidence in advance of the hearing including the evidence
provided by both witnesses, the appellant and Dr Ibrahim, together with the
evidence of online activities on the part of the appellant, and having
considered all of that evidence in the round including the evidence from
witnesses, and after hearing Mr McVeety's brief submissions, I reached the
clear view that the appeal should be allowed.  I now give my reasons for
having made that decision.

Findings

The country background material is not in any serious dispute.  It is
contained within the appellant's bundle.  It includes a U.S. State
Department Report dated 29 May 2018, dealing with international religious
freedom in Saudi Arabia.  This states that the government does not allow
the public practice of any non-Muslim religion and criminalises anyone who
challenges either directly or indirectly the religion or justice of the
King or Crown Prince, and also criminalises any attempt to cast doubt on
the fundamentals of Islam.  The report goes on to say that since 2004,
Saudi Arabia has been designated as a country of particular concern under
the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 for having engaged in or
tolerated particularly severe violations of religious freedom.

The starting point for my factual findings must be the factual findings
reached by the 2010 Tribunal, which accepted the appellant to be a genuine
convert.  Since that time, the appellant returned to Saudi Arabia, a
country where he accepts he was unable to follow his religion because of a
fear of persecution.  The fact that the appellant returned to Saudi Arabia
and voluntarily availed himself of the protection of the authorities there
by obtaining a passport tells against the genuineness of his Christianity.
However, he returned to the UK as long ago as 2013 and the evidence I have
by which to assess the genuineness of his Christianity extends from 2013 to
the present day - over five years.

I accept the appellant's own evidence that he is genuinely committed to
Christianity.  His evidence in his various statements is detailed and
consistent with that which was said in his various interviews over time.
He has explained why he made the difficult decision to return to Saudi
Arabia and why he travelled through various countries before reaching the
UK.  Those explanations have not been seriously disputed before me.

The appellant has also explained that he does not simply attend church but
is also active in other ways.  He attends weekly prayer meetings.  This has
been confirmed and corroborated by Dr Ibrahim.  He also attends Bible study
evenings.  He has provided evidence that he has been involved in leading
Bible study in Arabic with the Trinity Community Church in Rusholme.  The
Trinity Community Church has provided evidence in the past supporting his
activities with the church and there is also a printout from the Diocese of
Manchester website confirming that the appellant leads the Bible study at
the Holy Trinity Church.

Significantly, the appellant's evidence is supported by Dr Ibrahim.  Dr
Ibrahim has been the de factor leader of the appellant's Church for many
years and is in a good position to assess the genuineness of the
appellant's conversion.  He has confirmed to me, and I accept, that his
assessment of the genuineness of the appellant's Christianity is not just
based upon his attendance at church but rather on what he has seen and
witnessed himself.  He gave clear and credible evidence that the appellant
has been a regular attender of prayers on a Tuesday and his behaviour leads
him to hold no doubt whatsoever that he is genuine.

I now turn to the appellant's online activities.  These first of all
support the appellant's claim not to be a supporter of the Saudi Arabian
regime.  They include the following.  First, in the past year or so, he has
been very vocal in his criticism of the Saudi regime in videos,
particularly a video that was viewed over 227,000 times, in which he was
querying and questioning the arrest and imprisonment of a human rights
activist.  In another video, which has 39,000 views, he demanded that the
Saudi Crown Prince open a church in Saudi Arabia.  He is identifiable and
linked to these videos.  He has explained in his witness statement that his
motivation for campaigning in this way has been to try and demand rights
for his Christian brothers and sisters.  His online political activities
are therefore linked and must be seen in the context of his Christianity.
They support his claim to be a genuine Christian.

Even if I am wrong about that, in my judgment, the appellant is at risk by
reason It is for all those reasons that I find that the appellant is indeed
a genuine Christian notwithstanding his return to Saudi Arabia and of the
doubts that that may give rise to. The U.S. State Department Report dated
13 March 2019 also makes it clear that the government engages in arbitrary
or unlawful killings and is not tolerant of any religious or political
dissent. of his sur place online activities.  There can be no doubt that
the Saudi Arabian authorities take a very dim view of those activities.
The appellant's skeleton argument has referred to comprehensive evidence
that supports the proposition that serious harm will come to those who are
viewed adversely by the Saudi government either in the political or the
religious sphere and that online activities are monitored very closely, see
in particular the U.S. State Department Report from 2019 under the sections
"Arbitrary or Unlawful Interference with Privacy, Home or Correspondence"
and "Freedom of Expression".  This evidence demonstrates that information
posted online is monitored and gathered by the Saudi authorities and is
used to justify arresting, charging and convicting dissidents under trumped
up cyber-crime laws.

Conclusion

If removed to Saudi Arabia the appellant is unlikely to articulate his
Christian religion or his anti-regime political views openly.  However, the
reason he will not do so is because of a well-founded fear of persecution.
When the principles in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 are applied to my factual
findings I have no hesitation in concluding that this appellant faces a
real risk of persecution for reasons relating to his religion or imputed
political opinion.

Decision

I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer                             3 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
