
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00182/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2020                            |On 3 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YRN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Jones of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

This is an appeal by the appellant, who was the respondent before the First-
tier Tribunal, and who I will refer to as the Secretary of State.  The
respondent was the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, and to avoid
confusion, I will refer to him as the claimant.  The Secretary of State
appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa (the
"FtT"), promulgated on 9 September 2019, by which she allowed the
Claimant's appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State's decision to
revoke the Claimant's status as a refugee under the Refugee Convention
breached the UK's obligations under the same convention.

Background

The Claimant was convicted on 2 June 2008 of robbery, for which he was
sentenced to 60 months' detention in a Young Offenders Institution.  He
successfully appealed against an earlier deportation order and his appeal
was allowed on 29 September 2011.  He was subsequently granted leave to
remain as a refugee on 5 September 2012.  Following this, on 26 July 2013,
at Blackfriars Crown Court, he was convicted of conspiracy to cause
grievous bodily harm with intent and he was also convicted of applying
corrosive fluid with intent.  He was sentenced to fourteen years'
imprisonment for each offence, to run concurrently.

The first issue before the FtT in the case before her, noting the very
serious offences of which the Claimant had been convicted, was whether the
Claimant had rebutted the presumption under section 72(2) of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The presumption that the
Claimant became a 'refoulable' refugee applied as he had been convicted in
the UK and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 2 years, so it
was presumed that he had been convicted of a particularly serious crime and
remained a danger to the community of the UK.

The FtT upheld the Secretary of State's certification of the Claimant's
case under section 72.  In doing so she concluded that he remained a danger
to the community of the UK ([19]). That aspect of her decision is not the
subject of an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

The FtT noted that the section 72 certification was not an end of the
matter and she still had to consider the cessation of Claimant's status as
a refugee under the Refugee Convention, as it had been considered by the
Secretary of State in her decision. She considered whether the
circumstances in which the Claimant had been granted refugee status had
changed, specifically by reference to the Claimant's country of origin, the
Democratic Republic of Congo ('DRC'), and whether the Claimant would be at
risk on return to Kinshasa, as someone of mixed ethnicity, including Tutsi
heritage, with his family's perceived political links.

The FtT considered country evidence, in particular a report by the Canadian
Immigration and Refugee Board dated March 2013, relating to Tutsis living
in Kinshasa, which referred to a 'deep hatred' amongst Congolese people for
those of Tutsi origin.  However, the FtT noted that the report stated that
corroborating information on the treatment of Tutsis living in Kinshasa
could not be found.  The FtT went on to consider correspondence from the
UNHCR from September 2018 relating to the proposed cessation of the
Claimant's refugee status and their assertion that the situation in the DRC
had not fundamentally and durably changed to justify the application of
Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention.

The Claimant relied on the country guidance case of AB and DM (Risk
categories reviewed - Tutsis added) DRC CG [2005] UKIAT 00118, which
continued to be applicable country guidance.  The FtT concluded that she
could not be satisfied that there were clear and cogent reasons for
departing from the country guidance.  She went on to consider at paragraphs
[27] and [28] the past adverse treatment of the family (including the
Claimant's sister's abduction and disappearance and presumed death of the
Claimant's father by virtue of their ethnicity and perceived political
loyalty to the RCD, a rebel opposition group); and the fact that an earlier
Tribunal had previously concluded, in a determination of March 2011, that
the Claimant had discharged the burden of proof of having a well-founded
fear of persecution for a Convention reason.

Having assessed the evidence in the round, the FtT concluded that there was
insufficient evidence before her to suggest that there had been a change of
circumstances as relied upon by the Secretary of State which was
significant and of a non-temporary nature.  She went on to indicate that
she was not persuaded that the circumstances by which the Claimant was
recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist.  She found therefore that the
decision breached the UK's obligations under Article 1C(5) of the Refugee
Convention and that in light of this finding, Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR
were also engaged.

In the Notice of Decision at the end of the determination, the FtT noted as
follows:

"The appeal is allowed on the basis that the respondent's decision to
revoke the appellant's refugee status breaches the UK's obligations under
the Refugee Convention."

The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

The Secretary of State appealed against the decision in grounds of appeal
submitted on 22 September 2019.  Ground (1) started on the basis that
Article 1C(5) of the Refugee Convention applied; that a change of
circumstances in the DRC meant that the Claimant was no longer a refugee
and the serious criminality of the Claimant meant that the public interest
required his deportation.  Whilst the FtT had upheld the section 72
certification, the consequence of that was that the appellant was excluded
from the protection of the Refugee Convention and therefore the decision
that the respondent's decision had breached the UK's obligations under the
Refugee Convention was materially flawed.

Ground (2) asserted that the FtT had not provided adequate reasons, in
particular in relation to the lack of durable change in the DRC, noting
that there was no recent evidence of ethnic violence aimed at Tutsis or
those of mixed ethnicity in Kinshasa.  The Country Guidance case of AB and
DM was now fourteen years old and given the lack of any recent evidence of
persecution it was submitted that the FtT had not explained adequately why
there had not been a durable change of circumstances in the DRC.

Judge L S Bulpitt granted permission for this matter to proceed to a full
hearing on 11 October 2019.  He noted that it was arguable that ground (1),
namely that the Secretary of State's decision breached the UK's obligations
under the Refugee Convention, disclosed an error of law, as the provisions
of Article 33(2) on permitting refoulment were unambiguous and did not
require consideration of cessation of Refugee Convention status.  He
referred to the authority of RY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 81.  It
was also arguable that the FtT's reasoning, in particular when finding that
Articles 2 and 3 were engaged, was inadequate, especially in the light of
RY (Sri Lanka) and the need to consider the ECHR, as distinct from the
Refugee Convention.

The hearing before us

The representatives' submissions substantially changed from the beginning
of the hearing, in light of our discussions with them about the authority
of Essa (Revocation of protection status appeals) [2018] UKUT 00244.  Mr
Jones, on behalf of the Claimant, initially conceded that the FtT had erred
in considering the Claimant's refugee status, suggesting that once she had
upheld the section 72 certification, the FtT had erred in going on to
consider cessation, at [20].  The focus should instead be on Article 3
ECHR. It was unarguably open to the FtT to have concluded that Articles 2
and 3 would be breached and there was no evidence to disturb the Country
Guidance on the risk to the Claimant by reference to Article 3.

Mr Mills, on behalf of the Secretary of State, concurred with that
concession and said that once the section 72 certification was upheld, then
the FtT should cease to consider refugee status and instead focus solely on
Articles 2 and 3 in light of RY.  RY suggested that there was not a need to
go on to consider Article 1C(5) and the FtT had impermissibly gone on to do
so.  Where we ended up with was a consideration of Article 3 on the same
facts.  The burden of proof rested with the Claimant on an Article 3 case,
and instead all that was available was the fourteen year old Country
Guidance case and the absence of any new evidence which one would expect to
see, the Claimant had failed to show the risk of adverse treatment of
Tutsis.  In particular, ongoing discrimination was not sufficient to show a
risk of Article 3.  Reports had referred to people of Tutsi ethnic origin
in Kinshasa, in positions of power.

Our discussion with the representatives on the impact of 'Essa'

We discussed with the representatives whether Mr Jones' concession could
properly be made in light of Essa.   While RY indicates that the Secretary
of State is not obliged to consider whether cessation applied in a
certification case, in the Claimant's case, the Secretary of State had
considered both certification and cessation.  Was it suggested that despite
the Secretary of State having considered both, the FtT, when considering
the appeal, had erred in doing so?  It appeared to us that if the section
72 certification applied, then absent any further issue, the Claimant
became a 'refoulable' refugee. If cessation were considered and there were
durable changes, then the Claimant would cease being a refugee at all.  On
the basis of Essa, even where section 72 certification was upheld, and
where, as a result, the FtT was obliged to dismiss the appeal under section
72(10), it could go on to consider whether someone nevertheless had status
as a refugee, albeit a refoulable one, as this could have important
practical implications for the Claimant.

Having considered the implications of Essa over the lunch break, both
representatives accepted that the FtT should have considered cessation as
well as certification and Mr Jones withdrew his earlier concession.  The
FtT was right to consider whether Article 1C(5) applied.  We permitted him
to withdraw the concession and Mr Mills did not object to us doing so.

For the Secretary of State, Mr Mills accepted that the burden of proof
remained upon the Secretary of State to show that Article 1C(5) applied,
and while he was not making any formal concession, there was very limited
evidence to indicate that matters had changed since the Claimant's asylum
status was recognised in 2011.  However: (1) the FtT had failed to apply
Essa and formally dismiss the Claimant's appeal under section 72(10) of the
2002 Act; (2) even if the Secretary of State had not discharged the burden
of proof of showing a durable change within the meaning of Article 1C(5) of
the Refugee Convention, nevertheless, the burden of proof and question
under Article 3 was very different.  It was a forward consideration and the
burden of proof was on the Claimant.  It depended on the risk to the
Claimant at the date of the FtT hearing, 9 September 2019.  The lack of
evidence since the Country Guidance case some fourteen years earlier, of AB
and DM, meant that the Claimant had failed to discharge the burden.   The
FtT had conflated her view in reasoning in paragraph [28] that because the
decision breached the UK's obligations under Article 1C(5) of the Refugee
Convention, therefore, Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR were also engaged.  Mr
Mills accepted that a judge might, for similar reasons, uphold both
appeals, but nevertheless they needed to explain why.

Mr Jones reiterated that for the cessation test, the burden of proof was on
the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State had not come to the hearing
before the FtT with any evidence to demonstrate such a durable change in
the DRC.  The Secretary of State had provided the Claimant only excerpts
from the Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board Report and the Claimant's
solicitors had to research and find the remainder of the report, which
suggested ongoing discrimination.  He also referred to the letter from the
UNHCR in relation to the risks to the Claimant.  Moreover, there had been a
specific FtT determination in the Claimant's case far more recently than
the Country Guidance case, namely in 2011, which had considered the
specific risks to the Claimant in light of the adverse treatment of his
sister and family.

Discussion on error of aw

We gave an oral decision and full reasons to the parties in relation to the
error of law, which these written reasons record.  There was one specific
error in the FtT's decision, namely that she failed to formally dismiss the
Claimant's appeal under section 72(10) of the 2002 Act. Nevertheless, that
was an omission which, in the absence of any evidence or submission to the
contrary, could be easily rectified on remaking, by us formally dismissing
the Claimant's appeal.

We conclude that there was no error of law in FtT going on to consider
Article 1C(5).  While there was no concession, Mr Mills' submissions about
the absence of evidence since the 2004 Country Guidance case, and the
limited (ableit still relevant) 2013 Canadian Immigration and Refugee Board
report, undermined any assertion that the Secretary of State had discharged
the burden of showing a fundamental and durable change. In the
circumstances, we preserve the FtT's findings that it has not been shown
that there has been a fundamental and durable change in the DRC since
recognition of the Claimant's refugee status in 2011.  Article 1C(5) is not
satisfied and the Claimant remains a refugee, despite section 72 applying.


However, we did regard the FtT as erring in law in simply applying the same
conclusion on Article 1C(5) to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, without
further explanation.  We accept Mr Mills' submissions that the test and
burden is different - the burden being on the Claimant, and the risk being
forward-looking.

Decision on error of law

We allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the limited extent that the FtT
failed to dismiss the Claimant's appeal. We do so now and dismiss his
appeal under section 72(10) of the 2002 Act.

In doing so, we nevertheless confirm that there was no error of law in the
FtT's decision that the Secretary of State has not shown that Article 1C(5)
applies.  The Claimant continues to be a refugee for the purposes of the
Refugee Convention.  We preserve that finding.

We set aside the FtT's decision that the Secretary of State's decision
breached the Claimant's rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, which
needs to be considered afresh in remaking the decision.

We regard it as appropriate that we remake that decision, in light of the
narrowness of the issues.

Remaking the Decision

Mr Mills applied to adjourn the remaking hearing, on the basis that the
Secretary of State may wish to adduce evidence in relation to the risk, on
ethnic grounds, to Tutsi returnees to the DRC.  There had been a
considerable period of time since the Country Guidance case of AB and DM
and an expert report would shed some light on this.

When asked for an explanation for why such evidence had not been adduced
before the FtT and why he did not have such evidence ready for the remaking
hearing today; without any criticism of Mr Mills, he confirmed that he had
no explanation.  Further, we specifically asked him whether he had any firm
instructions on whether the Secretary of State would actually proceed to
instruct an expert, were we to adjourn the hearing, and he confirmed that
he did not.

On the Claimant's behalf, Mr Jones opposed the adjournment and instead
submitted that we should consider the remaking of the appeal on the
evidence before us.

We considered the overriding objective, which required us to deal with the
case justly and fairly.  In that regard, we considered not only whether the
Secretary of State demonstrated a good reason for adjourning the hearing,
but also whether the Secretary of State was deprived of a fair hearing and
we were conscious of the cases of SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ
1284 and Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

We concluded that it would not be in accordance with the overriding
objective to adjourn the hearing and we concluded that the Secretary of
State had not been deprived of a fair hearing.  Considering the two-stage
approach under SH (Afghanistan) and Nwaigwe, without any personal criticism
of Mr Mills, the Secretary of State had not given any explanation
whatsoever for why there had been no instruction of an expert.  Moreover,
Mr Mills could give us no reassurance that there would actually be any
definite decision to instruct such an expert, and in the circumstances, the
possibility that an expert might be instructed could be no more than
speculative.  In the circumstances, where the Secretary of State had the
opportunity on two separate occasions to instruct an expert but had not
done so and in the absence of any firm instructions to Mr Mills that an
expert would be instructed, we concluded that it would not be in the
interests of the overriding objective to adjourn the matter and we refused
the adjournment application.

The Claimant's submissions on remaking

We proceeded with the hearing.  Mr Jones relied upon the Canadian report;
the Country Guidance case of AB and DM; and crucially, the 2011 decision of
the First-tier Tribunal, in accordance with the principle of Devaseelan,
with further guidance recently given by the Court of Appeal in SSHD v BK
(Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 1358.  Judge Cooper had allowed the
Claimant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 29 September 2011, on both
asylum grounds and also by reference to Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.  Paragraph
[10.15] notes:

"While we accept that he lived without problems for three years after the
abduction which led to the dreadful experiences of his sister, we
nevertheless accept that the abduction took place, and that it took place
because of the family's perceived ethnic origin and political allegiances.
Consequently this is not a case where the appellant has merely asserted his
claim to be Tutsi or Rwandan.  We therefore find that it is reasonably
likely that the appellant would be at risk of persecution or treatment in
breach of his Article 2 or 3 rights as a person falling within this
category described in AB and DM."

There is a recitation of his conclusion at [10.17], where Judge Cooper
repeated that in light of the finding, that there were substantial grounds
for believing that the Claimant would, on return to his country, now face a
real risk of death or ill-treatment which reached the minimum level of
severity required to constitute a breach of Articles 2 and 3.

Mr Jones emphasised that this was not a case of risk merely assessed by
general conditions in the DRC, but also because of particular adverse
treatment of the Claimant's sister (her abduction) and abduction of the
Claimant's father, and in circumstances where the authority of Devaseelan
applied, that that should be the starting point.  While the burden may be
on the Claimant in the context of Articles 2 and 3, there was no reason to
depart from that starting point.

In relation to the Canadian report, it stated explicitly that it was not
intended to be definitive; that available information was scarce owing to
time constraints in which the report had been produced; and that many of
those of Tutsi ethnicity had already fled Kinshasa owing to prior conflict
and persecution.  That report further indicated at pages [16] to [18] of
the Claimant's supplementary bundle that the report did not purport to be
conclusive as to the merit of any particular claim for Refugee Convention
protection and it described the situation in the DRC as still relatively
tense.

The Secretary of State's submissions on remaking

Mr Mills reiterated the age of the Country Guidance. Whilst there was
evidence of potential discrimination and anti-Rwandan/Tutsi feeling, there
was an emphasis that each case would need to be considered on its own
merits.  Even the Canadian report had referred to Tutsis in positions of
some prominence within Kinshasa, which was not consistent with risks to
those of Tutsi origin only by virtue of their ethnicity in Kinshasa.  The
evidence was simply stale.  Whilst the evidence was specific and Mr Mills
accepted that the risks identified in 2011 had been not only general, the
risks to the Claimant could have changed with the passage of time.

Conclusions

We take the FtT's decision in 2011, to which we have already referred by
way of an excerpt, as our starting point.  We are not 'bound' by it, in the
sense that we are unable to consider wider evidence (see BK (Afghanistan))
but equally, Mr Mills does not seek to criticise the decision in any way.
We accept the submission that Judge Cooper evaluated risks not just by
general background factors, but also relating to the family's perceived
political connections, as a result of which the Claimant's sister was
abducted (she too has been granted asylum) and their father abducted, never
to be seen again.  This was an evaluation which was not simply based on the
Country Guidance case of AB and DM, but an evaluation of personal risks far
more recently, namely in 2011. While we accept the submission that for
Articles 2 and 3, the burden is on the Claimant, we accept that the 2011
determination should be our starting point.

The Secretary of State's case to the contrary is simple: the passage of
time and the absence of clear evidence either way on the risk to the
Claimant since 2011 means that he has not discharged the burden on him in
relation to Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.  We do not agree. The burden is to the
lower evidential standard. We take the 2011 decision as our starting point,
which expressly found that the Claimant's appeal succeeded on Article 2 and
3 grounds.  Judge Cooper did so not only by reference to AB and DM, but
also the personal risks to the Claimant, as a result of his family's
adverse treatment, because of the family's perceived political loyalties.
That is consistent with [39] of AB and DM which confirms that the
resentment against anybody Rwandan or perceived to be Rwandan is very high;
and that a mere assertion of risk on the basis of being a Tutsi would not
engage Articles 2 and 3; but it might do, by reference to particular
individual risks, which need to be assessed.  In the Claimant's case, the
general hostility towards those perceived as Rwandans recorded in AB and DM
is echoed in the more recent Canadian report, noting its limitations; more
importantly, there remains the individualised risk, as exemplified in the
Claimant's sister's abduction and disappearance of his father.  The passage
of time does not negate or minimise those individual risks, and there is no
reason to depart from Judge Cooper's 2011 decision that the Claimant's
removal would breach his rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

Notice of Remaking decision

The Claimant's appeal to the FtT is  remade  and  allowed  on  human  rights
grounds. His removal would breach his rights under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

Signed   J Keith                        Date 29 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   J Keith                        Date 29 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


