
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00129/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2020                 |On 14 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Attendance by or on Behalf of the Respondent

This has been a remote hearing. The form of remote hearing was video by
Skype (V). A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing. Neither
party objected to a remote hearing prior to the hearing and Mr Walker did
not express any concerns at the hearing. I did not experience any
difficulties with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The respondent (hereafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Somalia born in
January 1997.

The Secretary of State is appealing against the decision of Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal Herbert OBE ("the judge") promulgated on 13 January
2020 to allow the claimant's appeal.

Neither the claimant nor a representative on his behalf attended the
hearing, which was held remotely.

On 17 September 2020 the claimant's (former) solicitors wrote to the
Tribunal advising that they were no longer instructed.  No reason was given
and an application for an adjournment was not made.

In considering whether to proceed with the appeal in the claimant's
absence, I had regard to the overriding objective in the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases fairly and justly including,
in particular, the need, as expressed in Rule 2(2)(c), to ensure so far as
practicable that the parties are able to participate fully in the
proceedings and the need, as expressed in Rule 2(2)(e), to avoid delay so
far as compatible with the proper consideration of the issues. After
weighing these two considerations, as well as considering more broadly the
issue of whether proceeding would be fair and just, I decided to proceed
with the appeal.  I did so because it was clear that the claimant, through
his previous representatives, would have been aware of when the hearing was
scheduled to take place but no application for an adjournment was made (or
explanation for non-attendance given).  Whilst the claimant is free to
change representatives as he wishes, that does not mean that the hearing
should not proceed as scheduled in the absence of an application, or
request supported by reasons, for an adjournment.

Claimant's Background and the Respondent's Decision of 18 June 2018

The claimant entered the UK in 2003 with his mother and four siblings. In
2009 they were granted asylum.

In 2008 the claimant was convicted of robbery and in 2013 he was convicted
of conspiracy to sell heroin and crack cocaine and sentenced to ten years'
imprisonment.

In 2017 the claimant was sent notice of a decision to deport him and
notification of an intention to revoke his refugee status.

The claimant did not make any representations in respect of the notice to
deport him and revoke his refugee status.  However, the respondent
nonetheless considered whether he fell within Section 33 of the UK Borders
Act 2007, and concluded that he did not.

In respect of revocation of the claimant's refugee status, the respondent
noted that the claimant's status derived from his mother who suffered
persecution due to her clan membership and ethnicity. The respondent's
position was that there has been a significant and durable change in
Somalia in respect of persecution on the basis of ethnicity and clan
membership such that the circumstances in connection with which the
claimant had been recognised as a refugee had ceased to exist.

In respect of Article 8 ECHR, the respondent did not accept that there were
very compelling circumstances outweighing the public interest in the
claimant's deportation.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge found that the claimant, along with his wife (currently serving a
sentence of eleven years' imprisonment) had been groomed from a young age
from within the Somali community into a criminal lifestyle.  The judge
found that the claimant's criminality had been extremely serious, as
reflected by his sentence.  The judge considered Exceptions 1 and 2 under
Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
Act").  The judge found that Exception 1 applied because:

The claimant has been lawfully in the UK for most of his life.

He is socially and culturally integrated, despite his offending.  The judge
found that:

"Whatever the rights or wrongs of that finding, certainly his criminality
was born and developed in the United Kingdom and cannot be attributed to
his having originated from Somalia notwithstanding the connections to those
of Somali origin in the United Kingdom who introduced the appellant to a
criminal lifestyle and groomed him from a young age."

There would be very significant obstacles to integration in Somalia.  The
judge gave several reasons for this at paragraph 79 of the decision, where
he stated:

"I find that the very significant obstacles to his reintegration into
Somalia would be as follows:

I.   His inability to speak fluent Somali;

II.  the fact that his demeanour, behaviour and social interactions which
clearly are of a person of Somali origin who has been out of the country
for many years;

III. his lack of knowledge of cultural norms and mores that would be
necessary for surviving in Mogadishu or Somalia today;

IV.  his lack of protection from a majority clan;

V.   his lack of protection from any minority clan members;

VI.  the absence of accommodation;

VII. his inability to obtain employment;

VIII.    the fact that any UK qualifications or training as a mechanic
would be of very limited value in the current 66% unemployment in
Mogadishu;

IX.  the appellant himself would face being targeted by criminal gangs or
those exploiting his vulnerability upon return to Mogadishu because of
factors 1 to 9."

In respect of the extant country guidance on Somalia, MOJ & Ors (Return to
Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014], the judge stated at paragraph 81:

         "I have also had regard to the case of MOJ and note that this case
         is somewhat dated because it was at that time a belief that Al-
         Shabaab had been defeated and the security situation would rapidly
         improve.  Neither of those factors has come to fruition."

The judge went on to state at paragraph 85:

"I paid detailed regard to the situation in Mogadishu and rely upon the
UNHCR letter of 21 December 2017 which contains a very careful assessment
that civilians living in Mogadishu face daily life threats to their life
and security; individuals without close relatives remaining in Somalia with
limited clan ties may be at risk of serious harm; individuals without close
relatives remain in Somalia may become an IDP and face consequential
protection issues and a risk on return.  There is no sufficiency of
protection, careful assessment of clan protection in line with a decision
of MOJ and Others in respect to the appellant."

The judge concluded that taking all of the factors into considerations
there were compelling circumstances over and above Exception 1 of the 2002
Act.

The judge also considered the claimant's relationship with his daughter,
with whom he does not presently have any contact.  The judge stated that
the claimant's daughter is an innocent victim and that her loss must be
weighed in the balance.  At paragraph 92 the judge set out his conclusion
in the following terms:

"In concluding, the appellant has been largely responsible for his own
dreadful situation with which he is clearly coming to terms with.  That
however is a very British problem, sadly aided by those in his own
community who I am satisfied groomed him to meet this criminal lifestyle.
That simply does mean that he cannot be removed from the United Kingdom and
survive in the dangerous environment that are the current circumstances in
Mogadishu and Somalia today without regard to his current vulnerability and
lack of support networks.  Family sending money would not help and may even
make him a target."

After having assessed the claimant's Article 8 claim in detail in
paragraphs 71 to 93, in the second half of paragraph 93 the judge set his
entire assessment of the claimant's protection claim, stating:

"I also find that he faces a clear risk of persecution on account of his
perceived status as a westernised Somali man, without clan protection, and
upon his return that would place him at serious risk.  He therefore
entitled to continue to benefit from his refugee status and his removal
from the United Kingdom would place the United Kingdom in breach of its
international obligations under the 1951 Geneva Convention in any event."

Grounds of Appeal

The grounds of appeal take issue with various aspects of the decision in
respect of Article 8 ECHR.

Firstly, it is argued that the evidence did not support the judge's
conclusion that the claimant had only a limited ability to speak Somali
given that the claimant's own evidence was that he speaks the language, did
not leave Somalia until the age of 10, and has remained within a Somali
family and associated with members of the Somali community whilst in the
UK.

Secondly, it is argued that the reasons given in paragraph 79 of the
decision (which is quoted above) as to why there would not be very
significant obstacles to reintegration into Somalia are deficient because
there was not a basis to find that the claimant would lack knowledge of
cultural norms in Somalia and would not be well-placed to find employment.


Thirdly, the grounds contend that the judge failed to follow MOJ in respect
of the risk of harm in Mogadishu without explaining why there were
sufficient reasons to warrant a departure from it.

Fourthly, the grounds note that MOJ points to remittances from family in
the UK being a factor enabling a return to Mogadishu whereas the judge
found, to the contrary, that it would not assist him and would make him a
target.

Fifthly, the grounds challenge the assessments of the best interests of the
claimant's child and are critical of the weight given to the criminal
conduct given how serious the offence was.

The grounds do not make any reference to the judge's finding at paragraph
93 that the claimant would face a serious risk of harm, such that
deportation would breach the Refugee Convention, because of his perceived
status as a westernised Somali man and the lack of clan protection.

Analysis

The judge allowed the appeal under Article 8, having regard to the
considerations in Section 117C of the 2002 Act, because he was satisfied
that there were "very compelling circumstances" over and above the
exceptions in sections 117C(4) and (5).  Although the judge stated that he
reached this conclusion because of a combination of reasons, it is apparent
that the central reason was his assessment of the situation prevailing in
Somalia in general and Mogadishu in particular.  At paragraph 89 the judge
referred to Somalia as being "exceptionally risky to [the claimant's] life
and existence".  At paragraph 90 the judge described Somalia as posing "a
unique danger to those returning as it does to those who are resident".  At
paragraph 92 the judge referred to the "dangerous environment that are the
current circumstances in Mogadishu and Somalia today" and in paragraph 93
the judge referred to there being a serious risk of a harm to Somalis
perceived as westernised.

These findings about the level of risk in Mogadishu to civilians in
general, and to westernised Somalis in particular, is inconsistent with the
extant country guidance, MOJ, where, inter alia, it was not found that a
returnee who is an ordinary citizen would be at risk simply on account of
having lived in a European country or that a returnee will ordinarily face
conditions breaching article 3 ECHR.

It is well established that a failure to apply a Country Guidance decision,
unless there is good reason explicitly stated for not doing so, constitutes
an error in law in that a material consideration had been ignored or
legally inadequate reasons for the decision have been given: see, for
example, NA (Libya) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
EWCA Civ 143.

In this case, the only evidence referred to by the judge was the UNHCR
letter of 21 December 2017. The letter contains an assessment of the
circumstances faced by civilians in Mogadishu and the judge was entitled to
give this weight. However, he has not acknowledged that his conclusion is
inconsistent with MOJ, or adequately explained why this single piece of
evidence was considered sufficient to justify a departure from MOJ on the
level of risk and degree of harshness in Mogadishu. The judge therefore
erred by failing to follow MOJ or give adequate reasons for not doing so.

I also accept the Secretary of State's argument that the judge has not
adequately explained why he rejected the claimant's own evidence that he is
able to speak Somali and why he departed from MOJ on the significance of
remittances from the UK.

I raised with Mr Walker the fact that the grounds of appeal do not
challenge the judge's finding (in the second half of paragraph 93) that the
claimant is entitled to the benefit of refugee status because he would be
perceived as a westernised Somali man.  Mr Walker acknowledged that there
was not a specific challenge to this finding, but argued that the lack of
reasoning to support this conclusion is so clear that an error should be
found.

Although it appears no reasons were given to support the judge's finding on
refugee status in paragraph 93 of the decision, reading the decision as a
whole, it is apparent that the reasoning given earlier in the decision
(where the judge, in the context of the article 8 claim, discussed the
current circumstances in Mogadishu) is applicable to the conclusion in
paragraph 93. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the grounds of appeal
concerning a failure to follow MOJ are applicable to the judge's findings
in respect of the Refugee Convention as well as to his assessment of
article 8. The judge erred in his assessment of whether the claimant is
entitled to protection under the Refugee Convention not because of an
absence of reasons but because of a failure to explain why he departed from
MOJ.

Mr Walker's view was that, given the extent and range of errors in the
decision, the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. As the
appeal will need to be considered afresh with no findings preserved, having
regard to paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of the Immigration
and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, I agree
with Mr Walker that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different
judge. No findings from the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the claimant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the claimant and to the Secretary of State. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                          |                                   |
|                                          |                                   |
|Signed                                    |                                   |
|                                          |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                               |Dated: 9 October 2020              |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan             |                                   |

