
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00168/2018
                                                               HU/08799/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 19 August 2019                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [D M]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Groves, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent appeared in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  respondent
(also "the claimant). Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of
court. I make this order because the respondent claims to  be  entitled  to
the protection of the Refugee Convention.

2. Appeal number RP/00168/2018 is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appeal  of  the
respondent,  hereinafter  "the  claimant",  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State to revoke his refugee status.  At the same time as  that
appeal was heard the First-tier Tribunal was seized with an appeal  by  the
claimant against a decision of the Secretary of State refusing him leave to
remain on human rights grounds following a decision to deport him.  That is
the appeal represented by the reference HU/08799/2018  and  the  First-tier
Tribunal declined to determine that appeal at all.   The  decision  not  to
determine that appeal made sense only if the decision to allow  the  appeal
against the decision to  revoke  the  refugee  status  was  sound.   In  my
judgment for reasons I have explained below that decision was not sound and
it follows that the First-tier Tribunal erred in not determining the appeal
HU 08799 2018.

3. The decision leading to the appeal RP 00168  2018  is  dated  26  January
2018 and it set out in a "Notice of Revocation  of  Refugee  Status  -  In-
Country Right of Appeal".  The decision  in  Appeal  No.  HU/08799/2018  is
dated 4 April 2018 and is explained in a "Decision to Refuse a Human Rights
Claim".

4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  set  out  the  claimant's  immigration
history.

5. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 September 2002  when  he
was 16 years old.  He arrived with his sister and they both claimed asylum.
 They said they had fled Zimbabwe because their father was  an  active  MDC
supporter who had  "disappeared".   Their  claims  were  refused  but  they
appealed.  Their appeals were allowed and the claimant  was  given  refugee
status on 16 June 2003.

6. The appellant is a criminal.  He was warned about his behaviour  formally
on 15 August 2008 and again on 12 June 2009.  On 12 February  2010  he  was
served  with  a  "Liability  to  Deportation"  letter   following   further
convictions.  Following referral to UNHCR it was decided, on 5 August 2010,
that his refugee status  could  not  be  revoked  lawfully  at  that  time.
Nevertheless the Secretary of State revoked his indefinite leave to  remain
and an appeal against that was dismissed.

7. On 16 October 2009 he was sent to prison for two years and six months.

8. On 20 January 2015 he was sent to prison for three years.

9. On 14 February 2015 Notification of Liability to Deportation  was  served
on him.  His solicitors  responded  indicating  he  would  be  at  risk  in
Zimbabwe and he had family life with a partner and  four  children  in  the
United Kingdom.  On 12 April 2016 a referral was made  to  UNHCR  informing
them of the Secretary of State's intention to cease the claimant's  refugee
status because of his criminality and the UNHCR responded  on  5  May  2016
setting out some matters that concerned them.

10. On 26 January 2018 the  decision  was  made  to  revoke  the  claimant's
refugee status.

11. I do not find it necessary to  go  into  details  about  the  claimant's
criminal behaviour.  The short point is that he has been sent to prison  on
(I think) three occasions, once for four months, once  for  two  years  six
months and once for three years.  It is quite plain from his record that he
is a man who has a history of drinking too much and being  violent  perhaps
particularly towards his partner or former partners.  When  sentencing  him
to  three  years'  imprisonment  the  Recorder  in  the  Crown  Court   was
particularly  withering  about  the  claimant's  conduct  saying  that  the
claimant did "not work, you spend your time drinking and taking drugs while
sponging off your partner" and went on to describe him as "lazy,  indolent,
and violent parasite". It is not the role of a Recorder in the Crown  Court
to be gratuitously rude.  These remarks were made  because  they  described
the claimant.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then summarised the claimant's case.

13. The claimant said that he comes from Bulawayo, that  his  father  had  a
prominent role as an MDC supporter and that as a result  the  whole  family
were attacked.  He maintained he would be at risk in the event of return to
Bulawayo or any part of Zimbabwe.  It was the claimant's case that  he  had
avoided political activity in the  United  Kingdom  because  he  wanted  to
remain removed from the reasons that  led  to  his  coming  to  the  United
Kingdom in the first place.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then examined carefully the  Secretary  of
State's reasons for revoking the claimant's asylum status.   The  Secretary
of State, correctly, reminded herself of the appropriate Immigration  Rules
and particularly paragraph  339A(v)  which  permits  revocation  where  the
claimant "can no longer, because of the circumstances  in  connection  with
which he has been recognised as a refugee have ceased to exist, continue to
refuse to avail himself of the protection of the country of nationality".

15. The UNHCR had indicated that it was  not  satisfied  that  Zimbabwe  had
fundamentally and durably changed so as to  obviate  the  circumstances  in
which the claimant came to be recognised as a refugee and therefore  should
not be subject to revocation of status.

16. The Secretary of State however relied on the country guidance  given  in
CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC)
which decided clearly that failed  asylum  seekers  returning  to  Bulawayo
would not usually suffer the adverse attention from ZANU-PF  even  if  they
had a significant MDC profile and, generally, someone with  no  significant
MDC profile would not face a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty  to
ZANU-PF.  The Secretary of State noted, correctly,  that  it  was  not  the
claimant's case that he had been politically active in the  United  Kingdom
and the Secretary of State found that  the  circumstances  leading  to  the
claimant being recognised as a refugee had ceased to exit.

17. Additionally the Secretary of State decided that  asylum  status  should
be revoked because there were  reasonable  grounds  for  finding  that  the
claimant constituted a danger to the community of the  United  Kingdom.   I
mention this next point simply to discount it.  There was a  clear  finding
by the First-tier Tribunal Judge that this claimant does  not  represent  a
danger to the community and that finding was not  challenged.   As  far  as
this case is concerned that point has been  established  and  cannot  be  a
reason to justify his revocation of status or deportation.

18. The judge then outlined the  reasons  for  bringing  a  claim  on  human
rights grounds but did not expand upon it greatly.

19. The judge was understandably critical of the Secretary of State  failure
to provide documents relating to the  original  asylum  claim.   The  judge
wanted to see the screening interview, the asylum  interview,  the  Reasons
for Refusal Letter and the written Determination following  the  appeal  in
which the claim was  upheld  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   It  is
disappointing that the Secretary of State was not more cooperative.  It  is
not a question of reviewing the Secretary of State's decision.   The  judge
had to satisfy himself that the claimant was no longer at risk.   It  would
have been much easier to do that if the First-tier Tribunal's decision  had
been available and so  at  least  the  judge  would  have  known  what  was
established when the claimant was awarded asylum.  The Secretary  of  State
should not be making decisions  of  this  kind  without  considering  these
things and should make her decisions and/or supporting documents  available
to assist the Tribunal.

20. Be that as it may, the judge had to make a decision on  the  information
that he had got and there were things that could be deduced properly.

21. He was assisted by the Determination and Reasons  of  Immigration  Judge
Frankish sitting with Mr H G Jones MBE  JP  deciding  in  October  2010  to
dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  curtail   his
indefinite leave to remain.  Paragraph 10 of  that  Determination  confirms
that it was the claimant's case that he was  the  son  of  an  MDC  leaflet
distributor.  His father was beaten almost to death and his shop burned and
his father was abducted.  He was able  to  finance  the  claimant  and  his
sister travelling to the United Kingdom.  The judge noted  that  the  "core
finding and analysis" in the determination of the asylum appeal stated:

    "The evidence of the appellant and his sister has been consistent  with
    each other.  Their accounts of events in September 2002 are  in  accord
    with each other.  They detail an attack on a  date  in  September  2002
    where the sister was sexually abused.  They also detail the  key  event
    of the attack on their father's shop by ZANU-PF on 20 September 2002".

22. In short, the claimant was a refugee because he was the 16 year old  son
of someone who had been persecuted for MDC sympathies in 2002.

23. Although  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  has  been  conspicuously
careful in his decision I am quite satisfied that he is wrong to  say  that
the refugee status should not be revoked,  at  least  for  the  reasons  he
gives.  Whilst the burden of proof justifying a revocation clearly lies  on
the Secretary of State I find  the  Secretary  of  State  appears  to  have
discharged that burden by pointing out there has been a regime  change  and
that the guidance  given  in  CM  points  to  people  being  returnable  to
Bulawayo.  I agree respectfully  with  the  UNHCR  that  the  situation  in
Zimbabwe remains difficult and I agree  that  some  people  who  have  been
recognised as refugees might still be in need of international  protection.
That is something to decide on a case-by-case basis when the  need  arises.
I do not accept that the evidence supports the conclusion that  people  who
were  at  risk  in  2002  because  of  the  activities  of  their   parent,
particularly relatively low level activities and who are not themselves MDC
activists, are at  risk  in  Zimbabwe  now.   The  judge's  error  was  not
individualising the risk.  If he had he would not have made the decision he
did for the reason that he did.

24. If this is all that was wrong with the decision I would have remade  the
decision on the background material before me.

25. However a further difficulty here is that the  human  rights  claim  has
not been considered.  It is plainly an error of  law  not  to  determine  a
ground of appeal and an issue before the Tribunal.  With respect the  judge
was wrong not to determine the point.  Clearly if the  first  decision  had
stood there were to be no need for the further work but a person who  is  a
refugee is likely to qualify for protection on Article 3 grounds and  there
are issues here relating to private and family life which might be  capable
of supporting a decision to allow an appeal.  I am satisfied that  it  will
be wrong to make a decision on this point without giving  the  claimant  an
opportunity to give oral evidence if that is  what  he  wishes  to  do  and
without losing the possibility of further appeals because  it  is  not  his
fault the case was not determined in the First-tier Tribunal.

26. As the case has to be heard again I have decided not to redetermine  the
appeal against revocation. The claimant is representing himself and may, if
he wishes, apply to serve further evidence that might make a difference  to
the "refugee appeal".

27. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal because it erred  in
law.  Both appeals will have to  be  determined  again  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

28. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I allow the Secretary  of  State's
appeal. I direct that both appeals are determined again in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2020                |



