
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: RP/00143/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2019                       |On 14 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     UR
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel, instructed by Lova
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Following a hearing on 29 April 2019 I found errors of law in the
earlier decision of the First-tier Judge, who allowed the appellant's
appeal against the respondent's decision on 10 September 2018 to deport him
as a foreign criminal.  It seemed unlikely that there would be more than a
little further fact-finding to be made at today's hearing and in the event,
Mr Syed-Ali did not call the appellant and therefore I was concerned with
legal submissions only.  There are two points of consideration.  The first
of those is the application of section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002.  The Secretary of State in the decision letter
certified that the presumption in section 72(9)(b) of the Act applied to
the appellant and therefore, unless he can show that he should not be
excluded from refugee protection, that certificate will stand.  The second
issue is that of risk on return, which, it is common ground, will apply
whether or not the certification is upheld.  Even if the appellant is
excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention, he can argue that
he is entitled to avail himself of Article 3 protection.

2.   The appellant had previously been successful in an appeal before an
Immigration Judge in 2009.  The First-tier Judge noted and in part founded
his decision on the positive credibility findings in that appeal hearing.
The judge accepted that in November 2001 the appellant and his father were
arrested and interrogated about an uncle who had been a senior member of
the LTTE.  The appellant was beaten and tortured whilst in detention and he
and his father were subsequently released unconditionally in April 2002.

3.   Subsequently, he was forcefully made by the LTTE to dig bunkers for
them and was captured after an attack by the Sri Lankan forces and held,
beaten and tortured and eventually admitted his involvement with the LTTE.
He was released on 8 May 2009 following payment of a bribe by his aunt to
the EPDP.  He came to the United Kingdom later that month.

4.   From his interview it is relevant to note in answer to question 43
that he said it was peacetime when he was released on the first occasion
and they released him on no conditions.  With regard to the second occasion
when he was arrested he was asked at interview whether they had asked him
about his uncle that time and he said no.  He said that they told him when
they released him on the payment of a bribe by his aunt that if he remained
in Sri Lanka they would arrest him again and his life would be in danger.

5.   As I say, the First-tier Judge adopted the positive credibility
findings of the Immigration Judge.  However, he did not accept the
appellant's claim to have been engaging in sur place activities while in
the United Kingdom.

6.   The appellant's profile therefore with regard to risk on return is of
a person who was arrested in 2001 on account of his association with his
uncle, and subsequently released unconditionally in April 2002, and was
arrested in 2008, no reference being made to his uncle, but on account of
having been digging bunkers for the LTTE.  The claimed sur place activities
have not been accepted.

7.   As regards his criminal record and the section 72 issue, on 26 March
2015 the appellant was convicted of possession and/or control of articles
for the use of fraud.  He was further convicted on 18 May 2015 of two
offences of possession and/or control of articles for the use of fraud and
he was sentenced to 33 months' imprisonment.

8.   On 30 March 2017 at Isleworth Crown Court he was convicted on three
counts of possessing/controlling articles for use in fraud and sentenced to
40 months' imprisonment for count 1 and 40 months' imprisonment each
concurrent for counts 2 and 3.

9.   The effect of section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 is that a person is to be presumed to have been convicted by a
final judgment of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger
to the community of the United Kingdom if he is convicted in the United
Kingdom of an offence and sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
two years.  The presumption is rebuttable.

10.  The argument in respect of rebuttal of the presumption of serious
crime under section 72 was in part based on the argument as set out in Mr
Syed-Ali's skeleton, that the Secretary of State is not obliged to revoke
refugee status on the grounds that the appellant constitutes a danger to
the community, having been convicted of a particularly serious crime.  He
referred to the fact that the judge found the appellant to pose only a low
risk according to the OASys Report.  The judge did not, however, as noted
in my earlier decision, address the section 72 certificate.

11.  It does not seem to me that the presumption in this case has been
rebutted.  The appellant has, as Mr Clarke pointed out, been convicted on
two occasions of serious fraud offences.  With regard to the 2015 offences,
it is clear that a further offence was committed six days after the grant
of bail.  It is clear from the sentencing remarks in respect of the second
group of offences that the appellant was offending again within six weeks
of his release in August 2016.  The author of the OASys Report does not
appear to have been aware of the earlier offences.  The only offences
referred to, at page 7 of 35 of the report, are the three 2016 offences.
Mr Syed-Ali pointed to page 3 of 35 and the reference to sources of
information including previous convictions, but the only convictions
specifically referred to are those of 2016, and as I say, the author of the
report does not appear to have been aware of the earlier offences, or that
an offence among the earlier ones was committed while the appellant was on
bail, and he committed the subsequent offences at least in one case within
six weeks of his release from prison.  The author of the report does not
appear to have seen the sentencing remarks.  In light of the fact that the
appellant had referred to alcohol as his reason for offending, the
conclusion at page 16 of 35 that alcohol is not linked to his offending
appears to be at least problematic.  I agree with Mr Clarke that though one
cannot go behind the conclusion in the report, nevertheless it is
appropriate to point out weaknesses and limitations in that report, which
does not appear to be based on the full picture of the appellant's
offending or the evidence pertaining to him.  This is of relevance to bear
in mind in deciding whether the offence is a serious one or not, and I have
concluded that the offence is indeed serious.

12.  The question remaining is that of risk on return.  Clearly the
presumption under section 72 can be rebutted on this basis and I have
concluded that the offences involved convictions by a final judgment for a
particularly serious crime and it has not been rebutted in relation to the
terms of subsection 9.

13.  I therefore uphold the Secretary of State's certification.

14.  In any event, however, risk on return has to be considered in light of
the fact that even without the protection of the Refugee Convention the
appellant is entitled to rely on the protection of Article 3 of the Human
Rights Convention.

15.  I have set out above the essential findings of the Immigration Judge
which were preserved by the First-tier Judge, and also the First-tier
Judge's finding that the appellant is not engaged in sur place activities.
As Mr Clarke argued, it is somewhat surprising as a consequence of that to
see an expert report which among other things deals with issues of sur
place activities despite the fact that the author of the report, Dr Smith,
had seen the First-tier Judge's decision and also my earlier decision.  The
relevant country guidance is still GJ [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), and as the
headnote in that case makes clear, the present objective of the Sri Lankan
government at the time that decision was written is to identify Tamil
activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism and to
destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state.

16.  As regards the current categories of risk identified in that decision,
the only ones of potential relevance in paragraph 7 of the headnote are
individuals who are or are perceived to be a threat to the integrity of Sri
Lanka as a single state because they are or are perceived to have a
significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the
diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka or a person whose
name appears on a computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport,
comprising a list of those against whom there is an extant court order or
arrest warrant.  It is said that such people will be stopped at the airport
and handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities in pursuance of
such order or warrant.

17.  As regards the category in paragraph 7(a), it is not possible in my
view to consider the appellant, given his record, as a person who is
perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
separatism and to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single
state.  Any interest in him as a relative of his uncle had apparently
disappeared by 2009, and otherwise he was simply a person who was arrested
having been digging bunkers.

18.  Nor is there any evidence to suggest that his name would appear on a
stop list.  There is no arrest warrant extant or court order, and there is
no reason to believe that he is a person whose name is on a list and who
would therefore be stopped at the airport and handed over to the
appropriate authorities.

19.  As regards subparagraph 9, the maintenance of computerised
intelligence-led "watch" lists, such that a person is not reasonably likely
to be detained at the airport but to be monitored by the security services
after his or her return, it is said that if that monitoring does not
indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the
unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed conflict such person
is not reasonably likely to be detained by the security forces.  That is a
question of fact in each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried
out by such an individual.

20.  Again, I see no reason to suppose that the appellant falls within this
risk category.  He is not and never has been a Tamil activist and
monitoring would not indicate that he is such an activist working to
destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state, and his claimed diaspora
activities were found to lack credibility.

21.  Nor do I see anything in Dr Smith's report insofar as it deals with
risk on return to suggest that the country guidance has in any sense been
overtaken.  There are a number of examples given of people thought to have
been associated in some way to the TGTE and the BTF experiencing detention
and/or ill-treatment on return to Sri Lanka.  These are all fact-sensitive
cases, and one can see in any event that these were people of a degree of
high profile and/or sur place activity.  None of them is anywhere near the
appellant in terms of their profile.  As a consequence, I do not consider
that Dr Smith's report advances the case of the appellant any further and
it does not show that the country guidance has in any sense to be replaced
by more recent evidence of the kind which he presents.

22.  As a consequence, I consider that even if it were the case that the
certificate of the Secretary of State were not to be upheld, the appellant
in any event, whether under the Refugee Convention or under Article 3, does
not face a real risk on return to Sri Lanka.  The picture has changed
significantly since his appeal hearing in 2009.  There is more recent
country guidance which reflects the position as of now as opposed to the
earlier guidance in force at the time when the Immigration Judge heard the
appeal in October 2009.  Accordingly, the appellant's appeal is dismissed
under the Refugee Convention and also with regard to human rights and
humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 19 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
