
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal

WA (Draft related risks updated - Muslim Women) Eritrea CG [2006] UKIAT
00079

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 August 2006                               |                           |
|Prepared                                        |.........30 October        |
|                                                |2006......                 |


                                   Before

                      Senior Immigration Judge King, TD
                       Senior Immigration Judge Eshun
                               Mr R Baines JP


                                   Between

                                     WA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr H Norton-Taylor, Counsel instructed by YVA
                  Solicitors
 For the Respondent:Mr J Wright, Home Office Presenting Officer

On the basis of the evidence now  available,  Muslim  women  should  not  be
excluded from being within the draft related at risk  category.The  evidence
indicates that Muslim women, per se are not exempt  from  military  service.
In some areas, however, local protests prevent their call up and  in  others
the draft is not so strictly implemented. With this addition (amending  para
113 of the determination), the draft related risk categories  in  KA  (Draft
-related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005]  00165  are  reaffirmed.
In particular it remains the case that in general someone who has  lived  in
Eritrea for a significant period without being  called  up  would  not  fall
within the category of a draft evader.   The  evidence  indicates  that  the
administration of National service is devolved to six regional commands  and
the degree to which  recruitment  is  carried  out  varies  from  region  to
region. In considering risk on return a decision maker  should  pay   regard
to any credible evidence relating to the particular region  from  whence  an
appellant comes and the degree to which recruitment is enforced within  that
particular area. NB: This decision should be read  with  AH  (Failed  asylum
seekers - involuntary returns) Eritrea CG [2006] UKAIT 00078

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Eritrea  born  on  13  June  1970.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 28  September  2003  and  applied  for
    asylum shortly thereafter.  On 26 November 2003 a decision was made to
    refuse to grant asylum and to give directions for her removal from  the
    United Kingdom.  The refusal letter is dated 21 November 2003.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision,  the  hearing  of
    which appeal came before an Adjudicator, Miss S Jhirad, on  3  February
    2004.   The appeal in respect of asylum was dismissed as was  also  the
    appeal in respect of human rights.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision.   Permission  to
    do so being granted by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal on 13 May  2004.



4.   Following the commencement of the appeals provisions of the  2004  Act,
    the  grant  of  permission  now  takes   effect   as   an   order   for
    reconsideration by this Tribunal of the appellant's appeal.

5.   The matter came before the Tribunal for hearing on 15 April  2005.   It
    was argued on behalf of the appellant that she would be regarded  as  a
    draft evader upon  return  to  Eritrea.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    Adjudicator had failed to deal with the issue of her  military  service
    in sufficient detail or at all.  The Tribunal found that there had been
    an error of law  in  the  determination  of  the  Adjudicator  in  that
    military service was the key issue in the appellant's  claim  but  that
    had not been dealt with adequately in the determination. The full  text
    of that decision is set out in Annex A herewith.

6.   It  was  directed  that  there  would  be  a  reconsideration  of  that
    decision.  All issues would be at large once again  including  that  of
    credibility.

7.   The matter was listed  for  a  full  reconsideration  of  all  relevant
    issues and evidence.  Thus it is that the matter comes  before  us  for
    reconsideration.

8.    The  appellant  is  represented  by  Mr  H  Norton-Taylor  of  Counsel
    instructed by YVA Solicitors.  The respondent is represented  by  Mr  J
    Wright, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

9.   A number of  documents  are  presented  for  our  attention,  contained
    essentially in bundles A and B.  In addition there were  various  other
    reports and documents which were presented to us for our attention.

10.  Essentially three issues  were  highlighted  for  our  attention.   The
    first being to identify the procedure for call up to  military  service
    in Eritrea.  The second being to consider  the position of Muslim women
    and if necessary, to revisit the findings in KA  (Draft  -related  risk
    categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005]  00165   in  the  light  of  more
    recent objective evidence.  Thirdly, to consider the risk on return for
    this appellant.

11.  The appellant was called to give evidence.  She adopted her  statements
    of the 27 January 2004 and 16 February 2006; also, her SEF statement at
    interview conducted with the Home Office.

12.  The basis of her claim can be summarised as follows. She  was  born  in
    Argodat.  She married in 1991 and her daughter was born in  1993.   She
    divorced her husband in December 1998 and her child lives with  him  in
    Eritrea.   She has one sister and three brothers.   The  sister  and  a
    brother have been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the whereabouts of her father and the other two brothers is
    not known.

13.  Between 1972 and 1975 she lived in Saudi Arabia, returning  to  Eritrea
    in 1975 where she stayed for three years.  She returned to Saudi Arabia
    in 1978 where she remained until 2000.  In June 2000,  when  her  Saudi
    Residence Permit expired, she returned to  Agordat  accompanied  by  an
    aunt and the aunt's family. She worked as a domestic servant until  the
    end of January 2003, joining also an ELF secret cell.  In that capacity
    she attended monthly meetings and made donations.

14.  She was instructed to report for military service but did not.   Whilst
    following instructions to distribute ELF leaflets to a Mr Osman in  the
    town of Parantu, the appellant travelled towards that location but  was
    stopped at a military checkpoint.  The ELF  leaflets  were  discovered.
    She was arrested and detained for five months, interrogated and beaten.
     She was admitted to hospital in mid-July 2003  and  escaped  with  the
    assistance of a hospital guard in mid-August 2003, travelling to  Sudan
    and then on to the United Kingdom.

15.  She fears return to Eritrea, both on account of her failure  to  attend
    military service and also by reason of her political  profile  both  in
    Eritrea and in the United Kingdom.

16.  The appellant gave oral evidence in support of her claim  and  was  the
    subject of considerable cross-examination at the hearing.

17.  She gave birth to her daughter in Eritrea at the home of the family  of
    her husband. When she divorced her husband in  1998  he  was  in  Saudi
    Arabia but is now back at  Agordat,  having  returned  there  in  2000.
    When she left Saudi Arabia in June 2000  neither  her  sister  nor  her
    brothers remained there.   Her father and two brothers had  disappeared
    in Ethiopia having travelled there from Saudi  Arabia  in  1999.   They
    left to renew their passports but nothing has been heard of them since.

18.  In June 2000 her Ethiopian passport had expired  and  she  returned  to
    Eritrea via Sudan.  She entered without any travel documents, returning
    the same way as many other returnees had done.  She was returned  under
    the auspices of the UNHCR.  She did not register within Eritrea until a
    year after arriving.

19.  She spoke of  her  activities  with  the  ELF.   She  was  involved  in
    collecting financial  contributions  and  distributing  leaflets.   She
    would collect funds from female sympathisers and  hold  meetings.   The
    meetings would be weekly with  about  twenty  or  twenty  five  females
    present.  Our attention was invited to her reply to Question 22 of  the
    interview, in which she claimed to have  written  articles.   She  said
    that she did write things at meetings as well as preparing leaflets.

20.  She indicated that she received the call-up papers at the home  of  her
    aunt on 15 February 2003.   She did not read the papers but rather tore
    them up as she was not willing to undertake military service.   Pressed
    upon the issue as to why she had not even taken the step of seeing what
    the papers said, she indicated that the aunt's son had read it so there
    was no need for her to do  so.  She  was  required  to  report  to  the
    authorities in a week's time.  She remained at the aunt's house.

21.  In the light of her evidence the appellant was invited to consider  the
    interview which had been conducted with her  on  7  November  2003,  in
    particular Question 31 and her answer thereto.  She was asked expressly
    "have you been called up?", her answer was "no".  The appellant  sought
    to say that her understanding of  the  question  was  whether  she  was
    willing to do military service not whether she had in fact been  called
    up.

22.  She spoke of her arrest at the checkpoint on  25  February  2003.   She
    spoke of her ill-treatment and said she  had  scars  remaining  on  her
    back.  She was  in  hospital  for  some  twenty  three  days  receiving
    treatment by way of injections and tablets.  She  continued  with  that
    treatment until she escaped.   Travelling from Eritrea  to  Sudan  took
    five days during which she received no  medication.   She  received  no
    medication or treatment in Sudan.

23.  The appellant repeated that  she  had  entered  Eritrea  illegally  but
    obtained identity documents when she  had  registered.    She  had  not
    moved around very much  during  the  year  before  she  registered  and
    nothing untoward had happened.   She left her aunt in Eritrea  and  has
    since had no news about  her  aunt  nor  has  she  made  any  enquiries
    concerning her.  She had last  seen  her  daughter  in  2002  when  her
    husband brought her to see her.   Since then she has had no news of him
    or of her daughter.  The appellant was unsure whether the  husband  had
    undertaken military duty or not.

24.  Finally, the appellant was asked about her domestic situation in  Saudi
    Arabia.   She said that with her  family  she  would  speak  Tigre  and
    Arabic.   Her brothers and sister also spoke those two languages.  When
    it was indicated to her that her brother had indicated in his interview
    to the Home Office that he did not  speak  Tigrean  she  said  that  he
    understood it but found Arabic more convenient.

25.  The parties made their submissions to us.   Mr  Wright,  on  behalf  of
    the  respondent,  invited  us  to  make  adverse  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility.  He submitted that the  only  reason  for  the
    appellant coming to the United Kingdom was to join  her  siblings.   We
    were urged to find that there was no realistic family political profile
    within Eritrea, otherwise why would the appellant have returned in 1993
    to give birth and to return subsequently in 2000.

26.  In her first account of her entry into Eritrea with her  aunt  in  2000
    no reference was made to it being an illegal entry.  Clearly if it  had
    been with the UNHCR it would not have been illegal but that again was a
    matter very recently mentioned.  If the appellant had entered illegally
    and spent a year in Eritrea on that basis why was it that she chose  to
    register her presence.

27.  It was submitted that the appellant's  activities  with  the  ELF  were
    minimal.  The appellant indicated  that  she  distributed  leaflets  to
    those who attended the meetings.  In those circumstances why  were  the
    leaflets not distributed at the meetings rather than carried elsewhere.



28.  We were invited to find that the evidence as to the receipt of  call-up
    papers and the appellant's response lacked credibility particularly  as
    nothing was mentioned in the interview concerning any particular  call-
    up, indeed the appellant had specifically rejected that suggestion.  It
    was improbable, given the claimed interest  in  the  appellant  by  the
    authorities, that she would go through checkpoints  at  all  let  alone
    carrying ELF documents.  In interview, in answer to  Question  34,  the
    appellant indicated she had been stopped  four  times  at  checkpoints.
    Why was it therefore that she had not  been  picked  out  for  military
    service?

29.   The  appellant  claims  to  have  escaped  hospital  having  undergone
    considerable medical treatment for her injuries and condition.   It  is
    not credible that she would  be  able  to  have  survived  the  arduous
    journey which she has sought to describe.

30.  We were addressed at length as to the objective  evidence  relating  to
    the situation of call-up, those submissions perhaps are best dealt with
    when we come to deal with certain of the issues which we find now arise
    in this particular case.

31.  Mr Norton-Taylor, on behalf of the appellant, invited us to  find  that
    her account was a credible one.  It is clear from  her  family  profile
    and particularly from the statements of her siblings that there  was  a
    considerable political profile to the family.  We were  asked  to  find
    that the appellant was indeed called up as she has indicated, indeed it
    was surprising that she had not been before.

32.  It was submitted, however, that  notwithstanding  our  findings  as  to
    credibility the fact remained that the appellant would be perceived  as
    a draft evader and someone who had been available for military  service
    and had failed to do it.  It was argued that  as  a  Muslim  woman  she
    would not have been exempt from  that  military  service.   Once  again
    various  arguments  were  addressed  to  us  which  perhaps  are   more
    convenient to be addressed under the particular issue which we have  to
    consider.

33.  We were addressed at length in  respect  of  certain  of  the  Tribunal
    decisions and of the objective material relating thereto.   The  expert
    report of Dr David Pool was very much relied upon  by  the  appellant's
    representative.  We do not set out in detail  that  objective  evidence
    but will highlight the main areas of  relevance  under  the  particular
    issues which we have identified.

34.  We remind ourselves as to the definition  of  refugee  as  set  out  in
    Article 1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The burden and  standard  of
    proof is to the lower standard, namely a "reasonable likelihood" or  "a
    serious  possibility".   We  remind  ourselves  that  the  similar  low
    standard is to be applied to determine whether or not  there  has  been
    any breach of the protected rights under the ECHR.  In determining  the
    issue of real risk we bear in mind the approach taken to  such  matters
    by  the  decisions  of  Kacaj   and  Ullah.    In  considering  matters
    effecting particularly Article 8, we  bear  in  mind  the  approach  of
    Razgar.

35.  In matters of credibility we remind ourselves that it is  important  to
    consider the case as presented on behalf of the appellant as  a  whole,
    both in regard to the evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  to  the
    objective evidence.  It is necessary to put matters within their proper
    context taking a holistic approach to that evidence, seeking  to  place
    each element of it within the context as a whole, giving such  evidence
    such weight as is appropriate.

36.  One  issue  is  that  of  credibility,  whether  the  appellant  has  a
    political profile, either individually or through her family,  such  as
    to create a risk to her upon return, or whether she is indeed  a  draft
    evader in the circumstances of her  claim  as  produced.    The  second
    issue arises independently to the issue of credibility, namely  whether
    the fact that the appellant had not been called up for  an  appreciable
    period of time while she lived in Eritrea removes her from  a  category
    of risk.  The Tribunal in the country guidance case  of  KA  indicated,
    particularly in their conclusions at paragraph 113(f)(i), that the fact
    of a returnee being of draft age is not determinative, if we considered
    that those falling into the "left illegally" sub-category often include
    persons who are considered to have already done their national service,
    persons who have got an exemption and persons who  have  been  eligible
    for call-up over a significant period but  have  not  been  called  up.
    The burden of the submissions made to us today by Mr  Norton-Taylor  is
    that the current objective evidence indicates  that  such  is  an  over
    optimistic statement to make, particularly given the  clarification  of
    the procedures for call-up which are adopted.

37.  The third matter relates to whether the appellant  as  a  Muslim  woman
    would be liable for call-up in any event.  The Tribunal in  KA  in  its
    conclusions  at  paragraph  113(e)  excluded  Muslim  women  from   the
    categories of females who would be most potentially at risk of  serious
    harm.  Mr Norton-Taylor argues that once again in  light  of  the  more
    recent objective evidence that is not a position  that  is  tenable  at
    present.

38.  In considering the question of credibility we find generally  that  the
    appellant is not credible.  We find that she has sought  to  exaggerate
    her political activities and has fabricated her claim to be the subject
    of a call-up notice.

39.  The current evidence as presented on behalf of the  appellant  is  that
    she was detained at the checkpoint because  of  the  leaflets  and  was
    interrogated for many months, both as to her ELF activities and to  the
    failure to attend for military  service.   Given  the  fact  that  many
    students and young people eligible for the draft are rounded up by  the
    authorities and taken to training camps, it is not credible, as  we  so
    find, that if the authorities regarded the appellant as a draft  evader
    or eligible for military service they would not have sent  her  to  the
    camp for training.  We bear in mind the evidence which  she  gave  that
    the notice received at her home was requiring  her  to  report  to  the
    military establishment the following week.

40.  It is not credible, if the appellant had received such  call-up  papers
    and was the subject of questioning about  her  military  service,  that
    such would not have been within her mind  at  the  time  when  she  was
    questioned about such matters in  the  interview.   The  appellant  was
    asked specifically whether she had done military service  or  had  been
    called up.  We can understand no reason at all why the appellant should
    not have given some details of the matters which she now claims to have
    experienced in answer to those questions.  The appellant  indicated  at
    the interview that she had been detained  for  five  months.   She  was
    asked why she had been detained too long and in answer to  Question  42
    she said, "They were interrogating me from time to time about  the  ELF
    activities and as I did not confess to their interrogations  they  kept
    me in detention".   No mention is made in that reply of any questioning
    concerning military service.

41.  It cannot be overlooked that military service was  certainly  a  matter
    very much in the mind of the appellant when she gave the answers  which
    she did in interview.  In answer to question 29 she spoke of  the  fact
    that the military police stopped the bus in order to  find  the  youths
    who had escaped from national military service.  In answer to  Question
    32 the appellant said that the military police asked who had  completed
    or had done their military service and those who had not.  She was  one
    of those who had not done national service, she was taken to the police
    station and asked to show her identity card.   It was on that  occasion
    that the leaflets were discovered.

42.  The appellant in her statement of 27 January 2004 expressed herself  in
    a slightly different way concerning the bus and  the  stopping  by  the
    military police.  She said at paragraph 14 as follows:-

         "The military police were looking for  draft  evaders.   As  I  was
         eligible for conscription and had not done my military service  the
         military police were particularly interested in me.  I believe that
         this was the reason that they took me to the police station."


    Thereafter she gives no evidence that she was further questioned  about
    that matter. Indeed there is perhaps a distinction to be made as  to  a
    person eligible for conscription and one actually called up.  The  fact
    that the appellant  at  no  stage  mentions  at  interview  or  in  her
    statement that she was called up is a very relevant factor in assessing
    her overall credibility.


43.  Although the appellant claims  that  she  received  call-up  papers  to
    report a week later, she remained  at  the  aunt's  house  prepared  to
    undertake the routine identity checks at checkpoints.   This would  not
    seem to be the actions of someone seeking to  evade  military  service.
    The objective evidence clearly shows  that  checks  at  checkpoints  by
    military police was one of the means by  which  the  authorities  could
    locate those eligible or required for military service.   The nature of
    her evidence was for the effect that she was not arrested  because  she
    was an evader but rather that, because she was of military age, she was
    taken to the local police station so that enquiries could be made.   No
    doubt had the call-up notice been delivered  as  she  claims  enquiries
    would have revealed her obligation to report.    Nothing,  however,  is
    said in the interview or in the statement about that matter nor  indeed
    in the SEF at Annex A7 of the appeal bundle.

44.  The appellant seeks to  present  a  political  profile,  both  for  her
    family and for herself.  We noted, however, that essentially  for  much
    of her life the appellant lived outside  Eritrea.    Although  born  in
    Agordat in Eritrea, much of her life until  2000  was  spent  in  Saudi
    Arabia.  On her own account, however, she had returned  to  Eritrea  to
    give birth to her daughter and spent a number of years  in  Eritrea  in
    the mid-1990s.   There  is  no  indication  that  she  experienced  any
    difficulties on account of her family profile  or  of  her  activities.
    According to her account, her father, sister and two brothers  went  to
    Addis Ababa to renew their passports in 1990.  Her sister Abeer and her
    brother Sakhr leaving Addis Ababa for the United Kingdom  and  claiming
    asylum.   Seemingly it was in  Ethiopia  that  her  father  and  uncles
    disappeared.  The appellant herself displayed no  seemingly  reluctance
    to return to Eritrea.  Her precise status in Eritrea  is  perhaps  less
    clearly defined in her evidence  than  might  otherwise  be  the  case.
    There is no indication in her SEF, interview or earlier statements that
    she entered Eritrea illegally.  She said  that  she  had  an  Ethiopian
    passport which expired in 2000.  Such was the reason for her having  to
    leave Saudi Arabia.  At one  stage  in  the  evidence  before  us,  she
    indicated that she  entered  illegally  through  the  routes  taken  by
    persons seeking entry into Eritrea, later she said that that entry  was
    facilitated by the UNHCR.  There was no documentary evidence confirming
    that particular fact.   It was her evidence that she managed to  remain
    a year  in  Eritrea,  seemingly  without  having  registered  with  the
    authorities.  Given the number of  checkpoints  and  the  frequency  of
    checking we do not find that to be a credible assertion.  The appellant
    claims to have registered and claims also to have  had  valid  identity
    cards, which she showed at some four or five checkpoints prior  to  the
    checkpoint that she had referred to as being the  one  leading  to  her
    detention.  We fail to understand how a person with no  valid  passport
    for Eritrea would be able to register herself in such ways.  There is a
    degree of lack of clarity as to her domestic situation.   According  to
    the appellant she went to Eritrea to give birth to her daughter and yet
    she divorces her husband when a few years later he is living  in  Saudi
    Arabia as well.   According to her evidence he is now living  with  the
    daughter in Agordat.

45.  If Agardat is the  family  home  of  her  husband  where  her  daughter
    resides and also the place where she and her aunt lived for a number of
    years, it would be reasonable  to  expect  some  communication  between
    herself; her husband or aunt.  It is in  that  context  we  regard  her
    evidence that she does not know whether or not  he  has  done  military
    service to lack credibility.  We are  not  persuaded,  looking  at  the
    matter as a whole, that the appellant is divorced from her  husband  or
    indeed was living a life apart from him at any material time.

46.  Although the picture is painted by the appellant of  a  family  with  a
    high  political  profile,  it  is  clear  that   she   experienced   no
    difficulties in residing in Eritrea for many years.   The  evidence  in
    the SEF was that she joined a secret ELF cell which  consisted  of  ten
    members including herself.  She attended meetings at various places and
    gave donations.  She also claimed  that  she  distributed  leaflets  on
    behalf of the ELF.  Asked to whom she delivered the leaflets  she  said
    to the people who attended the meetings.  As Mr Wright has commented in
    his submissions to us, if that were the case then there would be little
    need for any overt distribution of leaflets other than within the  very
    small confines of the group.

47.  The appellant claims that she was given a bundle of ELF leaflets on  24
    February 2003 to deliver to person a living in Parantu.    It  was  the
    leaflets found upon her person which are said to be the  cause  of  her
    detention.   We  do  not  find  that  to  be  credible   in   all   the
    circumstances.   The appellant would ask us to believe that having been
    notified by the authorities  that  they  were  interested  in  her  for
    military service and being aware of the dangers which must be  apparent
    to  those  seeking  to  avoid  military  service  when  going   through
    checkpoints, nevertheless she carried such incriminating material  with
    her.  We do not find that is credible that she would have  done  so  in
    the way in which she seeks to describe.  Given also the reality of  the
    checkpoints and the frequency of them, we do not believe someone  would
    carry such documents with them  thereby  exposing  themselves  to  such
    danger.

48.  The account of the appellant is of repeated ill-treatment at the  hands
    of the authorities and repeated questioning.    She  was  detained  for
    five months and in the latter part of the  fifth  month  the  appellant
    became  very  ill  such  that  she  required  hospital  treatment   and
    medication.  As a matter of commonsense such treatment would have  left
    somebody very ill indeed, particularly as the treatment at the hospital
    also was prolonged.  Notwithstanding  such  a  weakened  condition  the
    appellant would have us believe that she was able to make  the  arduous
    journey away from the hospital, escaping on 15 August  2003  making  a
    journey of some five days crossing into Sudan.   It was  reasonable  to
    believe that, if there was any truth in that  matter,  she  would  have
    been very weak and very tired and as a result of  those  journeys,  yet
    seemingly she is out and about in Khartoum  on  27  August  near  to  a
    demonstration which was taking place which incidentally  leads  to  her
    arrest.  Once again she was detained for some  twenty  three  days  and
    then released which would, we think, not  have  assisted  her  weakened
    condition, yet she  then  manages  to  leave  Khartoum  Airport  on  28
    September 2003 and come to the United  Kingdom.    There  has  been  no
    medical evidence produced as to the scarring of her body or as  to  the
    state of her health.  In the circumstances we do not find  her  account
    of her escape to be credible.

49.  We bear in mind the general nature of the  profile  which  is  claimed.
    There are details of the appellant's brother  and  sister  and  of  the
    claims which they presented in the United Kingdom as to their political
    profile.  We have heard no evidence from them but we have been asked to
    consider the evidence which relates  to  them.Our  attention  has  been
    drawn to the determination of an Adjudicator having heard their  appeal
    on 2 May 2002.   In June 1999 the two siblings flew to Addis Ababa with
    their father, two brothers and two uncles.  All bar  the  two  siblings
    went to renew their passports but did not  return.    The  brother  and
    sister remained in the  same  house  in  Addis  Ababa  for  two  months
    following the disappearance of their father and brothers and then  came
    to the United Kingdom.  It  was  their  case  as  advanced  before  the
    Adjudicator that their father had been a prominent member of the ELF in
    Jeddah and  that  they  also  had  been  members  and  became  somewhat
    politically involved.  They too had carried out activities before  they
    left  for the United Kingdom and believed they  had  been  recorded  on
    video cameras in the course of demonstrations.   Significantly  neither
    applicant would seem to have been in Eritrea for many years.  Abeer was
    born in 1979 and was therefore twenty three years of age at the time of
    the hearing before the Adjudicator.  Sakhr was some twenty  five  years
    of age at the time of the hearing.

50.  Clearly their experiences must  be  distinguished  from  those  of  the
    appellant who has very much closer connections with Eritrea and  indeed
    married an Eritrean citizen and visited Eritrea from time  to  time  in
    the course of the 1990s.  There was no suggestion whatsoever  that  any
    interest has been shown in the  appellant  on  account  of  her  family
    connections in any way or at all.

51.  In all the circumstances and for the reasons set out above  we  do  not
    find that the appellant was the subject of  call-up  or  that  she  was
    arrested in the circumstances which she described or at all.

52.  We remind ourselves that the task for us is to make findings  upon  the
    evidence that has been adduced or to indicate  in  respect  of  certain
    areas of evidence where findings are not possible to be made.   In  the
    latter category stands the precise domestic situation of the  appellant
    as it existed in Eritrea.  The appellant has failed to satisfy us, even
    applying the lower standard of burden of proof as we do, that  she  was
    living with her aunt and not with her husband and child.   We  are  not
    persuaded that divorce ever took place between the two.

53.  We  turn,  however,  to  consider  the  second  proposition  which  was
    advanced to us by Mr Norton-Taylor on behalf of the  appellant,  namely
    that, notwithstanding any findings which we may make as to credibility,
    the appellant remains at risk of being considered a draft evader.    He
    seeks to argue in particular that the length of time that an individual
    resides in Eritrea without call-up is not in  itself  determinative  of
    that issue.

54.  Our attention was drawn to the decision of KA  (Draft  -  related  risk
    categories updated) Eritrea CG UKAIT 00165, notified in November  2005.
    The Tribunal has sought to clarify the  risks  which  are  entailed  by
    those of draft age returning to Eritrea.   The summary  of  conclusions
    is set out in paragraph 113 of KA.

55.  Mr Norton-Taylor invited  our  attention  particular  to  113(i)  which
    reads as follows:-

         "They can be considered to have left  Eritrea  legally.   Regarding
         this sub-category, it must be borne in  mind  that  an  appellant's
         assertion that he left illegally will raise an issue that will need
         to be established to the required standard.  A person who generally
         lacks credibility will not be assumed to have left illegally.    We
         think those falling into the "left legally" sub-category will often
         include persons who are considered to have  already  done  national
         service, persons who have got an exemption  and  persons  who  have
         been eligible for call-up over a significant period  but  have  not
         been called up.  Lastly those falling outside the sub-category  and
         often at risk will include persons who left Eritrea when they  were
         approaching draft age (eighteen) or had recently passed that age."


56.  In the case of the appellant she had been living in Eritrea since  June
    2000 until September 2003.    She left Eritrea when she was aged thirty
    three.  At first sight, therefore, she would seem to be  a  person  who
    had been eligible for call-up over a significant  period  but  had  not
    been called up.  We are urged, however, to view that finding in KA with
    considerable circumspection bearing in mind the  more  recent  evidence
    now available as to how the mechanism of call-up is put  in  place  and
    the increasing importance attached to call-up by the government.

57.  In that connection our attention was drawn to the report  of  Dr  David
    Pool dated 12 February 2006 to be found at pages 17 to 25 of Bundle A.
     Dr Pool sets out his qualifications at the beginning  of  the  report.
    He is well known to the Tribunal and indeed part of  his  evidence  was
    cited by the Tribunal in KA.

58.  In his report he  makes  clear  that  the  administration  of  national
    service is devolved to the regions/provinces of Eritrea and involves  a
    dual  role  for  the  local  offices  of  the  Ministry   of   Regional
    Administration (MAR)   and the Ministry of Defence.   According to  the
    NSP,  the  MRA  used  directives  based  on  the  Ministry  of  Defence
    instructions.  Eritrea is divided into six regions/provinces  following
    the reorganisation of the provinces in 1996, with each  region  divided
    into sub-regional administrative  zones.    The  lowest  level  is  the
    village administration in the rural areas and the quarters in the urban
    areas.  In parallel with the MRA, the Eritrean Army  has  six  regional
    commands at the apex of which are six senior generals all of  whom  are
    former EPLF  Commanders.    The  severity  with  which  recruitment  is
    conducted is partly  a  function  of  the  character  of  the  Regional
    General.

59.  There is an  additional  civilian  component  layered  into  the  draft
    process, presumably to ensure the draft  of  those  eligible  but  less
    easily identifiable because they are not school students and because of
    the weakness of the registration process.   At the crucial local  level
    (village and town quarter) the local  administrative  unit  responsible
    for the draft is constituted of a committee of  six.    Three  of  them
    represent the state institutions, the MRA, and three are from the local
    community.  The civilian committee  members  are  generally  "community
    elders" associated with the  PFDJ,  state  parties.   These  committees
    stretch down to village level in the countryside and  the  quarters  in
    the towns.  As there is no door-to-door postal services in Eritrea  the
    names of  suitable  candidates  for  the  draft  are  gathered  by  the
    committees from the families in the locality.

60.  The members of the committee are said to  have  the  responsibility  of
    surveying the  village  residents  in  their  homes;  of  investigating
    children's ages, of determining whether the  child  is  away  from  the
    village; whether the child is abroad, whether the child is  undertaking
    military service or whether  the  child  is  a  student.    Information
    therefore as to who is eligible for the draft is based on a combination
    of  local  knowledge  of  family  members  and  investigation  by   the
    committee.  The final step in the process is the delivery of notice  of
    draft to the household by hand from the local committee.

61.  Dr Pool comments that given the political economy  and  the  nature  of
    the society in rural and urban  Eritrea,  it  is  not  always  easy  to
    implement the draft process.   There is a large amount of  geographical
    mobility, not all of which can be monitored by  roadblocks.   In  rural
    Eritrea for example most peasants have cattle and oxen.  Young men  can
    be absent from the villages for months while they take family herds  to
    distant pastures.  Rural people also  move  temporarily  to  towns  for
    casual wage labour.  As urbanisation began as  recently  as  the  1930s
    many Eritrean families still have their roots in villages and shares in
    village land.  Urban residents frequently go and reside in villages  to
    help out members of their extended family clan in times of need.

62.  Registration of national service is  based  on  the  identification  of
    those eligible in the village or the urban quarter by officials of  the
    MRA and the civilian committee members.

63.  The Giffa (round-up)  are  organised  in  villages  and  town  quarters
    entirely of those who appear to be of eligible  age.   The  authorities
    search houses, workplaces and streets and detain suspected  evaders  to
    check their identity documents  and  at  military  roadblocks  on  main
    roads.   It is quite usual for buses and other forms of transport to be
    stopped for the identity cards of all passengers to be checked.

64.  Dr Pool focused upon the issue of whether someone would  be  considered
    a draft evader if they have not been called up for a significant period
    in time.   It was his view as expressed in paragraph 4 of  the  report,
    that somebody within that category could still be considered as a draft
    evader.  He refers  particularly  to  Article  37(3)  and  (4)  of  the
    National Service Proclamation of 1995.   It  seems  that  the  onus  to
    undertake military services would seem to be on the person eligible for
    the draft to undertake it.  The vague phrasing in  paragraph  37(3)  is
    "knowing he has the duty of serving" and "avoids the performance of his
    duty".    Article  37(5)  provides  "anyone  that  attempted  to  avoid
    national service by various devices  or  delayed  his  registration  by
    unjustified  motives  or  created  obstacles...".   In  the  nature  of
    Eritrean society and the  political  economy  an  individual  could  be
    absent from the normal  place  of  residence  for  a  period  of  time.
    Strong links between extended families  and  clans  between  rural  and
    urban areas provide considerable opportunities for  Eritreans  to  find
    protection and places to hide out for significant periods of time.   Dr
    Pool makes reference to the fact of the reports and rumours of  massive
    imprisonment and of prisons unable to cope with the  numbers  of  draft
    evaders being held in schools, military encampments and indeed in metal
    containers.

65.  Thus, Mr Norton-Taylor submits on the basis of Dr Pool's  report,  that
    the local community, having  identified  suitable  candidates  for  the
    draft may well consider such candidates to have evaded  that  draft  if
    they are absent from their home or  area  unreasonably  for  an  unduly
    extended period.   Thus the fact that a person may not have been called
    up does not indicate that they are not the subject of interest  by  the
    committee.  Their departure would be seen by that committee as  seeking
    to evade military service.

66.  The efforts of the committee are seen also to be complementary  to  the
    general obligations upon citizens  to  make  themselves  available  for
    national service.  The proclamation itself proclaims the  matter  as  a
    matter  of  national  pride  and  civic  responsibility  to   undertake
    services.  An individual who has not done so will be viewed  critically
    by the authorities.  Mr Norton-Taylor submits to  us  that  the  longer
    that somebody remains in Eritrea without performing  military  service,
    the more likely it is that the finger will  be  pointed  at  them  upon
    return.  It is difficult to understand, submits Mr  Norton-Taylor,  how
    the appellant could benefit from any  exempted  category.  She  is  not
    married but rather is divorced from her husband.   She  is  not  taking
    care of children because her child  is  being  taken  care  of  by  her
    husband's family.   Thus there would be no good reason for her  not  to
    have undertaken national service.

67.  Thus he submits that although it is to be recognised  that  the  vigour
    of enforcement of national service may vary  between  the  regions,  it
    could not be said that  the  lack  of  application  in  enforcement  is
    necessarily an indication as to a lack of interest.

68.  Mr Wright submits in relation to such matters, that the  appellant  was
    not moving around the country but on her evidence was resident with her
    aunt for a number of years in the town.   According to her account  she
    had registered with the authorities in 2001 and  she  had  an  identity
    card which had been checked on a number of  occasions  at  checkpoints,
    indeed having been checked  on  four  occasions  given  the  answer  to
    Question 34 of the interview.   On none  of  those  occasions  was  she
    detained for military service.  He submits that  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that the appellant was of any interest to the authorities  for
    national service before she left.

69.  Although Dr Pool's evidence has been presented to us in an  attempt  to
    persuade  us  that  the  findings  of  the  Tribunal  in  KA  are   not
    sustainable,  we  find  that  the  report,  to  the  contrary,   merely
    reinforces the position which has been expressed by the Tribunal,  that
    generally somebody living for a significant period in  Eritrea  without
    being called up would not  fall  within  the  risk  category  of  draft
    evader.

70.  We focus very much of course upon the appellant's situation and of  her
    evidence that when she came into that area of Eritrea  she  was  housed
    and remained living with her aunt for three years thereafter.   Argodat
    is the capital town of Barka Province.   She was  living  in  an  urban
    area not in a village.   She registered with the  authorities  in  2001
    and had an identity card which presumably provided all relevant details
    as to her identity.  It was an identity card, which had been checked on
    her own account at least four times at a checkpoint during  the  period
    that she resided in Akcordat.  Thus she was a person  who  was  settled
    and a person whose identity was known to the local authorities.

71.  Dr Pool's report  stresses  the  important  function  which  the  local
    committee has in selecting those who are eligible for national service.
      Contrary to what  might  otherwise  be  supposed,  those  chosen  for
    national service are not seemingly  chosen  at  random  or  by  unlucky
    selection, but rather in a combination of enquiry and local  knowledge.
    Those selected for national service are therefore  chosen  at  a  local
    level by the specific concern of the appointed committee.

72.  It seemed to us as a matter of commonsense, therefore, that the  longer
    that somebody is in an  area  without  being  called  up  for  national
    service the less likely it is that they are of interest  to  the  local
    committee.  We readily understand that there may be those in the fairly
    mobile society in Eritrea who leave their homes for a long time  before
    returning.  That is not the case of this appellant.

73.  Given the emphasis  which  is  clearly  placed  by  the  government  on
    national service and the obligation of those citizens to partake, it is
    reasonable to assume that there  would  be  some  motivation  upon  the
    committee to recruit those who become eligible as soon as possible.  it
    is clear from the objective evidence that students  in  particular  are
    very much at the forefront  of  the  call-up  procedure  and  face  the
    requirement as part of their continuing education to  undergo  military
    training at the Sawa Training Camps.

74.  Clearly the appellant was not of that age when she resided in  Eritrea.
      Though the committee had ample opportunity to call her up,  the  fact
    she was not called up is indicative, as we so find, that she was not of
    any particular interest to the committee.

75.  The comments of Dr Pool also can be seen in  a  wider  context.   If  a
    considerable degree of flexibility is allowed as between the regions as
    to the enforcing of the draft, it is difficult to argue that there is a
    uniformity of approach  and  severity  across  the  country.   Thus  an
    individual who may move from a region which was fairly lax and  liberal
    as to the call-up, into a region where the call-up was  more  rigorous,
    may not by reason of that fact alone, be considered to have avoided the
    draft.  Certain communities were more rigorous in seeking to impose  or
    restrict draft than in  others.   There  is  good  reason  to  suppose,
    therefore, that anybody returning to Eritrea would be considered as  to
    their response for military service, in the light of  the  practice  or
    approach which was adopted in their region at the material time.

76.  We turn to consider the third matter which was  raised  by  Mr  Norton-
    Taylor and that was a challenge once again to the  conclusions  of  the
    Tribunal in KA, particularly as to the risks  to  females  of  eligible
    draft age as set out in paragraphs 75 to  77  of  that  decision.    In
    particular, issue is taken by Mr Norton-Taylor in the statement made by
    the Tribunal that the government was  reported  in  2003/2004  to  have
    stopped  the  forcible  recruitment  of  young  Muslims   from   Muslim
    communities, especially among the Afar  of  Dankalia  on  the  Red  Sea
    coast.  Comment was made based upon the US State Department Report  for
    February 2005 that hundreds of women  were  demobilised  from  national
    service due to age, infirmity, motherhood, marriage  or  the  needs  of
    their families.  He submits, that the conclusions of  the  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 113(e) that the category of risk is not  extended  to  Muslim
    women or to women who are married  or  are  mothers  or  carers,  is  a
    simplification in the current circumstances and situation  in  Eritrea.



77.  Mr Norton-Taylor opens his submissions to us by inviting our  attention
    to the letter which was  written  by  his  solicitors  to  the  British
    Embassy in Asmara dated 15 May  2006  and  the  reply  which  has  been
    received on 31 July 2006 from Mr Nick Astbury, HM Ambassador.

78.  The Ambassador when asked to confirm whether Muslim  women  in  Eritrea
    were exempt from national service and if so whether that exemption  was
    confined to a specific region in Eritrea.  The reply which was received
    was as follows:-

         "I was finally able to get an answer to your question this morning.
          Mr Amanwe, the Secretary at the Department of  Religious  Affairs
         told me that, under Proclamation 82/1995, the only exemptions  from
         national service was for those below eighteen,  those  over  forty,
         those with a physical disability or mothers.   I  asked  explicitly
         about Muslim women and was told there was no exemption for them."


79.  Our attention was invited to the report of Dr Pool  dated  12  February
    2006 to be found in Bundle A.  At paragraph 5 of that report  he  makes
    comment upon the recruitment of Muslim women in these terms:-

         "The recruitment of Muslim women is a difficult topic on  which  to
         provide any definitive conclusion.  The Eritrean  Government  takes
         some  pride  in  its  treatment  of  women  and  of  its  own  non-
         discriminatory  practices  between   Eritrean   nationalities   and
         regions, a legacy of the equality between genders was in the  ranks
         of the EPLF when women provided some thirty  per  cent  front  line
         fighters.  There had been reports that  in  some  areas,  like  the
         Muslim Afar region of the  Red  Sea  coast  and  Barka  in  Western
         Eritrea, the implementation of the  NSP  for  women  has  not  been
         rigorous.  According to my sources in recent years there has been a
         lighter handed  approach  towards  the  recruitment  of  women  for
         national service, in part because of the  refusal  of  families  to
         deliver women for national service.  However, if a student wants to
         complete high school (and rates of enrolment  of  women  in  Muslim
         areas at all educational levels is  especially  low)  and  continue
         into higher  education,  training,  national  service  in  Sawa  is
         necessary, regardless of religious faith.   Although  it  has  been
         easier over the last few years for women  to  gain  exemption  from
         national service or to be released early there has been no official
         change in the universal eligibility for national  service  as  laid
         out in the NSP.  It would also seem that  the  induction  of  women
         into national service is uneven and can vary with the more or  less
         rigorous  policy  pursued  by  the   Regional   General.    General
         Gebrezgher Andemariam (better known as  Nom-te-Guerre  "Wuchu")  of
         the Central Military Region covering Asmara  and  its  surroundings
         and General Tekli Haile Sellassie of the Soluther  Military  Region
         have fearsome reputations as being particularly hardline."


80.  Building on that report by Dr  Pool,  our  attention  was  drawn  to  a
    report by Gaim Kibreab a Reader  in  Psychology  and  Director  of  MSC
    Refugee Studies at the London Southbank  University.   Unhelpfully  the
    report seems not to be  dated  but  clearly  was  prepared  after  2002
    bearing in mind the footnotes to  the  report  as  specified.   In  his
    report he highlights that  initially  there  were  nine  categories  of
    people who were exempted  from  national  service.   They  were  people
    engaged in industrial, agricultural and pastoral  production,  licensed
    self-employed traders, except those who work in  liquor  houses,  bars,
    hotels and nightclubs, women  who  are  in  gainful  employment,  self-
    employment or who make a living by employing others are exempt from the
    obligation, married women and  single  mothers,  sole  breadwinners  in
    families, and couples in honeymoon until the honeymoon ends.  (Articles
    2-9 of the NSP).

81.  He speaks of the fact that national  service  was  introduced  in  1994
    during the immediate post-Algiers Peace Agreement (December 2000)   The
    Eritrean   Government   established   a   National    Commission    for
    Demobilisation  and  Reintegration  Programme  (NCDRP)  and  a   phased
    demobilisation programme of some four hundred thousand  combatants  was
    formulated.  Some seventy  thousand  combatants  were  expected  to  be
    demobilised by the end of January 2003.  These were going to be  mostly
    women, people with skills, family needs and sicknesses.   In the second
    phase six thousand combatants were expected to be  demobilised  by  the
    end of July 2003.

82.   Instead  of  demobilising,  however,  the  government   extended   the
    obligation to perform national service indefinitely under the  Warsaid-
    Yekaalo Campaign (WYC)  in  May  2002.    Where  the  national  service
    proclamation limits the requirement of service to eighteen months,  the
    WYC compels those who complete the eighteen months requirement to  stay
    in arms indefinitely and to work for the  state  without  remuneration.
    In 2004 the government "demobilised" some people with scarce skills and
    some  women,  they  were  required  to  remain  in   their   respective
    assignments for an additional two years without remuneration.

83.  The report goes on to speak about the participation  of  women  in  the
    national service.  It speaks of the differences  in  intensity  of  the
    level of resistance of the different  ethno-linguistic  groups  in  the
    country.  The programme was deeply resented by all  communities  and  a
    degree  of  popular  resistance  to  women's  participation  has   been
    intensifying, as a result  of  their  negative  experience  as  regards
    protection against alleged sexual harassment.   For example,  when  the
    army rounded up thousands of people on the streets of  Asmara  in  July
    2002, including pregnant women, a spontaneous gathering of parents took
    place to protest against that action.  It said that  the  pressure  was
    such that on 27  December  2002  the  Commissioner  for  Demobilisation
    promised  that  women  serving  in  the  army  would  be   demobilised.
    Although it was said that it was not followed in practice.

84.  The participation of Muslim women in national service was  resented  by
    most Muslim families.  The government's policy is  based  on  the  fact
    that all Eritreans are equal before the law.  However,  the  government
    was forced seemingly to implement the law flexibly in two areas of  the
    country,  namely  rural  Dankalia  and  parts  of  Barka.    When   the
    government came to rural Dankalia and rural Barka to recruit women  the
    Afar of rural Dankalia and the Beni Amer of rural Barka  threatened  to
    defend their women by the use of force.   The government turned a blind
    eye to recruitment of women in those particular areas.  Such was not to
    be construed however that the exemption applied to all women throughout
    the country.

85.  According to Gaim Kibreab in all cities and  towns  no  exemptions  are
    made to recruitment  of  Muslim  women.    He  said  that  many  Muslim
    families have withdrawn their children  from  school  or  had  arranged
    marriages.   He concludes that Eritrean Muslim women who  live  in  all
    the cities and towns as well as outside the rural areas of Dankalia and
    parts of Barka are effected by national service.

86.  Further comment is made  upon  that  matter  by  Rachel  Wikin  of  the
    Individuals at Risk Programme of  Amnesty  International  in  a  letter
    dated 13 July 2006.  She  comments  that  the  statement  in  the  2004
    Amnesty Report that the government appears to have subsequently stopped
    forcible conscription of young Muslim women in these areas, was at  the
    time sourced  from  the  reports  of  confrontation  between  the  Afar
    community  in  the  Dankalia  region  on  the  Red  Coast  as  well  as
    information from confidential sources.

87.  Rachel Wikin comments as follows in the last paragraph of that letter:-



         "From our general  knowledge  of  the  behaviour  of  the  Eritrean
         authorities, we do not believe that an Afar woman who was  returned
         to Eritrea as a failed asylum applicant would be safe from forcible
         conscription.  She would not have access to any protection that may
         be afforded by the Afar community in  the  region.   Any  exemption
         operating within the Dankalia region would not extend  to  Afar  or
         non-Afar Muslim  women  outside  of  that  area.   Exemptions  from
         conscription  in  Eritrea  appear  to  be  arbitrary  rather   than
         bureaucratically controlled".


88.  Thus Mr Norton-Taylor submits that the lack of conscription  of  Muslim
    women is simply a de facto decision, applicable only to certain regions
    in Eritrea and arises simply because the communities in  those  regions
    have stood firm against the government's recruitment policy.   Although
    the appellant is in the Barka province she is in  the  main  town.   As
    such she would  not  have  the  protection  of  a  local  community  to
    recruitment.  Hence the general optimism, which was expressed in KA  as
    to the reduction in the recruitment of women,  is  ill-founded  in  the
    light of the reports which have been presented for our attention.

89.  He developed that argument further by inviting  our  attention  to  the
    EHDR-UK letter of 13 July 2006 set out at page 90 of Bundle B.  This is
    the letter written by the Executive Director of Eritreans for Human and
    Democratic Rights.  The letter  confirms  that  Muslim  women  are  not
    exempt at all.  However, there are areas where the villagers refuse  to
    send  their  daughters  to  military  service  or  hide  them  and  the
    government or local military administration  does  nothing  further  in
    respect of that refusal.

90.  Mr Norton-Taylor submits that the position of the government  in  terms
    of recruitment for national  service  has  hardened  in  recent  years,
    rather than having been modified.   Our  attention  was  drawn  to  the
    general situation as outlined by the US Department of State  Report  of
    March 2006 to be found at pages 80 to 90 of Bundle B.   In  particular,
    at page 18 it is said that the law requires that women aged eighteen to
    twenty seven participate in national  service.   During  the  year  the
    government  continued  efforts  to  detain  women  draft  evaders   and
    deserters.  Reference was made  to  an  article  headed  "Eritrea  said
    recalling  Demobilised  Soldiers",  an   article   from   Awat.com./BBC
    Monitoring dated 2006 to be found at page 58 of Bundle B.   This is  an
    article dealing with the round-up of high school students for  military
    services.  In a number of regions, high school students aged  seventeen
    and above are taken to military service.  It  was  noticed  that  those
    called for military service including  athletes  and  other  youngsters
    active in various sports who had previously  been  given  a  permit  to
    pursue their sporting activities.  Demobilised  soldiers  and  national
    service corps, who had been discharged for medical reasons,  were  also
    ordered to re-register.  It is  submitted  that  the  government  would
    continue to take a serious view of  those  who  failed  to  attend  for
    military service.

91.  We recognise, in light of that  evidence,  that  it  may  be  that  the
    comments by the Tribunal in KA as to Muslim women and  their  exemption
    from the  draft  may  well  have  to  be  modified.   Clearly,  greater
    consideration will now have to be given to the individual circumstances
    of the claimant and in particular the region in which she lives.

92.  There remains, however, the  distinction  between  being  eligible  for
    military service and being perceived as being a draft evader.  We  find
    that the appellant came from a region which was generally lax about the
    recruitment of Muslim women, or women generally, for national  service.
    Given that finding it is difficult to conclude, thereby,  that  by  her
    non-performance of military service she was a draft evader.  It  is  of
    some significance that the Barka Province seemed to be  less  prone  to
    enforced conscription for  women  generally  than  other  regions.   Mr
    Norton-Taylor invites us  to  find  that  as  the  appellant  lived  in
    Agordat, which was the capital, she stood to lose the advantage,  which
    might otherwise  accrue  to  her  were  she  to  come  from  the  rural
    community.  For our part we cannot see such a sharp  distinction  being
    focused in the reports which have been presented to us.  Given that the
    town is within the general region which exercises a degree of latitude,
    it is difficult to understand why such latitude would not  extend  also
    to the urban area under control of the same regional General.

93.  it is seemingly consistent with the  evidence,  which  we  have  heard,
    that the appellant was not called up  precisely  because  of  the  less
    rigorous approach adopted to the call-up of women in the Barka  region.
     Equally of course it may well be that she was not  called  up  because
    she was a mother living with her daughter.   We have nothing other than
    the testimony of the appellant to indicate she was either divorced from
    her husband or that her daughter was living with her  husband.   As  we
    have remarked before, it is somewhat curious, if her  husband's  family
    lived in Agordat  or  nearby,  that  the  appellant  saw  her  daughter
    infrequently.  Her evidence  was  that  her  husband  had  brought  her
    daughter to see her the last time about a year before she departed  for
    the United Kingdom.  We remind  ourselves  that  corroboration  is  not
    required but equally we are entitled to  place  such  weight  upon  the
    evidence of the appellant as appears from the overall context  of  that
    evidence and to the general credibility relating thereto.

94.  In considering the objective  evidence  and  the  submissions  relating
    thereto, we consider that it would be wise and  appropriate  to  update
    the conclusions of the Tribunal as expressed in paragraph  113  of  KA.
    We consider, however, that the only amendment which needs to be made in
    the summary of conclusions therein is simply to delete the reference in
    113(e), the category of  Muslim  women.   In  all  other  respects  the
    summary would seem to us to be an accurate statement of the situation.

95.  Dealing thus first of all with the asylum claim of  the  appellant,  we
    indicate that we do not find it credible as to her having  been  called
    up or detained.   We do not find that she is at risk of being  regarded
    as a draft evader upon return.   We do no find that the  appellant  had
    any political profile of her own such as to attract  the  attention  of
    the authorities nor do we consider that her family profile was such  as
    to cause any interest in her by the authorities at the time she was  in
    Eritrea or upon any return.   It follows, therefore,  that  we  do  not
    find there is a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason in the case of the appellant.

96.  We were not addressed at length upon  the  human  rights  situation  as
    faced by the appellant.  Our findings in relation to Article 3  of  the
    ECHR stand or fall on the findings which we have made.   We  note  that
    the appellant was able to leave Eritrea without incident.   She  has  a
    child in Eritrea and an ex-husband or husband.   She also has  an  aunt
    and other relatives.

97.  We note the various statements which have been made by  the  appellant.
    These  do  not  deal  in  any  great  detail  with  her  situation  and
    circumstances in the United Kingdom nor were  we  addressed  in  detail
    upon such matters.  We note the written submissions, which  were  filed
    on behalf of the appellant and which are contained  in  pages  1-16  of
    Bundle A.  Once again, such matters  do  not  deal  with  her  domestic
    situation in the United Kingdom.   We understand that  the  appellant's
    brother and sister were granted asylum  status  in  August  2002.   Our
    attention was drawn to documents relating to them in  Bundle  B.    The
    brother, Sakhr was born in 1977 and the sister, Aber, born  in  January
    1979.   We have regard to the determination which is set out  at  pages
    21 to 26 of Bundle B.   There seemed to be little adjudication  in  the
    determination as to the merits  of  the  claim  as  presented  for  the
    brother and sister.  Significantly they said that they  did  not  speak
    Tigrean or Amharic but only Arabic, where as of course the appellant in
    the case before us confirmed that they spoke both.    The  issue  which
    concerned the Adjudicator, as he then  was,  was  whether  or  not  the
    brother and sister would be able to gain  entry  into  Eritrea  on  the
    documents which they had.  He found that  they  would  not,  they  were
    therefore stateless.   It was on that limited finding that their asylum
    appeals were allowed.  The findings of  the  Adjudicator  dealt  little
    with the aspect of political profile.

98.  Nothing has been presented before us to show that there  is  any  undue
    dependency as between the appellant or siblings.  We bear in  mind  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Razgar and that in Huang.   We  bear
    in mind the structured approach to the issue  of  Article  8  which  is
    urged upon us by such  decisions.   Clearly  the  appellant  enjoys  an
    element of private life and that to return her to Eritrea would  be  an
    interference with that enjoyment.   However, we find no feature such as
    would render such an interference a breach  of  her  protected  rights.
    The appellant has secured entry into the United Kingdom  upon  what  we
    have found to be a false claim for asylum. We see no reason at all  why
    the course of immigration control  should  not  be  properly  exercised
    against her.   There is nothing exceptional in her case to  render  the
    act of removal one that is disproportionate in all  the  circumstances.



99.  In the circumstances the appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed.

100. Thus, upon a reconsideration of the decision of the  Adjudicator,  Miss
    Jhirad, we find the original decision should  stand,  namely  that  the
    appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed.   The  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 24/10/2006

Senior Immigration Judge King TD

SE(Deportation-Malta-2002-GeneralRisk) Eritrea CG [2004] 00295

NM(Draft evaders-evidence of risk) Eritrea [2005] UKIAT 00073

KA (draft related risk categories updated) Eritrea CG [2005] UKIAT 00165

Proclamation No 82/1995 - National Service Proclamation ( Eritrea)

Excerpt "Eritrea said recalling demobilized soldiers"-Awate. Com/ BBC
monitoring- February 2006.

Operational Guidance Note- Eritrea - 5 May 2006

USSDR International Religious Freedom Report 2005 - Eritrea.

USSDR on Eritrea - 8 March 2006.

Dr David Poole Expert Report - 12th January 2006.

Amnesty International Letter - Rachel Witkin - 13 July 2006.

Dr Gaim Kibreab - Expert report [undated]

EHDR - UK letter - 13 July 2006.

Amnesty International Report - "Eritrea Religious Persecution "- 7.12.2005.

Middle East Times Article - 23 February 2006.

Letter from Solicitors to British Embassy in Asmara - 15 May 2006.

Letter from Nr Nick Astbury, HM Ambassador Eritrea - 31.July 2006.





