
KX  (Mixed marriages-Roma-Albanian - Januzi applied) Serbia and Montenegro
(kosovo) CG [2006] UKAIT 00072


Asylum and Immigration Tribunal



|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On              9 May 2006                    |On 20 September 2006         |
|Prepared 9 June 2006                          |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE GLEESON
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE McGEACHY
                                MRS J HARRIS

                                   Between

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant :    Mr G Denholm, Counsel
     Instructed by Sunny Leong & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller,
     Home Office Presenting Officer

Where there is a visible difference in skin  colour  and  the  Roma  partner
speaks  no,  or  accented,  Albanian,  Roma-Albanian  mixed  marriages   and
relationships akin to marriage in Serbia and Montenegro  (Kosovo)  put  both
parties at risk.  The country background evidence now distinguishes  between
the risk to Roma and their partners, who remain at  risk  because  they  are
perceived by the Albanian community as traitors and Serb collaborators,  and
Ashkaelia and Egyptians whose position is not as serious.

Roma-Albanian couples cannot  access  the  protection  either  of  the  Roma
enclaves or the Albanian community and unless either party will normally  be
perceived as a member  of  the  other  community,  the  parties  to  such  a
relationship are at  general  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  from
individuals in both communities because the risk is  from  non-state  actors
and there is, in general, insufficient protection  from  either  Serbia  and
Montenegro (Kosovo) state bodies or from K-FOR and other NGOs.

This determination  updates  and  replaces  (in  relation  to  Roma-Albanian
relationships) the Tribunal's decisions in FM (IFA-mixed  marriage-Albanian-
Ashkaelian) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00013, SK and  others  (Roma  in  Kosovo-
update) Serbia  and  Montenegro  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00023,  BS  (IFA  -mixed
ethnicity) Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT 04254, FD (Kosovo-Roma) Kosovo  CG  [2004]
UKIAT 00214 and AB (Ashkaelia) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00188.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is  the  reconsideration  with  permission  of  the  decision  of
      Immigration Judge Glossop who dismissed  the  appeal  of  KX  and  his
      partner or wife, AB, against refusal to recognise them as refugees and
      the setting of removal directions to Serbia and  Montenegro  (Kosovo).
      The Immigration Judge  rejected  both  the  asylum  and  human  rights
      grounds and made a separate finding that KX was not married to AB, the
      woman described as his wife.  The core  of  this  claim  is  that  the
      appellant and AB are in a mixed Albanian-Roma marriage and claim to be
      at risk of persecution on that account.  They  are  both  citizens  of
      Serbia and Montenegro (Kosovo).

   2. At the  first  stage  reconsideration  hearing  a  Tribunal  (  Senior
      Immigration Judge Freeman, Senior Immigration Judge Jordan and Dr J  O
      De Barros) found as follows:

         "[KX's] claim to face risk as the 'partner' of a Roma  woman  could
         not reasonably be dismissed on the basis that they are not  married
         given the length of time they have been living  together.   However
         the appeal could not succeed on the basis of risk to the  'partner'
         herself given that she chose to withdraw her  [asylum]  application
         and let her case proceed as a dependant of [KX]."

   3. The appeal therefore proceeds to full reconsideration.   Following  AH
      (Scope of s103A reconsideration) Sudan [2006] UKAIT 00038 the Tribunal
      must deal with all matters in the original grounds of appeal,  whether
      by approving the Immigration Judge's handling of them or remaking  the
      decision itself. The burden of proof remains upon the appellant.

   4. This appeal is argued under the Refugee Convention, and Articles 3 and
      8 ECHR.  For Article 3 and the Refugee  Convention,  the  standard  of
      proof is essentially the same  (real  risk  or  reasonable  degree  of
      likelihood), including for the ECHR rights (Kacaj (Article 3, Standard
      of Proof, Non-State Actors) Albania [2001] UKIAT 00018*, at paragraphs
      7-8).  For all the issues before us, the date at which risk on  return
      is to be established is the date of hearing.

   5. The original grounds of appeal also include Article 2  ECHR  but  this
      was not pursued at the hearing before us.  In the original grounds  of
      appeal, the appellant contended that the Secretary of State  had  been
      selective in his choice of the facts considered.  He argued  that  the
      Secretary of State's decision was against the weight of the  evidence.
      He  reasserted  his  persecution  claim  and  argued   that   it   was
      unreasonable to expect documentary evidence about his wife who  was  a
      traveller and without fixed address.  He asserted that she is of  Roma
      ethnicity (which is now accepted) and that  they  could  not  relocate
      internally to avoid local difficulties,  because  he  would  still  be
      attacked by the Albanian community  elsewhere  for  having  married  a
      traitor (the perception amongst the Albanian community being that  all
      Roma  were  Serb  supporters  and  collaborators).   The   levels   of
      discrimination and ill-treatment to which Albanians in mixed Albanian-
      Roma marriages  were  subjected  were  serious  enough  to  constitute
      persecution.  He also challenged the legality and  proportionality  of
      the decision to remove.

   6. The principal appellant, KX is of Albanian  ethnicity  and  appearance
      and his wife, (AB) is a Roma gypsy both by ethnicity  and  appearance.
      The Secretary of State no longer disputes her  ethnicity.   Only  KX's
      appeal remains  live,  AB  having  withdrawn  her  asylum  claim.  The
      Immigration Judge found that, KX and AB's marital  arrangements  being
      somewhat unclear, they were not to be regarded as in a mixed marriage.
       Leave to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguably  an
      error of law to find that the parties were not in a relationship  akin
      to marriage.

Second stage reconsideration hearing
   7. The present hearing is the full reconsideration of  KX's  appeal:   AB
      now falls to be considered only as his  dependant.  KX  is  an  ethnic
      Albanian and suffered in Kosovo in 1998 during the civil war but  this
      was not a live issue before the Immigration Judge.  The sole issue  at
      the reconsideration hearing was agreed by the parties as being:

         "Whether [KX] and [AB] would face a real risk  of  persecution  on
         return to Kosovo on account of
         (i) [AB's] ethnicity as a Roma gypsy, and
         (ii)     Their mixed  marriage  (that  being  an  additional  risk
             category recognised by UNHCR and indeed  other  parts  of  the
             objective evidence including the CIPU report)."

Evidence before Tribunal
   8. The Tribunal had the benefit  of  oral  evidence  from  AB,  and  full
      argument on the authorities.  We also had before us a  country  expert
      report from Dr Alex Standish (dated 18 March 2006), the  October  2005
      UN security Council report, the CIPU Country Report of April 2005, and
      Operational Guidance Notes (OGNs) of May and June 2006, the  US  State
      Department Report for Serbia and Montenegro, for  2005  (published  in
      March 2006), an Amnesty International report of July 2005,  and,  from
      UNHCR, a March 2000  background note on ethnic Albanians from  Kosovo,
      an August 2004 report on the  same  issue,  and  the  position  papers
      published in August 2004,  January and  March  2005,  and  June  2006,
      together with the fifth annual report of the Kosovo  ombudsperson  and
      five Articles from European Roma Rights Council (ERRC)  dated  between
      August 2004 and February 2006.

   9. Some of this material (the June 2006 OGN, and UNHCR position paper for
      June 2005) came to hand after the hearing.  It is all  in  the  public
      domain.   We considered whether to invite further submissions  but  as
      the newer material merely supports the picture which emerges from  the
      earlier material,  concluded  that  this  was  unnecessary.  We  have,
      however, included it on E and R principles.


Agreed facts and matters
  10. At the beginning of the  hearing,  both  appellants  were  present  in
      court. Both are Muslim. The Tribunal observed, as had the  Immigration
      Judge and the country experts, that there was  plainly  a  significant
      difference  in  skin  tone  between  them,   with   AB's   skin   tone
      significantly darker than that  of  KX.   They  appear  to  have  gone
      through a form of marriage in Kosovo, but are not registered in Kosovo
      as spouses, because of the difficulties which arise from  their  being
      of different ethnicity.

  11. Mr Deller confirmed that the facts could be treated as undisputed  but
      suggested that there was limited country guidance at present on  mixed
      ethnicity relationships.  Mr Denholm had not come  prepared  to  argue
      the risks to Roma in general.  He  had  however  prepared  a  skeleton
      argument which set out the undisputed facts as follows::

              "(a)     [KX] is an ethnic Albanian; [AB] is a Roma gypsy.
              (b) They married in  August  1998  but  the  marriage  is  not
    formally registered.
         (c)  They did not cohabit in Kosovo because of a  perceived  threat
             to them based upon their relationship.
         (d)  [KX] fled Kosovo in late 1998 and the parties were reunited in
             Macedonia before travelling on to the UK.
         (e)  They arrived in the UK in September 1999.
         (f)  They have lived together as man and wife ever since.
         (g)  They intend to live together on return to Kosovo."

  12. Their relationship is therefore now of some eight years standing,  for
      six and a half of which they have cohabited in the United Kingdom.  No
      oral evidence was  called  initially;   we  proceeded  immediately  to
      submissions against those agreed facts.  However, by agreement, we did
      take oral evidence from AB just before lunch.  She  is  now  a  fluent
      English speaker.  The evidence was taken at the  Tribunal's  instance,
      both KX and his wife being present in Court.  When asked,  neither  Mr
      Denholm nor Mr Deller objected.

   Oral evidence of AB (KX's wife)
  13. We now summarise the matters  which  emerged  from  AB's  evidence-in-
      chief, cross-examination, and clarificatory  questions  asked  by  the
      Tribunal.  AB confirmed her name and address. She  is  a  Roma  woman,
      with an obviously Roma appearance and accent.  She said that  she  had
      been afraid all her life.  She became very tearful  when  speaking  of
      her fear.  She described the  position  of  Roma  in  Kosovo  as  'low
      people'. When  they  walked  in  the  street  they  would  be  shoved,
      threatened and told, "You Roma, we will  kill  you,  we  will  destroy
      you."  Albanians never mixed with Roma, not in the last hundred years,
      past or future and they never wanted to do so.  The Roma also did  not
      mix with Albanians and the couple would not be welcome in a Roma town.



  14. AB told us that she was well known in her home area, but that anywhere
      in Kosovo she would be identifiable as a Roma woman.  AB was afraid to
      go back to Kosovo because of problems arising from her marriage to KX,
      which was opposed by both communities. AB was  asked  to  explain  her
      fear.  She said that she had run away with an ethnic Albanian  and  if
      they returned they would simply be killed.  In Kosovo, the law was not
      democratic like that in the United Kingdom; the law  was  administered
      by the families.  There was no protection and the families went by the
      Kanun of Lek.   There  was  nowhere  she  could  go  to  hide  and  no
      protection for her.

  15. Both she and her husband had been promised to  persons  in  their  own
      communities since birth. They had undergone a form of marriage but not
      had not  dared  to  register  their  union  for  fear  of  both  their
      communities taking revenge on them.  The village had found  out  about
      her relationship with KX, because he was  so  excited  when  they  got
      together that he told his best friend,  who  then  did  not  keep  the
      secret.  His best friend became  angry  and  said  to  KX,  "You  were
      promised to another girl and you have mixed with the Roma,  how  could
      you do that?"  He told the whole of KX's village which  was  near  the
      Roma enclave where AB lived; the relationship led to AB's family being
      suspected of Serb sympathies.

  16. Almost immediately, the friend's wife had told AB's mother.  That  was
      when the trouble started.  Her mother was not happy, especially as she
      already had a husband picked out for AB.  The people  from  AB's  Roma
      enclave  did  not  like  KX  and  disapproved  of  the   relationship.
      Realising the secret was out, KX then came to AB and said,  "They  all
      know about us."  He then went to the mountains to hide.  They did  not
      see each other again in Kosovo and she did not hear from him until she
      left.

  17. It was just a few weeks after that that they came for her father.   In
      July 1999, when they took her father,  KX's  village  knew  about  her
      relationship with KX and thought AB's whole  family  were  Serb  spies
      because she was having a relationship with KX.  Her  relationship  had
      put all her family members at risk and caused the disappearance of her
      father.  Some of  the  people  who  came  and  took  her  father  were
      identifiably from KX's village and,  although  they  wore  masks,  she
      recognised them.  They wore the KLA arm badge.  They  broke  down  the
      caravan door, pushed her mother aside, took her father and said  "come
      on you spy".  The men who came to take her father had  mentioned  KX's
      name.  They called AB some bad  names  and  walked  towards  her;  her
      mother told her to run.  She knew that they had intended to rape her.

  18. Her great fear was that the Albanians, or indeed the Roma, could  come
      and "do whatever" to the couple.  Once you broke the Kanun of Lek  you
      were basically dead; if either the Albanians or  the  Roma  caught  up
      with the couple, they would kill her or  rape  her  in  front  of  her
      husband.  The Albanians would harm her and the  Roma  would  harm  her
      husband.

  19. In cross-examination, AB was asked if she knew of any other  Albanian-
      Roma relationship in Kosovo. AB did not.  During their time in Kosovo,
      AB and KX had not been able to live together but  since  they  reached
      the United Kingdom they had done so.  She  would  rather  die  in  the
      United Kingdom than return to Kosovo because  she  would  be  at  risk
      everywhere.

  20. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, AB said  that  she  did  not
      know whether her mother was still alive.  She had three  brothers  and
      another two sisters but she did not know what had happened about them.
        She was not aware that she could try to trace family members through
      the Red Cross.  She had not seen anyone from Kosovo; KX  was  all  she
      had.

Appellants' submissions
  21. For the appellant, Mr Denholm relied on his skeleton  argument  (which
      is a useful guide to the background evidence) and made  the  following
      oral arguments.  He asked us to consider the decision of Schiemann  LJ
      in the Court of Appeal in Katrinak v The Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department  [2001] EWCA Civ 832 which held that it  was  possible
      for a man to be persecuted by what was done or threatened to his wife:

         "23. If I return with my  wife  to  a  country  where  there  is  a
             reasonable degree of likelihood that she will be subjected  to
             further grave physical abuse for racial reasons that  puts  me
             in a situation where there is a reasonable degree of risk that
             I will be persecuted.  It is possible to persecute  a  husband
             or a member of a family by what you do to other members of his
             immediate family.  The essential task for the  decision  taken
             in these  sorts  of  circumstances  is  to  consider  what  is
             reasonably likely to happen to the wife and  whether  that  is
             reasonably likely to affect the husband in such a  way  as  to
             amount to persecution of him."

  22. Mr Denholm observed that Roma  were  still  regarded  as  having  been
      collaborators  with  the  occupying  Serbs   and   pointed   out   the
      modification in UNHCR guidance given on mixed-ethnicity  relationships
      contained in "UNHCR Position on the Continued International Protection
      Needs of Individuals from Kosovo" for the years 2004  and  2005.   (We
      now also have the advantage of seeing the 2006  Position  Paper  which
      was published in June 2006).

  23. In 2004, at paragraph 6, UNHCR maintained its position that members of
      the Serb, Roma, Ashkaelia and Egyptian communities should continue  to
      benefit from international protection in countries of  asylum  "return
      of these minorities should take place on a  strictly  voluntary  basis
      deriving from fully informed individual  decisions".  In  March  2005,
      UNHCR separated  the  position  for  Roma  from  those  of  Ashkaelia,
      Egyptian, Bosniak and Gorani communities as follows:

      "14.    Against the described developments and constraints for  ethnic
          minorities UNHCR is concerned in particular for Kosovan, Serb and
          Roma communities as well as for ethnic Albanians  in  a  minority
          situation.  Therefore the Office  maintains  and  reiterates  the
          position that members of these groups should continue to  benefit
          from international protection in countries of  asylum  under  the
          1951 Convention or complementary forms of protection depending on
          the circumstances of claims. For these  groups  and  individuals,
          return should only take place on a strictly  voluntary  basis  in
          safety and dignity in  a  coordinated  and  gradual  manner  such
          return to be sustainable needs to be supported  by  reintegration
          assistance.

      15. With regard to Ashkaelia, Egyptian as well as Bosniak  and  Gorani
          communities, these groups appear to be better tolerated in  spite
          of a single, but very serious  incident  against  the  Ashkaelian
          community in Vushtrri/Vucitrin during the March 2004 attacks.  In
          the light of that incident the  August  2004  advice  from  UNHCR
          included the Ashkaelian and Egyptian communities among those with
          a continuing need for international protection.  However  in  the
          light  of  the  developments  since  then  UNHCR's  position   is
          currently that these groups may have individual valid claims  for
          continued  international  protection  which  would  need  to   be
          assessed in a comprehensive procedure."

  24. Under 'other groups at risk' UNHCR guidance identified:

         "Persons  in  ethnically  mixed  marriages  and  persons  of  mixed
         ethnicity; persons perceived  to  have  been  associated  with  the
         Serbian regime after 1990."

      That category remains in the current report.

  25. Mr Denholm then dealt with the Tribunal authorities put forward by the
      Secretary  of  State  on  the  mixed-race  question.  He   sought   to
      distinguish  FM  (IFA-Mixed  Marriage-Albanian-Ashkaelian)  Kosovo  CG
      [2004] UKIAT 00081. That decision, like this, was one where there  was
      no dispute on facts or credibility.  The appellant was an Albanian man
      who  married  a  woman,  each  of   whose   parents   was   of   mixed
      Ashkaeli/Albanian ancestry.  He was suspected of collaboration because
      of the family history.  He compounded matters by being seen  giving  a
      lift to two Ashkaelia men and a Serb man. The Tribunal  accepted  that
      there would be local difficulties for the couple but  found  that  the
      couple would not be identifiably in a mixed marriage if they  were  to
      relocate elsewhere in Kosovo.    Mr  Denholm  contended  that  it  was
      implicit in FM that if the couple had been in  an  identifiably  mixed
      marriage there would have been a risk (paragraph  26  on  page  8  and
      paragraph 38 to 47).

  26. In KB (mixed ethnicity, Roma/Albanian) Kosovo CG [2003] UKIAT 00013, a
      mixed-race appellant was light skinned and the Tribunal concluded that
      there was no ethnic risk as he would be seen as wholly  Albanian.   In
      AB (Ashkaelia) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00188 , paragraph 17 to 18,  the
      Tribunal held as follows: -
        1. The Appellant is not a Kosovo Albanian but he is married to one.
           Plainly the main  groups  of  mixed  marriages  that  can  cause
           security difficulties in Kosovo  are  marriages  between  ethnic
           Albanians and ethnic Serbs, and the Roma who are more  perceived
           by the Albanians as being allied to the Serbs. This  is  because
           of the continuing tension between the two  communities  and  the
           need particularly for the ethnic Serbs and Roma  to  concentrate
           in their own communities for security and  protection.  A  mixed
           marriage between an Albanian and a Serb could mean  difficulties
           in both communities and greater exposure to risk.
        1. The situation for Ashkaelia is however  rather  different.  They
           have  associated  themselves  traditionally  with  the  Albanian
           community. The Appellant has  lived  in  the  majority  Albanian
           community for much of his life. Having an ethnic  Albanian  wife
           would make it easier  for  him  to  identify  himself  with  the
           Albanian  community  in  the  way  described  in  the  objective
           evidence. The evidence that they have  experienced  difficulties
           themselves in the past in Kosovo is very limited and  vague.  In
           any event UNHCR advice is only that claims from people in  mixed
           marriages should be carefully considered. This we have done. "

  27. In BS (IFA, Mixed Ethnicity) Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT 04254 at paragraph
      5, the Tribunal found that if a person could pass as a member  of  the
      majority community there would be no risk.  Mr Denholm argued that the
      corollary would be  if  you  could  not  pass  and  the  marriage  was
      identifiable as a mixed ethnicity marriage, there was a risk.

  28. Accordingly, he contended that the  authorities  did  not  assist  the
      Secretary of State; it was implicit in all these decisions that  those
      in identifiably mixed ethnic marriages were at risk.   UNHCR  guidance
      was consistent on that point.  The Roma enclaves would give safety  to
      Roma but mixed marriages denied the  participants  the  protection  of
      both communities.

  29. In FD (Sufficiency of Protection, Roma, Munteanu)  Romania  CG  [2004]
      UKIAT 00001   the Tribunal was dealing with the child of a mixed Roma-
      Serb marriage (he referred to paragraphs 8,  14,  28),  not  with  the
      marriage itself.   The evidence in that case  was  that  the  problems
      were localised.

  30. The most recent UNHCR guidance  was,  he  submitted,  in  very  strong
      language, and plainly worded with reference to the Refugee  Convention
      risk. Conditions in enclaves were grim to the  point  of  being  life-
      threatening and FD did not deal with mixed ethnicity marriage.

  31. Mr Denholm then turned to Mr Standish's evidence as to the perceptions
      of both communities in particular at page 94,  paragraphs  22  to  26.
      Marriages between Roma and Albanians were treated as though they  were
      Albanian-Serb marriages by reason of the  perception  that  Roma  were
      Serb collaborators.  He asked us to compare paragraphs  32-39  of  the
      Standish report with  paragraph 3.11.2 of the May  2006  OGN,  and  to
      note the difficulty for a Roma woman, who would be  considered  marime
      (impure) for  marriage  to  a  "gadzjo"  (  a  non-Roma  man)  as  her
      responsibility was to ensure the continuation of  her  own  community.
      The couple were  unlikely  to  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  Roma
      enclaves.

  32. Mr Denholm also referred to a report from the Voice  of  Roma  in  the
      original bundle  before  the  Immigration  Judge  (pages  10-11).   At
      paragraph 30 of FD, the Tribunal had considered mono-ethnic  enclaves;
      however, Mr Standish's report was based upon material published  after
      the promulgation of the   determination.  Whereas in general, Roma who
      were concerned about their  personal  security  situation  could  seek
      shelter in a Roma enclave, where  there  was  a  greater  prospect  of
      collective protection than outside, and conditions in camps  (although
      overcrowded and poor) did not fall below the Article 3 threshold, such
      protection was not available to a mixed race couple.  The Tribunal was
      not bound to follow UNHCR guidance but the  Tribunal's  conclusion  of
      lack of risk in mixed marriages in Kosovo was erroneous and too widely
      expressed.

  33. Mr Denholm argued that in FD, the Tribunal had not made findings which
      bore directly on the Refugee Convention risk here.  The  decision  was
      in wide terms.  The evidence relating to events in January 2003 (pages
      92 to 93) were couched  in  moderate  language.   The  risk  was  one,
      however, of serious physical harm (page 33).  Marriages such  as  this
      one were extremely rare and practically all of those who were in  that
      position had left Serbia and Montenegro.  He repeated that he had  not
      prepared for the hearing on the basis that the risk to ethnic Roma per
      se was to be revisited and no oral evidence had  been  called  because
      KX's representatives were not under the impression that FD was  to  be
      revisited.  Mr Standish had been instructed on that basis.

  34. The group into which this couple fell, he said, was a  tiny  group  of
      people and there simply was no readily identifiable information in the
      public domain because it was such an extreme taboo.  The local feeling
      was very strong as recorded by UNHCR even absent specific examples.

  35. Mr Denholm asked the Tribunal to consider the family and private  life
      which KX and AB had  developed  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  their
      arrival in October 1999.  They had finally been able to live  together
      openly.  The Secretary of State had delayed in making his decision  on
      asylum and in serving it (the letter of refusal was in June  2003  but
      was not served until November 2004).  He relied on Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department v Akaeke [2005] EWCA Civ 947  in  relation  to
      the delay issue.  Nine years' delay in that appeal had been  described
      as 'a public disgrace'.  The  delay  here  was  significant;  had  the
      appellant KX been returned promptly,  he  could  have  made  an  entry
      clearance application to rejoin AB (though that part of  Mr  Denholm's
      argument is difficult to follow since neither party was settled).

  36. In J (Serbia and Montenegro) [2003] UKIAT 00151, Dr Storey  held  that
      unreasonable delay was  always  a  factor,  although  not  necessarily
      determinative.  The family were in settled accommodation in the United
      Kingdom, argued Mr Denholm.  AB now spoke good English and they had no
      children.  They had both studied in the past but  were  not  currently
      studying.  To return them to Kosovo now would be a severe interference
      with their private and family life  because  of  the  uncertainty  and
      difficulties in Kosovo and the significant  levels  of  discrimination
      they would undoubtedly face.  Mr Denholm relied  upon  the  Tribunal's
      decision in GS (Article 8, public interest not a  fixity)  Serbia  and
      Montenegro [2005] UKAIT 00121; the public interest in these appellants
      being removed should not weigh heavily in the balance,  having  regard
      to the Secretary of State's conduct.   The  couple  had  been  in  the
      United Kingdom for many years now pending  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision and at  the  very  least,  if  returned  would  face  extreme
      discrimination, ostracism and difficulties in accessing services    if
      returned.

  37. Mr Denholm also relied upon  MM  (Delay,  reasonable  period,  Akaeke,
      Strbac) Serbia and Montenegro [2005]  UKAIT  00163,  which  indicated,
      after a survey of Tribunal and other  jurisprudence,  that  delays  of
      over  twelve  months  were  unacceptable  and  unreasonable.   KX  had
      responded promptly to everything sent to  him;  the  levels  of  delay
      relating to him were such as  to  render  the  couple's  circumstances
      'truly exceptional'.  Theirs was an unusual  relationship,  unique  in
      Counsel's experience.  The situation in Kosovo,  he  argued,  was   so
      extreme as to engage Article 8 because the breach which KX feared  was
      a flagrant one (Ullah and Do).

  38. Mr Denholm then addressed human rights; there had been a delay of more
      than twelve months and the parties were not precluded  from  asserting
      human rights, as regards the situation in  Kosovo.   The  interference
      with family life in Kosovo short of flagrant breach of  Article  8  by
      the Kosovan authorities still  went  to  the  proportionality  of  any
      decision carried out by the United Kingdom. If the  breach  in  Kosovo
      were flagrant, the appellant would be entitled to  succeed  under  the
      principles set out in Ullah and Do.

  39. The materials before the Tribunal were up to  date,  particularly  the
      evidence  of  the  Ombudsperson  which   showed   that   Albanian-Roma
      relationships were not in any better position since  the  end  of  the
      war.  Paragraph 44 of the Ombudsperson's Report indicated  a  lack  of
      willingness and ability to protect people in  this  delicate  position
      and the CIPU Country Report referred to the 2004  anti-Roma  violence.
      The EHRR evidence set out the up-to-date situation for Roma in Kosovo;
      Mr Denholm also asked the Tribunal to consider the September 2005 CIPU
      Country Report. Mr Denholm asked the Tribunal to  allow  KX's  appeal,
      both in asylum and human rights.

Secretary of State's Submissions
  40. For the Secretary of State, Mr Deller accepted that in  the  light  of
      UNHCR report there were difficulties for mixed marriages; KX would  be
      treated as an ethnic Roma but Mr Deller accepted  that  he  would  not
      have access to the enclaves. He accepted  that  the  couple  would  be
      returned together.  He accepted that it would not be possible for this
      couple to assimilate, because it was obvious when one looked  at  them
      that they were a  mixed  race  couple.   The  question  therefore  was
      whether this couple could find a place of safety within Kosovo without
      having access to  either  Albanian  villages  or  Roma  enclaves.  The
      Tribunal should not infer that a general risk had been  found  in  the
      determinations before  it,  which  dealt  with  the  general  societal
      perception of Roma; the objective material did not indicate that there
      was a general risk for a mixed race couple.

  41. The Tribunal needed to focus on as to what was feared today, and  from
      whom.  The Immigration Judge had failed  to  focus  on  current  risk;
      there was a general perception of treating Roma as Serb collaborators.
       That was a real risk from which Albanians were also put  at  risk  by
      association with Roma.  Mr Deller reminded us that not all Roma  lived
      in enclaves and not all of them were at  risk  (FD  paragraph  51,  SK
      paragraph 16). The parties needed to demonstrate a  risk  before  they
      were required to consider relocation to the  enclaves.   The  Tribunal
      now had much more evidence before it, in particular in relation to the
      inter-ethnic violence in March 2004.   In FD  (paragraph  57  ff)  the
      Tribunal  had  found  that  there  was,  in  general,  sufficiency  of
      protection from K-FOR and thus no need for internal relocation.

  42. The evidence did not demonstrate any risk beyond a general presumption
      of Roma associations equalling  collaboration  with  the  Serbs.   The
      wife's family had been targeted  as  collaborators  which  meant  that
      there was a possible risk  in  her  home  area  (pages  66-67  of  the
      appellant's bundle).  The risk to newcomers  in  areas  outside  their
      home areas should be more than a theoretical possibility.   The  cases
      of Appellant S 395/2002 v Minister for Immigration  and  Multicultural
      Affairs [2002] High Court of Australia,  [2004]  INLR  233,  (discreet
      homosexuals) and of Hysi v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2005] EWCA Civ 711 (mixed race child who could pass as Albanian) were
      not relevant as this was not,  he  accepted,  a  situation  where  the
      couple could 'pass' in either community.  The skin  colour  difference
      was apparent.

  43. The situation in Kosovo, he added, was  now back to simmering  tension
      after the explosive events of March 2004 and  to  return  KX  and  his
      family today would not cause a Convention breach.

  44. Mr Deller asked the Tribunal to consider whether there was any  family
      and private life in the  UK  protected  by  Article  8  ECHR  at  all.
      Following the decision of the Court of Appeal in Amjad Mahmood  [2000]
      EWCA Civ 315, a couple could not dictate their place of residence  and
      he emphasised again that they would not be  returned  separately.   No
      strong links had been demonstrated with the United Kingdom and Article
      8(1) was not engaged in the domestic sense since there was no proposed
      interference with the couple's bond of affection, which could continue
      to exist outside the United Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of  State  would
      respect the family life asserted and the couple would be  returned  to
      Kosovo together.

  45. The Tribunal should hesitate before  finding  that  Article  8(1)  was
      engaged in the foreign sense.  Mr Deller reminded the Tribunal of  the
      provisions of the decision in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27;  this  couple's
      ties to the United  Kingdom  amounted  to  this,  that  they  had  the
      experience of being in the country for a period of time  and  studying
      here (as a result of which AB now spoke excellent English).  There was
      nothing extraordinary  about  the  delay  relied  upon;  thousands  of
      Kosovans had been evacuated during the years 1998 and 1999  and  there
      had been considerable legislative and procedural change since then, in
      particular the introduction of human  rights  legislation  in  October
      2000.  There was no Akaeke-style pursuit of these  proceedings  by  KX
      (and no policy in force on entry of which the appellant could have had
      the benefit under Bahktear Rashid [2005] EWCA Civ 744).  The Secretary
      of State's conduct had not been praiseworthy in relation to the  delay
      but was not seriously bad.

  46. There were no factors here  which  were  sufficiently  exceptional  to
      begin to meet the  standard of 'truly exceptional' set in Huang &  Ors
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  105  and
      no valid reason had been put forward why  the public  interest  should
      be regarded as having  been  diminished  in  priority.   In  order  to
      succeed, KX would have to show that the family life which  the  couple
      now shared could not exist at all in Kosovo and therefore  that  there
      would be a flagrant denial  of  their  human  rights.   He  asked  the
      Tribunal to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

   Discussion and reasons
  47. The Tribunal  reserved  its  determination  which  we  now  give.   We
      reminded ourselves of the agreed issues:


         "Whether [KX] and his wife would face a real risk of persecution on
             return to Kosovo on account of
         (i) [AB's] ethnicity as a Roma gypsy, and
         (ii)     Their mixed  marriage  (that  being  an  additional  risk
             category recognised by UNHCR and indeed  other  parts  of  the
             objective evidence including the CIPU report)."

48. It is accepted on both sides that this couple will  return  together  to
   Kosovo, that they are married (or at least  in  a  relationship  akin  to
   marriage) and have private and family life together in the United Kingdom
   which began only when they reached here in 1999. it is also accepted that
   their  core  account  is  credible  and  that  they  did  experience  the
   difficulties which caused them  to  flee  in  1998  (KX)  and  1999  (AB)
   respectively.   The couple has been together since at least  August  1998
   and it is accepted that they intend to live together on return,  although
   they were unable to do so before leaving Kosovo.

   Country background evidence on mixed marriages
49. We began by considering the respondent's current position as set out  in
   his Operational Guidance Notes on Kosovo.  There has not been  a  Country
   of Origin Information Report since 2004.   Since  this  case  was  heard,
   however, there are updated versions of both the OGN (June 2006) and UNHCR
   position paper on Kosovo (June 2006).  We have therefore  considered  the
   relevant passages in the latest versions in place of those to  which  the
   parties referred us.  The tenor (and the wording) of the passages in  the
   latest reports does not differ materially from  that  before  us  at  the
   hearing, so, after consideration, we decided that there was  no  need  to
   invite comment on the newer reports or to recall the hearing for  further
   submissions.

50. The June 2006 OGN  accepts  at paragraph 3.6.16 that:

         "3.6.16   Conclusion.   Societal  discrimination  against  Roma  in
         Serbia and Montenegro is widespread and some Roma may be subject to
         physical attacks.  However, in general  this   discrimination  does
         not amount to persecution and the authorities are willing to  offer
         sufficiency  of  protection  although  the  effectiveness  of  this
         protection may be limited  by  the  actions  of  individual  police
         officers/Government officials. However, internal relocation  is  an
         option and it is not unduly harsh for Roma to relocate  to  another
         part  of  Serbia  and  Montenegro  where   they   will   not   face
         persecution."


51. That conclusion is based on the KK decision which found that  there  was
   a sizeable Roma community into which a Roma at risk could  place  himself
   with adequate security and appropriate safeguards. At paragraph 3.10, the
   OGN deals with the risk to those perceived to have been  associated  with
   the Serbian r�gime after  1990  such  as  this  appellant's  family.   It
   records UNHCR's continuing view that such  persons  might  have  a  well-
   founded fear of persecution (March 2005).   Nevertheless,  the  Secretary
   of State concludes as follows: -

         "3.10.6 Conclusion Ethnic Albanians accused of/or perceived to have
         collaborated with the Serb authorities may face discrimination  and
         ill-treatment  in  Kosovo.  However,  in  the  majority  of   cases
         sufficiency of protection is available and internal  relocation  is
         an option, therefore claimants from these categories of  claim  are
         unlikely to qualify for asylum or Humanitarian Protection. However,
         it should be noted that such  cases  are  unlikely  to  be  clearly
         unfounded.

         3.10.7 Relatives of those who are accused of/or perceived  to  have
         collaborated with the Serb authorities may also face discrimination
         and ill-treatment in Kosovo, however,  in  the  majority  of  cases
         sufficiency of protection is available and internal  relocation  is
         an option.  Therefore  claimants  who  apply  on  the  basis  of  a
         relative's  involvement/  or  perceived  collaboration   with   the
         previous  Serb  r�gime  are  unlikely  to  qualify  for  asylum  or
         Humanitarian Protection. However, it  should  be  noted  that  such
         cases are unlikely to be clearly unfounded."

52. The June 2006 OGN deals with mixed marriages at 3.11 -

         "3.11 Kosovans of mixed ethnicity and  those  in  ethnically  mixed
         marriage
         3.11.1 Many claimants will apply for asylum or make a human  rights
         claim based on ill treatment amounting to persecution at the  hands
         of the general ethnic Albanian population and/or their own minority
         group due to their mixed ethnicity or involvement in an  ethnically
         mixed marriage.

         3.11.2 Treatment. People in mixed marriages with people from ethnic
         minorities  or  children  from  such  families  may  face   similar
         difficulties as those groups. Unlike other minority  groups,  mixed
         families may be excluded from all communities and may be unable  to
         resort to the relative  security  of  mono-ethnic  enclaves.  UNHCR
         reiterated their position in June 2006 that persons  in  ethnically
         mixed marriages and persons of mixed  ethnicity  may  have  a  well
         founded fear of persecution.

         3.11.3 The ability to speak fluent  Albanian  is  likely  to  be  a
         factor in the degree to  which  any  minority  group  are  able  to
         integrate with the majority community.

         3.11.4 Sufficiency of protection ...
         3.11.5 In general there is sufficiency of protection  for  Kosovans
         of  mixed  ethnicity  and  those  in  ethnically  mixed  marriages.
         UNMIK/KPS/K-FOR are able and  willing  to  provide  protection  for
         those that fear persecution  and  ensure  that  there  is  a  legal
         mechanism  for  the  detection,  prosecution  and   punishment   of
         persecutory acts. In general,  an  ethnically  mixed  claimant  who
         speaks Albanian and can physically pass as an Albanian will be less
         at risk than those  who  do  not  speak  Albanian  and  are  easily
         distinguishable as being from a minority group.

         3.11.6 Internal Relocation UNMIK regulations and the constitutional
         framework  provide  for  freedom  of  movement  throughout  Kosovo;
         however, inter-ethnic tensions  and  real  and  perceived  security
         concerns restricted freedom of movement for some minorities.  There
         is in general freedom of movement for ethnic  Albanians  in  Kosovo
         (outside of the Serb enclaves) and caseworkers should consider that
         internal relocation is normally possible, for  claimants  that  can
         pass as an ethnic Albanian, to another  part  of  Kosovo,  where  a
         claimant's ethnic background is unlikely  to  be  known  and  hence
         where there is not a  real  risk  of  persecution,  notwithstanding
         UNHCR and UNMIK's reservations about the return of  this  group  to
         Kosovo  at  this  time.  ..  However,  some  claimants  with  mixed
         ethnicity and/or those in ethnically mixed marriages who are easily
         distinguishable  as  a  member  of  a  minority  group   may   face
         limitations on their ability to internally relocate....

         3.11.8 Conclusion Kosovans of mixed ethnicity and/or those in mixed
         marriages may face discrimination and ill-treatment in Kosovo  from
         either the ethnic Albanian population or from members of their  own
         minority group or sometimes both. However, in the majority of cases
         claimants will  identify  with  and  be  accepted  as  one  of  the
         ethnicities that make up their mixed ethnicity and will be  treated
         as such by the  other  ethnic  groups  in  Kosovo.  In  most  cases
         language will be the  key  factor  in  identifying  which  group  a
         particular claimant can be identified with.

         3.11.9 Those who speak Albanian and can pass as an ethnic Albanian
         In general an applicant of mixed ethnicity who speaks Albanian  and
         can pass as  an  ethnic  Albanian  to  strangers  (looked  like  an
         Albanian etc) is unlikely  to  be  identified  as  being  of  mixed
         ethnicity outside of his home area. Therefore, the applicant  would
         be able to internally relocate to another area of Kosovo where  his
         ethnicity would not be known. Claimants from this category of claim
         are therefore  unlikely  to  qualify  for  asylum  or  Humanitarian
         Protection and are likely to be clearly unfounded.

         3.11.10 Those who can not speak Albanian but  who  can  pass  as  a
         member of a minority ethnic group
         Those who do not speak Albanian but who can pass as a member  of  a
         minority ethnic group are unlikely to be  identified  as  being  of
         mixed ethnicity outside their home area and will be treated in  the
         same way as other  members  of  that  minority  group.  Caseworkers
         should assess each claim in line with the relevant section  of  the
         OGN and in line with the policy for that particular  ethnic  group.
         For example a mixed ethnicity Gorani/Albanian who speaks Gorani and
         can pass as a Gorani will be treated as a Gorani within Kosovo  and
         so should be assessed in line with  the  policy  advice  on  Gorani
         contained in section 3.16 of this OGN.

         3.11.11 Those who can not speak Albanian and who can not pass as  a
         member of a minority ethnic group
         A few claimants of mixed ethnicity who do not speak  Albanian  will
         also not be able to pass as a member of minority ethnic  group  and
         are likely to be identified as being of mixed ethnicity  and  as  a
         result be in a worse position that those of minority ethnic groups.
         However there is generally a sufficiency  of  protection  available
         through UNMIK/K-FOR/KPS and therefore claimants from this  category
         of claim  are  unlikely  to  qualify  for  asylum  or  Humanitarian
         Protection but are unlikely to be clearly unfounded."

  53. UNHCR guidance for June 2006 sets out those it still considers  to  be
      at risk of persecution (maintaining the  exclusion  of  Ashkaelia  and
      Egyptians, who are considered not to be at risk any longer) :

         "Kosovo Serbs, Roma and Albanians in a minority situation
         24. Given the present fragile  security  situation  in  Kosovo  and
         serious ongoing limitations to  the  fundamental  human  rights  of
         Kosovo Serbs, Roma and Albanians in  a  minority  situation,  UNHCR
         maintains its position that persons in these groups continue to  be
         at risk of persecution, and that  those  minorities  having  sought
         asylum abroad should be considered as falling under the  provisions
         of Article 1 A (2) of the 1951 Convention  and  the  1967  Protocol
         relating to the Status of Refugees. Where a State feels  unable  to
         grant refugee status under the  law,  but  the  individual  is  not
         excluded from international protection,  a  complementary  form  of
         protection should be granted. The return of  individuals  belonging
         to these groups should only take  place  on  a  strictly  voluntary
         basis. Individuals who express a wish to return voluntary should be
         able to do so freely and with the full  knowledge  of  the  current
         situation in Kosovo."

  54. UNHCR also includes in the vulnerable persons group the following -

         "Other vulnerable categories of persons
         26. In the current complex situation of  Kosovo,  individuals  from
         groups not mentioned above may also have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for reasons covered by the 1951 Convention and the 1967
         Protocol. These individuals  may  originate  from  ethnic  minority
         groups not specified as being at high risk, or may belong to  other
         vulnerable categories of persons. Examples may include but are  not
         limited to
         . Persons  in  ethnically  mixed-marriages  and  persons  of  mixed
         ethnicity;
         .  Persons  perceived  to  have  been  associated  with   the   SCG
         authorities after 1990...
         27.  Furthermore,  asylum-seekers  who  do  not  qualify  for  1951
         Convention refugee status may still be protected against return  if
         non-refoulement obligations under international or  regional  human
         rights law apply."                  [Emphasis added]

  55. UNHCR discusses whether  relocation  to  Serbia  proper,  rather  than
      Kosovo is an option and concludes that it is not.  We are  not  seised
      of conditions in Serbia proper since it is  not  suggested  that  this
      couple would be returned, other than to Kosovo.  Conditions there  are
      not at all easy:  no humanitarian assistance is available,  there  are
      already 225000 internally displaced persons and 115000 refugees in the
      area, and no housing is provided  for  most  (except  5374  places  in
      collective centers), forcing Kosovo Roma to shelter in makeshift huts,
      corrugated metal containers and other substandard shelters, and  often
      live without electricity, running  water,  sanitation  or  any  public
      services.

  56. At a meeting on "The R�le of Municipalities  in  the  Decade  of  Roma
      Inclusion" organised by the Ministry for Human and Minority Rights  in
      May 2005, the Representatives of the  Serbian  authorities  stated  in
      terms that 75% of the Roma, Ashkaeli and Egyptian population in Serbia
      lived in extremely difficult  living  conditions  in  abject  poverty.
      UNHCR recorded that only 11 per cent of  Roma  settlements  in  Serbia
      allowed for a dignified life; there had been  a  series  of  evictions
      caused by the current privatisation process, with no legal  obligation
      to  identify  alternative  housing  solutions.   Roma,  Ashkaelia  and
      Egyptians in Serbia proper were at high risk of homelessness, physical
      injury, health problems, insecurity,  the  removal  of  children  from
      school and the loss of employment.  It may  be  that  this  issue,  if
      considered in an appropriate case involving exceptional circumstances,
      nevertheless falls below the Article 3 standard but we  are  concerned
      here with the evidence as to risk for Roma. Ashkaelia and Egyptians in
      Kosovo, rather than in Serbia and Montenegro as a whole.

   Expert report of Alex Standish
  57. Mr Standish's report of 18 March 2006 contained the proper recognition
      of his duty as an expert to this Tribunal and sets out his history and
      qualifications.  He had not met the appellant or his wife; he had seen
      only the documentary evidence and his comments  were  based  upon  his
      first hand knowledge of  Serbia  and  Montenegro  and  the  background
      evidence as it then stood.     He  explains  that  the  Maxhupet,  the
      ethnic group to which Roma in  Kosovo  belong,  mainly  speak  Romani.
      Ashkaeli and Egyptians  are  Albanian  speakers  (see  above  for  the
      improved protection that brings them).    At paragraph 23, Mr Standish
      confirms the rarity of mixed marriages in Kosovo,  especially  in  the
      rural areas.  Research undertaken at the Population Studies Centre  at
      the University of Pennsylvania before 1993 revealed  that  in  Kosovo,
      Albanians were an especially  'closed'  group  being  365  times  more
      likely to marry in than out.

  58. After 1990, there was also a political dimension to  marriage  outside
      the ethnic  Albanian  community.    Prejudice  against  Albanians  who
      married out was fuelled by a  highly  influential  book  published  in
      Kosovo in 1997 (Expulsions of Albanians and  Colonisation  of  Kosovo,
      Pristina 1997).   Marriage outside the ethnic Albanian  community  was
      well-documented as a serious risk factor for ethnic  Albanians,  their
      minority group partners  and  their  children.   That  conclusion  was
      supported by a report to the UN General Assembly in November  1999  by
      the UN Special Rapporteur responsible for monitoring human  rights  in
      the Southern Balkans, Mr Jiri Dientstbier.  Mr Standish sets  out  the
      objective evidence (earlier versions of that already considered).   He
      notes the additional difficulties for those minority persons in  mixed
      marriages who speak accented Albanian or do  not  look  Albanian.   He
      notes the report of the Human Rights Monitor appointed by the UN,  the
      Kosovo Ombudsperson  Mr  Marek  Antoni  Nowicki,  who  considers  that
      members of certain minority groups have in practice no access  to  the
      courts and that there had only been  'slight  improvements  since  the
      last reporting period' :

         "In the absence of a human  rights  Court  and  a  special  chamber
         within the Supreme Court  dealing  with  Constitutional  Framework-
         related  issues,  the  Ombudsperson  continues  to  be   the   only
         functioning human rights protection mechanism in place.  Due to the
         limited powers that  his  mandate  brings  with  it,  however,  the
         Ombudsperson cannot fill the  gap  left  by  the  absence  of  such
         courts."

  59.  Mr Kofi Annan's Report to the UN Security Council on 7  October  2005
      recorded that:

         "Combating serious crime...has proven to be difficult for  the  KSP
         [Kosovo Police Service] and the justice system.  It is hampered  by
         family or clan solidarity and by the intimidation of witnesses  and
         judicial officials.  For inter-ethnic crimes, the  law  enforcement
         mechanism is also weak...far too few perpetrators are ever  brought
         to justice...When perpetrators remain at large, a sense of impunity
         prevails.  Where there is freedom of movement for the perpetrators,
         it is hard to convince the victim that he or she  enjoys  the  same
         freedom."

  60. That does not support the OGN position that the authorities are  ready
      and willing to protect people in the situation of this  appellant  and
      his wife.  An OSCE Report entitled "The Response of the Justice System
      to the March 2004 Riots" dated December 2005 concluded that:

         "The justice system failed to send  out  a  clear  message  to  the
         population condemning this type of violence.  Such a response  does
         not serve  as  a  sufficient  deterrent  from  engaging  in  public
         disorder on a similar massive scale and therefore does  not  fulfil
         the full potential  of  the  preventive  function  of  the  justice
         system...Witness  intimidation  in  Kosovo  has  affected  numerous
         criminal proceedings in the past, particularly those of a sensitive
         or high profile nature."

  61. The OSCE records widespread failure by KPS officers to  give  evidence
      when properly summoned  and  inadequate  charges  not  reflecting  the
      gravity of the offence.  The result  was  lenient  sentences,  at  the
      level of the minimum penalty or even  below,  with  "improper  use  of
      mitigating and aggravating circumstances in unreasoned decisions".  Of
      51000 individuals alleged to have participated,  only  209  have  been
      convicted and mostly for minor offences.  In conclusion,  Mr  Standish
      recognises that credibility is for the Tribunal to determine but  that
      the ethnicity of AB was no longer in dispute.    While  reminding  the
      Tribunal of the impunity problem he sums up as follows:

         "65.     Since security for ethnic and religious  minorities  is  a
         province-wide problem and cases of violence and  intimidation  have
         been documented across Kosovo, I  do  not  consider  that  internal
         relocation could offer any degree  of  additional  security  to  an
         ethnic Albanian who is married to a woman who could  be  identified
         as Roma, whether by her physical characteristics or her accent.  In
         view of the small size of Kosovo's population (around two  million,
         or less than 30% that of central London), and the  very  tight-knit
         nature of ethnic Albanian society, I think that it is unlikely that
         a person who is in a  mixed  Roma-ethnic  Albanian  marriage  could
         conceal the fact.  A newcomer in any post-conflict Kosovo community
         is likely to attract  very  considerable  scrutiny  and  the  local
         Albanian  authorities  can  be  relied  upon  to  investigate  such
         individuals on the grounds that they might  be  collaborators  with
         the Serbs or  suspected  war-criminals.   In  addition,  widespread
         internal displacement of people from  villages  and  smaller  towns
         throughout Kosovo has also  increased  significantly  the  risk  of
         meeting former  neighbours  and  acquaintances,  thus  raising  the
         likelihood of identification of a person seeking to conceal his  or
         her identity or ethnic origins."

  62. We next considered the authorities in  the  respondent's  bundle.   We
      have not been referred to the decision of the High Court of  Australia
      which is included (Appellants 395/2002 v Minister for Immigration  and
      Multicultural Affairs [2004] INLR 233). That is a case on the need for
      a homosexual couple to act discreetly.  It is not relevant  here;  the
      presenting problem is that because of their different  appearance  and
      accents, the appellants cannot settle discreetly in  another  area  of
      Kosovo.

  63. We then considered the United Kingdom determinations in the  Secretary
      of State's bundle.  KB  (mixed  ethnicity,  Roma/Albanian)  Kosovo  CG
      [2003] UKIAT 00013, SK (Roma in Kosovo - update) Serbia and Montenegro
      [2005] UKIAT 00023 and BS (IFA,  Mixed  Ethnicity)  Kosovo  CG  [2002]
      UKIAT 04254 all deal with the difficulties facing children of a  mixed
      relationship  (in  particular,  whether  they  can  'pass'  as  either
      ethnicity and how that affects their position).   SK  deals  with  the
      position of an Albanian-speaking man with only Roma ethnicity and is a
      useful statement of the position at 10  December  2004  but  does  not
      really assist us with the mixed marriage issue. Those decisions do not
      therefore assist us as to the difficulties involved for the principals
      in a mixed ethnicity marriage.

  64. Unfortunately, we also do not gain much assistance from the  decisions
      which deal with mixed-ethnicity marriages.  FD, a decision of  Ouseley
      P, is based on the old evidence which  does  not  draw  a  distinction
      between Roma, Ashkaelia and Egyptians as ethnic groups.  FM (IFA-Mixed
      Marriage-Albanian-Ashkaelian) Kosovo CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00081  and  AB
      (Ashkaelia) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT  00188  both  relate  to  Ashkaeli-
      Albanian  relationships,  to  which  on  today's  evidence   different
      considerations apply.  There is much less hostility in Kosovo today to
      Ashkaelia than to Roma, and they  are  Albanian  speakers,  increasing
      their ability to vanish into the community  and  avail  themselves  of
      such protection as Kosovo can provide.  The appellant in that case was
      of mixed race and it is not a mixed marriage case.

  65. The Court of Appeal decision in Hysi [2005] EWCA Civ 711 relates again
      to a mixed ethnicity child  of  Roma-Albanian  origin.   The  decision
      assumes in his favour that he is a  man  who  can  pass  as  Albanian.
      Again, the decision does not assist us with the difficulties faced  by
      KX and AB, who cannot pass as a couple in  either  of  their  original
      ethnic groups because of their obvious difference  in  skin  tone  and
      linguistic differences.

  66. in considering internal relocation, we are guided by the  decision  of
      the House of Lords in  Januzi  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department and ors [2006]  UKHL  5.   The  correct  approach  for  the
      Tribunal is set out in the decision of Lord Bingham at paragraph 21 -
         "21...[the San Remo experts in 2001] considered that where the risk
         of being persecuted emanates from the State (including the national
         government and its agents) internal relocation "is not  normally  a
         relevant consideration as it can be  presumed  that  the  State  is
         entitled to act throughout the country of origin". UNHCR Guidelines
         of July 2003 similarly observe (paragraph 7I (b)):
           "National  authorities  are  presumed  to  act  throughout   the
           country.  If  they  are  the  feared  persecutors,  there  is  a
           presumption in principle that an internal flight  or  relocation
           alternative is not available."
         There can, however, be no absolute rule and it is, in  my  opinion,
         preferable to avoid the  language  of  presumption.  The  decision-
         maker, taking account of all relevant circumstances  pertaining  to
         the claimant and his country of origin, must decide whether  it  is
         reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate or whether  it  would
         be unduly harsh  to  expect  him  to  do  so.  The  source  of  the
         persecution giving rise to the claimant's well-founded fear in  his
         place of ordinary domicile may be agents of the state authorised or
         directed by the state to persecute; or they may be  agents  of  the
         state whose persecution is connived at or tolerated by  the  state,
         or not restrained by the state; or the persecution may be by  those
         who are not agents of the state, but whom the  state  does  not  or
         cannot control.  These  sources  of  persecution  may,  of  course,
         overlap, and it may on the facts be hard to identify the source  of
         the persecution complained of or feared. There is, as  Simon  Brown
         LJ aptly observed in Svazas v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2002] EWCA Civ 74 [2002] 1 WLR 1891,  paragraph  55,  a
         spectrum of cases. The decision-maker must do his best  to  decide,
         on such material  as  is  available,  where  on  the  spectrum  the
         particular case falls. The more closely the persecution in question
         is linked to the state, and the greater the control  of  the  state
         over those acting or purporting to act  on  its  behalf,  the  more
         likely (other things being equal) that a victim of  persecution  in
         one place will be similarly vulnerable in another place within  the
         state. The converse may also be true. All must  depend  on  a  fair
         assessment of the relevant facts."

  67. Further assistance is available  in  the  decision  of  Lord  Hope  at
      paragraphs 46-48.  It is quite wrong  under  Article  1A  (2)  of  the
      Refugee Convention to approach the appeal by comparing the  conditions
      in the United Kingdom   and the proposed place of  relocation  in  the
      country of origin.  The comparison must be between the home  area  and
      the proposed place of relocation, both in the country of  origin.   At
      paragraph 47, Lord Hope says this :

         " 47.     The question where the issue of internal  relocation  is
         raised can, then, be defined quite simply. As Linden JA put  it  in
         Thirunavukkarasu v Canada (Minister of Employment and  Immigration)
         (1993) 109 DLR (4th) 682, 687, it is whether  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh to expect a claimant who is being persecuted for a Convention
         reason in one part of his country to move to a  less  hostile  part
         before seeking refugee status abroad. The words "unduly harsh"  set
         the  standard  that  must  be  met  for  this  to  be  regarded  as
         unreasonable. If the claimant can live  a  relatively  normal  life
         there judged by the  standards  that  prevail  in  his  country  of
         nationality generally, and if he can reach the  less  hostile  part
         without  undue  hardship  or  undue  difficulty,  it  will  not  be
         unreasonable to expect him to move there."

  68.  What we must consider therefore is -

        1) whether there  is  a  risk  of  persecution  in  the  claimant's
           'ordinary place of domicile';
        2) if so, whether it is from agents  of  the  state  authorised  or
           directed by the state to persecute;  from agents  of  the  state
           whose persecution is connived at or tolerated by  the  state  or
           not restrained by the state; or by those who are not  agents  of
           the state, but whom the state does not or cannot control.  it is
           for the decision maker  to  decide  on  the  material  available
           where, on that spectrum, the particular case falls;
        3) the closer the link between the persecution and the  state,  the
           greater the control of the state over those acting or purporting
           to act  on  its  behalf,  the  more  likely  that  a  victim  of
           persecution in one place will be similarly vulnerable elsewhere,
           and the converse may also be true;
        4) all of the above findings depend on a  fair  assessment  of  the
           relevant facts; and
        5) the Tribunal must ask itself  whether  it  is  unduly  harsh  to
           expect a claimant who  is  being  persecuted  for  a  convention
           reason in one part of his country to move to a less hostile part
           before seeking refugee status abroad;
        6) relocation will not be 'unduly harsh' if the claimant can lead a
           relatively normal life in  the  proposed  place  of  relocation,
           judged by the standards prevailing in his country of origin, and
           can reach the less hostile part without undue hardship, or undue
           difficulty.


   General conclusions
  69. We have been able to derive only  very  limited  assistance  from  the
      Tribunal's existing jurisprudence and that of the higher courts on the
      question of mixed marriages.  Such evidence as underlies the  existing
      decisions now looks very out of date; we therefore have to decide  the
      relevant issues for ourselves in the light of the current evidence.

  70. In relation to Roma-Albanian  relationships,  we  draw  the  following
      conclusions from the above evidence -
        1) Roma in Kosovo in general live  in  conditions  of  considerable
           difficulty, with discrimination and victimisation and some  risk
           of violence, but which,  unless  exceptional  circumstances  are
           shown, will not amount to a risk  of  persecution  engaging  the
           Refugee Convention or of serious harm engaging Article 3 ECHR.
        2) Nevertheless, the  majority  Albanian  population  continues  to
           suspect all  Roma  continue  of  being  Serb  collaborators  and
           'traitors';  the  domestic  protection  available  is  the  Roma
           enclaves, and Roma with access to  those  enclaves  are,  absent
           special circumstances relating to them personally, safe  to  the
           Horvath standard.
        3) Roma-Albanian marriages are very rare because both the Roma  and
           Albanian communities are strongly opposed to  intermarriage  and
           may take revenge on the member of the  other  community  with  a
           degree of impunity, enforcing the Kanun of Lek.
        4) An Albanian who marries a Roma person will  be  treated  by  the
           Albanian population in the same way  as  Roma  are  treated.  An
           Albanian man who becomes involved with  a  Roma  woman  will  be
           considered to  have  demeaned  himself  and  can  expect  to  be
           isolated by his local community, or suffer a revenge attack;
        5) Roma do not usually speak Albanian and when they do it  will  be
           accented.   Having  regard  to  skin  colour   differences   and
           differences of accent, it will be extremely unusual for  a  Roma
           woman to be perceived from her physical appearance and  language
           abilities as Albanian or an Albanian man be perceived  as  Roma.
           A Roma woman is expected to support her  community  by  marriage
           to, and children with, a Roma man. She is at risk  of  violence,
           including  sexual  violence,  from  her  own  community  if  she
           establishes a relationship outside the Roma community and  seeks
           to remain within the enclave.  She is also at risk  of  violence
           from Albanians outside the enclave as they  will  disapprove  of
           the relationship of an Albanian man  with  a  'low  person'  and
           perceived traitor from the Roma community;
        6) Any risk of harm to Roma and those treated as Roma, whatever its
           level,  comes not from the  state  or  its  agents  (whether  by
           instruction or connivance). Instead, Roma suffer  discrimination
           from the ordinary population of Kosovo which the state is unable
           completely to control, but which ordinarily falls below the high
           standards required to establish persecution or cruel, inhuman or
           degrading treatment or torture. In general the enclaves  provide
           protection to the Horvath standard;
        7) In general, there is no internal relocation option in Kosovo for
           couples in a Roma-Albanian mixed relationship:  because  of  the
           hostility from both communities, they  cannot  access  the  Roma
           enclaves for protection or look to the  Albanian  community  for
           shelter unless one of them can 'pass' as a member of  the  other
           community on sight, and when speaking.  The test is not  whether
           they can do so with significant effort and deceit,  but  whether
           an ordinary member of the community in which the  person  wishes
           be perceived as belonging would not  notice  that  they  were  a
           member of the other community.
        8) If a couple arrives as strangers in a place where they  are  not
           known, there will be understandable local interest in them.   In
           effect, they will be investigated to see why they are no  longer
           living in their original area.   Differences  of  ethnicity  are
           very likely then to be identified, putting them at risk  in  the
           new community where they have  sought  refuge.   Those  who  are
           associated with identifiable Roma are likely to  be  treated  as
           Serb collaborators and  possible  war  criminals.   There  is  a
           significant risk of violence against them if that link is made.
        9) There is not,  at  present,  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for
           victims of inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo. Although  there  are
           attempts to protect, the judicial route is not always  open  and
           when it is, lesser charges are preferred, there are difficulties
           with witnesses, and the penalties imposed are at  or  below  the
           minimum sentence for those lesser offences.  UNMIK  itself  says
           that the risk of persecution engages the Refugee Convention, and
           UNHCR agrees.

   Decision on the present appeal

   Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR
  71. In both communities, this couple were promised to others  and  are  in
      breach of local laws and the Kanun of Lek.  They were unable  to  live
      together  in  Kosovo  and  have  both  incurred  the  wrath  of  their
      communities by failing to enter into  the  marriages  which  had  been
      arranged for each of them  in  their  own  communities.   AB's  father
      disappeared and AB and her mother were threatened as a result  of  the
      relationship.  KX's friends rejected him and people from  his  village
      were involved in the attack on AB's home.  AB fears rape or  worse  if
      they return to their home area, and KX fears attack also. AB's  family
      are perceived as Serb sympathisers and in their home area, which would
      follow them into both communities. On the evidence, there is a risk of
      persecution or serious harm for KX and AB in their home areas.

  72. The harm feared is from non-state actors, which increases  the  burden
      on  the  appellant  to  show  that  there  is  no  effective  internal
      relocation option for the couple.  They cannot be expected  to  return
      and live separate lives again; they have lived together now  for  over
      eight years and are an established couple.  Neither of them can 'pass'
      as a member of the other community; KX's skin is too fair and he  does
      not look or speak like a Roma man; AB's Albanian is accented  and  she
      neither looks nor sounds like  an  Albanian  woman.   Neither  can  be
      expected to conceal their origins and their  mixed-ethnicity  marriage
      will be obvious to outsiders.

  73. We  have  no  confidence  that  they  would  not  be  the  subject  of
      retribution if they were to return to their home areas.  This  couple,
      who are of obviously differing ethnicity , where  AB  does  not  speak
      accentless Albanian but is identifiable as Roma both by her appearance
      and speech, would be in the smaller group of those who  cannot  access
      the enclaves.

  74. if the appellants are not  safe  in  their  home  area  from  harm  or
      persecution (Januzi / Article 8) then the question is  whether  it  is
      unduly harsh to expect this young couple to live elsewhere in the area
      or in Kosovo as a whole.    The  question  then  is  whether  internal
      relocation is unduly harsh.  We find that it is.   Neither  the  wider
      Roma community in the enclaves, nor the Albanian majority will  accept
      them because KX is Albanian and his wife AB is  an  obvious  Roma  who
      speaks only accented Albanian and now, of course, they have to explain
      their absence from Serbia and Montenegro since 1999.  The  problem  is
      the political dimension to this relationship between  a  member  of  a
      community perceived to have collaborated with  the  Serbs  during  the
      recent conflict, and a member of the community now  in  the  majority,
      but at the time, victims of Serb ethnic cleansing.

  75. The evidence is clear that as a couple, both will be perceived as Serb
      collaborators wherever they go together and that is a  category  which
      remains at real risk throughout  Kosovo.   The  shelter  of  the  Roma
      enclaves is closed to them; the Albanian community  will  not  welcome
      traitors and collaborators.  It follows that  no  internal  relocation
      option exists  for  this  couple  at  present;  the  risk  is  not  of
      inconvenience,  discrimination  or  abuse,  but  of  the   persecutory
      treatment still meted out to perceived Serb collaborators in  post-war
      Kosovo.   The  background  evidence  establishes  a  general  risk  to
      collaborators throughout the territory, against which  there  is  very
      little State protection, and certainly not  to  the  standard  set  in
      Horvath [2000] Imm A R 205.

  76. It follows that the appellant KX is  entitled  to  succeed  under  the
      Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR.

   Article 8 ECHR
  77. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, in normal circumstances the  appellants
      would not succeed.  There is no disrespect to  their  relationship  in
      requiring them to conduct it in Kosovo.  They have  made  very  little
      impact on the local community and  have  few  links  with  the  United
      Kingdom other than with each other.

  78. However, their evidence, which we accept, is that they cannot  conduct
      their relationship at all in Kosovo at present.  They were not able to
      register their marriage or  even  to  cohabit,  and  as  soon  as  the
      relationship was known, they had to appear to part in order to survive
      the anger of both communities.  We have found that there is  still  no
      place of safety where they could conduct their married life in Kosovo.
       On that basis, return to Kosovo now would amount to a flagrant denial
      of their Article 8 rights which renders it disproportionate to  remove
      them on Article 8 grounds.


  79. The Tribunal has already found that there was a material error of  law
      in the Immigration Judge's determination.  We  substitute  a  decision
      allowing the appeal on all grounds.

   Decision


      The original Tribunal made a material error of law.
      The following decision is accordingly substituted:
        1. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds
        2. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds


Signed                                  Date:  10 August 2006


Senior Immigration Judge Gleeson











             SCHEDULE OF MATERIALS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL

AUTHORITIES
     1. Horvath v. Secretary of State For The Home Department  [2000]  UKHL
        37; [2000] 3 All ER 577; [2000] 3 WLR 379
     2. Secretary of State for the Home Department v Razgar [2004] UKHL 27
     3. Januzi v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  others
        [2006] UKHL 5
     4. Katrinak v Secretary Of State For Home Department [2001]  EWCA  Civ
        832
     5. Secretary of State for the Home Department v Bahktear  Rashid[2005]
        EWCA Civ 744
     6. Secretary of State for the Home Department v Amjad Mahmood   [2000]
        EWCA Civ 315
     7. Secretary of State for the Home Department v Akaeke [2005] EWCA Civ
        947
     8. Hysi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
        711
     9. BS (IFA, Mixed Ethnicity) Kosovo CG [2002] UKIAT 04254
    10. KB (mixed ethnicity, Roma/Albanian) Kosovo CG [2003] UKIAT 00013 CG
    11. FM (IFA-Mixed Marriage-Albanian-Ashkaelian) Kosovo CG [2004]  UKIAT
        00081
    12. AB (Ashkaelia) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00188
    13. FD (Kosovo - Roma) Kosovo CG [2004] UKIAT 00214
    14. GS (Article 8, public interest not a fixity) Serbia and  Montenegro
        [2005] UKAIT 00121
    15. MM (Delay, reasonable period, Akaeke, Strbac) Serbia and Montenegro
        [2005] UKAIT 00163
    16. SK (Roma in Kosovo - update) Serbia  and  Montenegro  [2005]  UKIAT
        00023
    17. Appellant S 395/2002 v Minister for Immigration  and  Multicultural
        Affairs [2002] High Court of Australia (9 December 2003)

BACKGROUND EVIDENCE
    18. Alex Standish Report (18 March 2006)
    19. UN Security Council Report (October 2005)
    20. Home Office CIPU
        (a) Country Report Serbia and Montenegro (April 2005)
        (b) Operational Guidance Note Kosovo (May 2006)
        (c) Operational Guidance Note Serbia (Including Kosovo) (June 2006)
    21. US State Department Report for Serbia and Montenegro 2005
    22. Amnesty International: Kosovo Protect the Right to Health and  Life
        (July 2005)
    23. UNHCR Material
        (a)  Background note on ethnic Albanians from Kosovo  in  continued
             need of international protection (March 2000)
        (b)  Kosovo minorities still  need  international  protection  says
             UNHCR (August 2004)
        (c)  Position on the continued international  protection  needs  of
             individuals from Kosovo (August 2004)
        (d)   Possibility  of  internal  relocation   within   Kosovo   for
             individuals of mixed ethnicity (January 2005)
        (e)  Position on the continued international  protection  needs  of
             individuals from Kosovo (March 2005)
        (f)  Position on the continued international  protection  needs  of
             individuals from Kosovo (June 2006)


    24. Kosovo Ombudsperson Institution (Fifth Annual Report)
    25. European Roma Rights Commission (ERRC)
         (a)  Criminal complaint re: lead poisoning in Kosovo (August 2005)
         (b)  Report (August 2004)
         (c)  Report (June 2005)
         (d)  ERRC/ENAR/ERIA statement  Roma  rights  in  Kosovo  (September
    2005)
         (e)  ERRC written comments to UNHCR (February 2006)

