
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (AIT Procession House)   |                             |
|On 17 & 18 February 2009 (Field House)        |                             |
|and on 5 & 6 May 2009                         |                             |
|Field House (Procession House)                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE MCGEACHY
                      SENIOR IMMIGRATION JUDGE SOUTHERN
                                MS J ENDERBY

                                   Between

                                     AM
                                     BM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:


For the Appellants:    Mr D. Jones and Mrs R Kotak, of Counsel instructed
                    by Messrs Wilson and Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Blundell, of Counsel instructed by the
Treasury Solicitor



a)    It is not possible to set out a typical profile  of  trafficked  women
from Albania:  trafficked women come from all areas of the country and  from
varied social backgrounds.

b)    At its worst  the  psychological  damage  inflicted  on  a  victim  of
trafficking can lead to difficulties in reintegrating into Albanian  society
and has implications on whether or not it is  possible  for  the  victim  of
trafficking, should she fear persecution in her own area, to relocate.

c)    Much of Albanian society is governed by a strict code of honour  which
not  only  means  that  trafficked  women  would  have   very   considerable
difficulty in reintegrating into their home areas on return  but  also  will
affect their ability  to  relocate  internally.   Those  who  have  children
outside marriage are particularly vulnerable.  In extreme  cases  the  close
relatives of the trafficked woman may refuse to have the trafficked  woman's
child return with her and could force her to abandon the child.

d)    Those that see themselves outside society, for  example,  divorced  or
abandoned  women,  or  others  who  wish  to  live  abroad,  may  seek   out
traffickers in order to facilitate their departure from  Albania  and  their
establishment  in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such   women   are   not
"trafficked women" in the sense that they have  not  been  abducted  against
their  will,  there  is  likely  to  be  considerable  violence  within  the
relationships and the psychological affect of that violence may  lead  to  a
situation where the pressures which they are under and the lack  of  freedom
they are under means that such women should be treated as trafficked women.

e)    The Albanian Government and authorities are taking  steps  to  protect
trafficked women who return but such steps are not always  effective.   When
considering whether or not there  is  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  a
trafficked woman who is to be returned her particular circumstances must  be
considered.  Not all trafficked women returning to Albania  will  be  unable
to access the arrangements and facilities available to enable successful re-
integration.

f)    Trafficked women from Albania may well  be  members  of  a  particular
social group on that account alone. Whether they are at risk of  persecution
on account of such membership  and whether  they  will  be  able  to  access
sufficiency of protection  from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their
individual circumstances including but not limited to the following:   1)The
social status  and economic standing of the  trafficked woman's  family.  2)
The level of education of  the  trafficked  woman  or  her  family.  3)  The
trafficked woman's state of health, particularly her mental health.  4)  The
presence of an illegitimate child. 5) The area of origin of  the  trafficked
woman's family. 6) The trafficked woman's age.






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The appellants are young women who  are  citizens  of  Albania.   Each
    applied for asylum, her claim being based on the fact that  she  was  a
    victim  of  trafficking.    Each  has  a  young  child.    When   their
    applications were refused, removal  directions  were  given  for  their
    return to Albania.

2.     Each  then  appealed,   their   appeals   were   dismissed   but   on
    reconsideration  material  errors   of   law   were   found   in   both
    determinations.  The appeals therefore now come  before  us  as  second
    stage reconsiderations with a view to giving country  guidance  on  the
    conditions facing victims of trafficking on return to Albania  and  the
    likelihood of future persecution or treatment contrary to their  rights
    under Article 3  of  the  ECHR.    Each  case  before  us  also  raises
    substantial Article 8 issues not least because  each  appellant  has  a
    young child.

3.    Over four days of hearing we heard evidence from AM, Dr Roxane  Agnew-
    Davies, a clinical psychologist specialising in violence against women,
    and from Dr Stephanie Schwandner-Sievers.  We  also  had  before  us  a
    report from Mr Alex Standish  of  the  Department  of  Anthropology  at
    Durham University and a number  of  medical  reports  relating  to  the
    appellants as well as the background documentation which we have listed
    in the addendum to this determination which includes the annual reports
    of the organisations in Albania set up to assist trafficked  women  who
    have been returned to Albania.

4.    Article 3 of the United Nations Protocol,  to  prevent,  suppress  and
    punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children dated 15th
    November 2000, supplementing  the  United  Nations  Convention  against
    Transnational Organised Crime  (the  'Trafficking  Protocol')  of  that
    date, defines 'Trafficking in Persons' in the following terms:


    (a)     'Trafficking  in   persons'   shall   mean   the   recruitment,
         transportation transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means
         of the threat or use  of  force  or  other  forms  of  coercion  of
         abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power  or  of  a
         position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments
         or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control  over
         another person for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation  shall
         include, at a minimum, the  exploitation  of  the  prostitution  of
         others or other forms of  sexual  exploitation,  forced  labour  or
         services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the
         removal or organs;


    (b)    The consent of a victim of trafficking in person to the intended
         exploitation set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article shall be
         irrelevant where any of the means set  forth  in  subparagraph  (a)
         have been used;


    (c)    The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt
         of a child for the purpose  of  exploitation  shall  be  considered
         'trafficking in persons' even if this does not involve any  of  the
         means set forth in subparagraph (a) of this article;


    (d)    'Child' shall mean any person under eighteen years of age.


5.    The Trafficking Protocol definition has been  described  by  UNHCR  as
    representing "the current international consensus  on  the  meaning  of
    trafficking". The same definition is used  in  the  Council  of  Europe
    Convention of 16th May 2005, on action  against  trafficking  in  Human
    Beings, in Article 4, subject to the addition  of  a  subparagraph  (e)
    defining "victim" to  mean  "any  natural  person  who  is  subject  to
    trafficking in human beings as defined in this article".

6.    The UNHCR Trafficking Guidelines, dated  20th  May  2002,  break  down
    this definition into 'three essential and interlinked sets of elements'
    as follows:


         "The act:  recruitment,  transportation,  transfer,  harbouring  or
         receipt of persons'
         The means: by threat or use of force or other  forms  of  coercion,
         abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of power, abuse of a position of
         vulnerability, or of giving or receiving of payments or benefits to
         achieve the consent of a person having control over the victim;
         The purpose:  exploitation of the victim, including, at a  minimum,
         the exploitation of the prostitution of others or  other  forms  of
         sexual  exploitation,  forced  labour  or  services,   slavery   or
         practices similar  to  slavery  or  servitude  or  the  removal  of
         organs."


AM's case

7.    AM (hereinafter referred to as "AM") was born on  16  August  1983  in
    Sinat Village, near Kukes in Northern  Albania.   She  entered  Britain
    illegally in July 2006 and her daughter was born on 5 August 2006.  In
    her determination Immigration Judge Kaler set  out  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim in paragraphs 11-16 as follows:

    "11.   She was born in Kukes  in  Albania  in  a  Muslim  family.   Her
         parents introduced her to A as a prospective husband and they  both
         agreed to the match after the first meeting in September 2005. They
         were officially engaged on 1 October 2005 when rings were exchanged
         and there was a small celebratory family lunch.  A  asked  and  was
         granted her father's permission to take her to Pristina as  he  had
         been promised a good job there, and they  left  for  Kosovo  on  20
         October 2005.  This was the last time she saw her family.


    12.    In Pristina, the Appellant was introduced to A's  friend  N  and
         was taken to a flat above a  caf�  where  there  were  other  women
         present.  She greeted them but they did not speak to her.   A  then
         told her that the girls worked for him and she would do so as well.
          He beat her up in front of the girls, she was raped by N and  then
         put to work as a prostitute.  She had initially refused  to  comply
         but they threatened her  family,  saying  they  would  recruit  her
         sister as well.


    13.    She tried to kill herself a week later.  She was in  a  flat  on
         the fourth floor and she tried to break a window with the  heel  of
         her shoe. A heard her banging and beat her severely.  She tried  to
         escape through a  bathroom  window  on  another  occasion  but  was
         discovered and beaten.  She was also beaten every time she did  not
         satisfy a client.  The clients were manly foreigners  and  many  of
         them spoke English.


    14.    A took her back to Albania five months later in March 2006. they
         went to Vlore and she was put to  work  again.   About  two  months
         later, the Appellant realised that her stomach was  getting  bigger
         and she told A she believed she was pregnant.  She did not think of
         this before as she always had irregular periods.  A  beat  her  up,
         and made her carry on working. She continued to service clients.  A
         then told her that he would take the Appellant to England and  sell
         the baby. A told her he had girls there too.


    15.    A, N and the Appellant travelled on a lorry on 3 July 2006,  and
         A left them when they changed lorries.   She  remembered  the  date
         because A had said they would have to be on the lorry  on  3  July.
         She was given hamburgers, biscuits, sweets and water  on  the  way.
         The lorry  contained  empty  boxes  which  they  sat  on.   It  was
         uncomfortable. When they arrived in the UK, N cut  a  hole  in  the
         canvas of the lorry and they got out.  He threatened the  Appellant
         and told her to stay nearby as he went to  make  a  telephone  call
         from a public booth. He was getting angry  and  agitated,  and  the
         Appellant took the opportunity to walk away and then run off.   She
         found a building with two rubbish containers and  hid  behind  them
         for the night.  The next day she  went  to  a  park  and  heard  an
         Albanian woman talking, whom she  approached.   The  woman,  called
         Anita, felt sorry for her, took her home and had  subsequently  put
         her in touch with solicitors.  The Appellant asked Anita to come to
         court with her but she was afraid to do so as  she  was  afraid  of
         what the traffickers might do to her after hearing the  Appellant's
         story.


    16.    She had not tried to contact her family.  They did not  have  an
         address.  She only had the telephone number of a friend, which  had
         been in her notebook that A had  taken  away.  She  was  afraid  to
         contact her family. She feared returning to Albania, as her  family
         would feel disgraced as she had worked as  a  prostitute  and  they
         would not let her keep her baby. She would be ostracised. She  also
         feared that A or N would  look  for  her.   The  police  would  not
         protect her, as she had no money to bribe them. She did not believe
         she would be safe anywhere in Albania as such men  had  connections
         everywhere."


      The Immigration Judge's conclusions were set out in paragraphs 29 to
      42 as follows:

    "29.   I am satisfied that this Appellant has been  consistent  in  her
          evidence.  She  has  repeated  the  same  account  in  interview,
          statement, to third parties and at the hearing and there  are  no
          inconsistencies.  This Appellant is a Muslim woman and I find her
          account  of  her  meeting  with  A  and   subsequent   engagement
          plausible, even though it was rushed.  The fact that there was no
          party to celebrate the engagement does not mean that there was no
          engagement.  The Appellant arrived in the UK without any personal
          effects and so it is not surprising that she does  not  have  any
          photographs or other evidence of the engagement.


    30.    The Appellant stated that she had contemplated suicide.  She has
          been consistent in her description of her attempt: she wanted  to
          throw herself out of a window but was  unsuccessful  in  breaking
          the glass.  She explained why she did  not  speak  to  the  other
          girls in the flat in Pristina in whose presence she was for about
          30 minutes.  A was with her for some of this time.


    31.    The objective evidence presented by  both  parties  gives  great
          detail about the way in which  young  girls  are  entrapped  into
          prostitution and their treatment by those  who  exercise  control
          over their lives. I also find that  the  Appellant's  account  is
          consistent with the objective evidence.


    32.    I do find it plausible that the appellant was smuggled into  the
          country on a lorry in uncomfortable circumstances.  A and N would
          have been concerned that she deliver a healthy baby but I do  not
          believe  they  would  have  cosseted  her  and  made  her  unduly
          comfortable on her journey.  They gave her food, which is not the
          most nutritious but would have sustained her.


    33.    I am able at this stage to make the following findings of fact:


          (1)    The Appellant went through an arranged marriage with A;
          (2)    She was lured to Pristina with him;
          (3)    She was forced into prostitution and was  repeatedly  used
                by A and N;
          (4)    She became pregnant and was beaten by N and  A  when  this
                was discovered.


    34.    There are some aspects of the Appellant's evidence that cause me
          concern.  The first of these is her statement that she was beaten
          by A when he discovered her pregnancy, but  then  he  decided  he
          would bring her to the UK to sell her baby.  Is  it  implausible,
          as argued  by  the  Respondent,  that  A  would  behave  in  this
          conflicting way?  I find merit in the Appellant's submission that
          he was angry at first and may have tried to force a  miscarriage.
          When this was unsuccessful, he decided he would make events  work
          to his benefit by selling the  child.  I  am  satisfied  by  this
          explanation.


    35     The second matter of concern is the Appellant's  claim  to  have
          been trafficked to the UK despite being eight  months'  pregnant.
          Why would A have done so for her, rather than bring over a  young
          girl who he could put to work immediately.  I am not persuaded by
          the Appellant's assertion that he intended to sell  the  baby  in
          the UK. Whilst there are numerous  reports  of  couples  who  are
          unable to bear children  or  find  it  difficult  to  adopt  here
          travelling  abroad  to  seek  babies  for  adoption  abroad   and
          clandestine  attempts  to  bring  babies  into  the  country  for
          themselves,  there  is  no  objective  evidence  to  support  the
          contention that there is a market for babies to be  sold  in  the
          UK. Why not simply take the child away from the  appellant  after
          birth and then try  to  sell  the  baby  from  Albania?   If  the
          Appellant's account is to be believed,  then  A  has  connections
          with members of other criminal fraternities and highly  organised
          gangs.  I suppose it may be plausible  that  they  have  seen  an
          opportunity and would try to offer  a  new  "service"  to  people
          here.  They could use the Appellant for prostitution, whether she
          had a child with her or not.


    .36.   The account of the Appellant's escape from  N  in  the  UK  also
          causes me concern.  She was heavily pregnant and tired  from  her
          journey to the UK.  She took her chance when she saw that  N  was
          distracted on the telephone but he appears not  to  have  noticed
          her disappearance nor did he give chase.  His purpose  in  coming
          to the UK on this occasion was to bring the appellant to  the  UK
          and make a profit from her, yet he did not pursue her to retrieve
          his "investment".  The Appellant does not suggest  that  she  has
          heard from other Albanians that she is being sought.   I  do  not
          find it plausible that N would simply have let her walk away.


    .37.   The Appellant conveniently met Alice (this is  an  error  -  the
          Immigration Judge is referring to Anita), the Albanian woman  who
          gave her shelter.  She did not meet her immediately  and  had  to
          sleep rough and approach many people before she  came  upon  her.
          The Respondent is right to be suspicious about her account.


    .38.   Given my findings of fact as set out in paragraph  33,  why  did
          this Appellant travel to the UK if not for  the  reason  she  has
          given?  My findings do not lend support to  the  contention  that
          she travelled here voluntarily, since she was being kept by A and
          N.  It has not been suggested by the Respondent that she may have
          been released by them when they discovered her pregnancy and  she
          made her own way here.  I do not believe she would have  had  the
          connections or resources to make her  own  arrangements.  I  have
          taken on board the medical evidence about her mental state, which
          I accept in its entirety.  None of this  was  challenged  by  the
          Respondent.  This Appellant has  complex  post  traumatic  stress
          disorder, which I accept has been caused by  her  experiences  in
          'captivity'.  She  is  clearly  traumatised  and   is   receiving
          counselling and treatment.  This evidence outweighs  my  concerns
          in paragraph 35, 36 and 37 above.  She strikes me as being docile
          and I find that she must have been under the control of others to
          have been brought here.


    .39.   I therefore also find that the Appellant was smuggled  into  the
          country and then escaped from her captor.  She has therefore been
          the victim of people smugglers whose intention was to put her  to
          work as a prostitute.


    .40.   Does the appellant qualify as a refugee, and what is the risk to
          her if retuned to Albania?


    .41.   Is there a risk that this  Appellant  would  be  victim  of  re-
          trafficking? The leading case is that of VD. The victim  in  that
          case was a 28 year old Albanian woman who believed she would have
          been trafficked, as was  her  sister  before  her.  The  Tribunal
          accepted that there was a real risk  of  women  being  trafficked
          from Albania and placed the figure at less than 6000 women over a
          ten year  period.  This  was  after  considering  at  length  the
          numerous objective reports. Whilst there was evidence that  girls
          aged 14-17 were at greater risk not all girls of this age were at
          general risk of being trafficked. The risk  of  being  trafficked
          was not increased if  a  girl  had  been  previously  trafficked,
          unless there were particular features, such as where the girl had
          been sold by her family to traffickers or that those  responsible
          for  the  abduction  had  shown  an  interest  in  that  person's
          whereabouts.  Thus, the Tribunal rejected the general proposition
          that women in general were  at  risk  of  being  trafficked  from
          Albania or that there was risk of  re-trafficking.  The  Tribunal
          also considered that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
          view of the numerous changes in the law and efforts made  by  the
          authorities.


    .42.   Applying those findings to this case, I find that there is not a
          real risk that the Appellant would be at risk of being trafficked
          on return to Albania.  She was not sold to A; her father  blessed
          her engagement after being satisfied that his daughter  consented
          to the match.   Whilst some abductors do pursue their victims and
          their families, there is no evidence of that in this  case.   The
          appellant was not pursued when she escaped nor  has  anyone  been
          enquiring of her whereabouts.  I accept  that  in  her  case  the
          Appellant did not have the opportunity of reporting the matter to
          the authorities but there is a sufficiency of protection for  her
          in her country."

8.    Immigration Judge Kaler concluded, it appears, that AM would  be  able
    to  return  to  her  family.  Reconsideration  was  ordered  by  Senior
    Immigration Judge McKee on 14  March 2007.

9.    On reconsideration Senior Immigration Judge P. Lane found  a  material
    error of law in the determination.  He gave his reasons as follows:

    "1.    At the reconsideration hearing on 4 October  2007  the  Tribunal
         found that there were material errors of law in  the  determination
         of the Immigration Judge.  Having found the appellant to be largely
         a credible  witness,  the  Immigration  Judge  concluded  that  the
         appellant was not at real  risk  of  persecution  or  serious  ill-
         treatment, if returned to Albania.  The Immigration Judge based her
         conclusions in part at least upon the country guidance case  of  VD
         (Trafficking) Albania [2004] UKIAT 00115.  However, as set  out  in
         paragraph 10  of  the  grounds  accompanying  the  application  for
         reconsideration, the Immigration Judge failed  to  have  regard  to
         material points of distinction between the facts in that  case  and
         the present; in particular, the following:-

        (a)      The appellant had been trafficked by her fianc�/husband;


        (b)      The appellant was from northern Albania where the  "Kanun"
             code decreed that a fianc� had the rights of a husband over the
             appellant;


        (c)      The appellant had been in servitude  as  a  prostitute  in
             Albania, which was relevant  to  the  risk  of  recognition  by
             clients and traffickers;


        (d)      The appellant's traffickers knew the appellant's home  and
             had already used  coercion  involving  threats  of  what  might
             happen to other family members;


        (e)      The Immigration Judge had made  a  finding  that  internal
             relocation was unreasonable in the case of the appellant;


        (f)      The above circumstances had a material bearing on the risk
             of re-trafficking; and


        (g)      As a single mother with a young baby,  the  appellant  had
             special reintegration needs.

    .2.     Mr Ouseley conceded on 4 October that the Immigration Judge had
        materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  make  proper  findings
        regarding  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant  fell  within  a
        particular social group for the purposes of the Refugee Convention.
         Finally, although not mentioned in the grounds, it  is  apparently
        the case that at paragraph 46 of the determination, the Immigration
        Judge made use of material in the form of  a  US  State  Department
        Report of 5 June 2006, which was not available to the  parties  and
        that as a result the Immigration Judge infringed rule 51(7) of  the
        Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    .3.     The Tribunal was unable on 4 October to proceed to substitute a
        fresh decision to allow or dismiss the appeal because, although  Ms
        Kotak indicated that the appellant would  not  be  called  to  give
        further oral evidence, Mr Ouseley was without the Home Office  file
        and was not in a position to deal substantively  with  the  matters
        referred to above."


10.   Senior  Immigration  Judge  Lane  preserved  the  Immigration  Judge's
    findings relating to  the  events  which  had  led  to  this  appellant
    claiming asylum.  Mr Blundell asked us to conclude  that  he  has  also
    preserved a finding by the Immigration Judge that this appellant  could
    return to her family.  Mr Jones asked us  to  hear  evidence  from  the
    appellant on this issue and the issue of whether or not AM's father was
    a "rational" man.  We considered that  not  only  was  the  Immigration
    Judge's finding on the ability of the appellant to return to her family
    cast into doubt by the very detailed background evidence which was  not
    before the Immigration Judge but also that that finding was  in  itself
    unclear.  We agreed to hear evidence from AM on that issue.

11.   AM's evidence was that she  was  frightened  of  returning,  that  her
    family would never accept her daughter and that on return, if she  were
    allowed to remain in the family home she would be  separated  from  her
    daughter and would be kept out of sight of others in the village  until
    such time as her father could arrange a marriage for her. The only  men
    willing to marry here were likely to be old or disabled  and  men  whom
    she would not ever herself wish to marry.  Her evidence also  contained
    the statement that she could not take her daughter back to Albania  and
    would do anything she could to ensure her daughter did not return.

12.   In considering AM's appeal we have  taken  account  not  only  of  the
    facts found by the Immigration Judge but also the statements made by AM
    regarding her own psychological state here, her suicidal  ideation  and
    the fact that Albanians whom she has met her have shunned her when they
    find out about her history.  In paragraph 68 of her  initial  statement
    she stated that she did not believe there was anywhere in Albania where
    she would be safe because:

         "These men  have  connections  everywhere  in  Albania,  they  have
         friends and family.  Sooner or later they will found  out  where  I
         am.  I ran away from them they will be very angry  with  me.   They
         are capable of anything.  They beat me, raped me,  they  harmed  me
         and other girls.  I think they are very dangerous men."


    She went on to say at paragraph 105,


         "The Home Office at paragraph 26 (she is commenting on the  refusal
         letter) tells me that my family could have  given  me  support.   I
         could not go to my parents.  It would bring shame on my family if I
         went back to them and told them I had been working as a  prostitute
         and had a baby. "


    106.   My father would not turn me away.  But I know  my  father  would
         never accept my daughter as his granddaughter.  He would not  allow
         her to live with us. I also know my fate.  I know that  I  will  be
         given to the first man who comes to ask my father for  my  hand  in
         marriage, regardless of their age.


    107.   I believe that my baby would be sold to a  childless  couple  in
         our area as I would not be allowed to keep her. There is nothing  I
         would be able to say to my parents to  stop  them.   I  know  their
         mentality.  This is how they think.  I know that  my  father  would
         rather bury my child, than let her be with me, as if  he  sees  her
         every day he would be reminded of my past and the shame  I  brought
         on the family.


    108.   I know that my mother would do anything to have me back, but she
         has not got any say in my family.  It is  my  father  who  has  the
         voice.  My mother was always blamed  because  my  sister  was  born
         slightly disabled.  My brother has been brought up  with  the  same
         mentality as my father and he would not protect me or look out  for
         me ...  In my family, tradition is important and must be followed.


    109.   I believe that the attitude of my family and the  people  living
         in my village will be that it will be far better for me to take  my
         own life, or be killed rather than my family having to face  people
         with the shame I  brought  on  them.   I  will  be  labelled  as  a
         prostitute, and once a prostitute always a prostitute".


13.   In paragraphs 115 onwards she said:-

        "115. I felt suicidal before I gave birth, but I do not  any  more.
             At the beginning I did not love my baby, but now I have  bonded
             with her and I love her so much.


        116.     If I was sent back to Albania, my parents could  force  me
             to give away my baby.  The police cannot a family  (sic)  which
             child to keep in the family and which family to let go (sic).


        117.     In Albania the only kind of support you  have  is  if  you
             turn to your family or your husband.  I could give my  baby  to
             the State but I do not want to do that.  I am not going back to
             Albania.  I will not harm my baby, I will leave a note next  to
             my daughter but I will kill myself before they put  me  on  the
             plane."


14.   We understood AM's evidence to be that  in  her  daughter's  interest,
    she would consider it better to  kill  herself  rather  than  take  her
    daughter back to Albania.

15.   There were a number of medical reports relating to AM  before  us.   A
    report from the Sankofa Foundation in Nottingham had been  prepared  by
    Ms Miriam Hollis who has a diploma in  psychotherapy  and  counselling.
    She refers to the appellant's difficulty with  sleeping  and  described
    the powerlessness which would be felt by a woman who was controlled  in
    prostitution and the resultant disassociation or detachment which would
    be a means of psychological survival.  She said that the appellant  was
    still in a state of shock and described  the  appellant  as  being  too
    afraid to make contact with anyone from the Albanian  community  living
    in Nottingham and having lost the capacity to  trust  anyone  from  her
    country who spoke her native tongue.  She said that AM was still highly
    vulnerable and referred to the  appellant's  fear  that  she  could  be
    followed to Nottingham (where she is now living) by the men who brought
    her to Britain and that  they  would  wish  to  sell  her  child.   She
    concluded that it would be  psychologically  inappropriate  for  AM  to
    return to Albania.

16.   A report, dated 8 December 2008, had been prepared by Dr Roxane Agnew-
    Davies.  She  is  a  Clinical  Psychologist  specialising  in  violence
    against women and a part-time Senior Research Fellow in  the  Institute
    of Primary Care and Public Health at London South Bank University.  She
    is a specialist advisor to the Victims of Violence and Abuse Prevention
    Programme in the Department of Health.  She is accredited as an  expert
    on sexual violence  for  Co-ordinated  Action  against  Domestic  Abuse
    (CAADA) and a mental health advisor  to  the  Greater  London  Domestic
    Violence Project and Director of Domestic Violence Training Limited  as
    well as being  an Associate Fellow of the British Psychological Society
    and a full member of the  Division  of  Clinical  Psychology.   In  her
    report she sets out the various tests which  she  undertook  to  assess
    AM's mental state and gives details of her conversations with AM.   She
    had administered the "Beck Anxiety Inventory" and stated  that  AM  was
    placed within the severe range as classified by the test designers. She
    also referred to AM's suicide attempts and her  continued  thoughts  of
    suicide - it would appear that the only thing  that  was  stopping  her
    committing suicide was her love for her daughter.  She  referred  to  a
    trauma symptom inventory which she said indicated that the  appellant's
    symptoms were more severe than 99% of the population  with  respect  to
    anxious arousal - anxiety  -  and  fear-related  symptoms,  depression,
    intrusive events (memories of traumatic events)  and  association  (the
    psychological strategy of "blanking out").  In Section 4 of her  report
    she sets out her opinions relating to AM stating that she is  suffering
    to a severe degree from chronic, complex post traumatic stress disorder
    and major depressive order and emphasised the appellant  had  "suicidal
    ideas", interpersonal difficulties and a  damaged  sense  of  identity.
    She described AM as having  severely  depressed  moods  and  at  4.1.12
    concluded that AM presented a:

         "mild risk of suicide at the current time but  in  my  professional
         opinion this will escalate into a high risk at any point  when,  or
         after, she is at  imminent  risk  of  further  abuse,  or  believes
         herself to be at such risk, including  being  served  with  removal
         directions".


    She referred to high risk indicators associated with return to  Albania
    being that AM had repeated said she would rather  commit  suicide  than
    return with or be separated from her daughter,  that  she  continuously
    thought for long periods about committing suicide which she referred to
    being connected to the insecurity of AM's current status and said  that
    the likelihood of a successful suicide attempt was increased because AM
    had considered specific means of killing herself and what she would  do
    if her first attempt failed which would increase the likelihood of  her
    attempts culminating in a successful suicide (4.1.13).   She  concluded
    in paragraph 4.1.17 by stating  that  AM  had  chronic  post  traumatic
    stress disorder in the context of major distress disorder.

17.   A Consultant Psychiatrist, David L Bell, prepared a further,  undated,
    report.  It assesses AM's psychological state in some detail.  Of  note
    is his comment that AM felt:


         "cut off from her sexual body and experiences no sexual desire.  Ms
         M... was very clear that  she  would  never  again  have  a  sexual
         relationship with a man - she does not want to  be  near  men,  and
         could never trust a man again".


    When considering the issue of  the  appellant's  removal  he  concluded
    that:

         "Removal would be removal to a context where she regards herself to
         be under very serious threat, a threat which,  as  she  understands
         it, she cannot be protected from.   I  am,  of  course,  not  in  a
         position  to  say  whether  her  fears  are  based  on  a  reasoned
         assessment of her circumstances or whether these fears derive in  a
         major part disordered imaginings,  deriving  from  her  psychiatric
         state.  I can say, however, that she believes  that  she  would  be
         sought out by her  persecutors  and  it  is  this  belief  that  is
         material to the deterioration in her state."


18.   Dr Bell commented also on the issue of treatment  in  Albania  stating
    that, given AM's deteriorating mental state, it was not at  all  likely
    that she will be able to make use of psychiatric services.  He added:

         "Further she would be  likely  to  be  very  highly  suspicious  of
         personnel, and may regard them as agents  of  state/authority  whom
         she cannot trust, who might very well be seen  as  blaming  him/her
         for her current situation, and treated with contempt.  She may even
         believe that they would inform her persecutors of her whereabouts".


19.   There is also a statement from Ms  Helena  Bandoo,  a  Refugee  Action
    volunteer who supported AM by coming  with  her  to  the  appeal.   She
    referred to her contact with the appellant and  made  reference  to  an
    incident when AM had read in an Albanian newspaper that  some  escapees
    were killed if their traffickers recaptured them.  She  said  that  she
    had been told  by  the  appellant  that  victims  of  trafficking  were
    considered to be "loose - dirty" in Albania  and  could  no  longer  be
    accepted as part of normal society, being shunned by others and even by
    their own families.

20.   We accept that the appellant was clearly close to Ms Bandoo  and  that
    she attends an educational project run by Refugee Action in Nottingham.



BM's case

21.   BM (hereinafter referred  to  as  "BM")  was  born  in  Vau-Dejes,  in
    Albania, on 6 December 1986.  As can be seen from the following extract
    from the determination of  the  immigration  judge  who  dismissed  her
    appeal, her account is of an horrific experience of abduction, rape and
    forced prostitution. Having arrived in the United Kingdom in  September
    2003, she was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  November  2004  on
    account of her age and she appealed against refusal to vary that  leave
    by way of the grant of further leave.

22.   Her appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Kealy on 5 January 2006  and
    dismissed.  In paragraphs 4 to 9 of the determination  the  Immigration
    Judge set out details of the appellant's claim as follows:-

    "4.    She lived with her parents in a  small  town  in  North  Eastern
         Albania.  She left school at fifteen and worked  as  a  seamstress.
         She has a much younger sister.


    5.     At Christmas 2002 a gang of masked people traffickers broke into
         their house  in  the  night,  shot  her  father  dead,  gagged  and
         blindfolded the Appellant and drove her away in a  van.   She  lost
         touch with the passage of time but it seems  that  she  arrived  in
         Bari in Italy, though she claims not to recall ever leaving the van
         or crossing the sea.  It was not till  later  that  she  discovered
         where she was.


    6.     She was taken into a building populated by a  team  of  four  or
         five (masked) Albanian men, possibly a warehouse of some kind,  and
         a number of other girls of  varying  nationalities  who  were  also
         housed there.  She was then "broken in" by the men  and  was  raped
         and abused by all the men in turn.   Until  then  she  had  been  a
         virgin.  This  ordeal  lasted  for  about  ten  days  after  which,
         thoroughly broken in, she was put on the streets as a prostitute to
         earn her keep.


    .7.    She was always watched from a distance by one  of  the  Albanian
         pimps (presumably no longer masked) so that she could  not  escape.
         It was only then that she discovered where she was.  She worked  as
         a prostitute for about nine and  a  half  months,  paying  all  her
         "earnings" over to her pimps.  It was made  clear  that  they  kept
         anything back at their peril.  Discipline was  inflicted  but  only
         where it would not show to put off the customers.


    .8.    Then one of the girls mentioned to her that there was usually  a
         lorry parked in a side street nearby.  On 22 or 23  September  2003
         she managed to slip out and get into  the  unlocked  back  of  this
         lorry, not knowing where it was going or anything  else  about  it.
         Again she lost track of time but was in  the  back  of  this  lorry
         without food or water or anywhere to relieve herself for as long as
         it took the driver(s) of that lorry to reach the Channel, cross  in
         a ferry and land somewhere in South Wales.  She never got out  from
         start to finish and the drivers did not know that  she  was  there.
         After it had been stopped two or three hours the lorry  was  opened
         and she was able to  emerge,  much  to  the  surprise  of  everyone
         outside.


    .9.    She walked away until she met a woman who she  later  found  out
         was herself a refugee from Macedonia, name of Linda.  She was  then
         kindly taken to Newport Social Services and they in turn  contacted
         the police and the Immigration Service where she claimed asylum."


    In the following three paragraphs he sets out the basis of  BM's  claim
         as follows:-


    "10.   If she were to return she feared what would happen to her.   Her
         father had always been  sickly  and  was  now  dead.   She  has  no
         brothers and only her mother and sister as far as she knew ((t)here
         are other relations but she does not know  them).   Many  relatives
         had emigrated.  In October 2003 she had not dared tell  her  mother
         where she was  in  case  she  was  subjected  to  pressure  by  the
         traffickers to find out where the appellant had escaped to.


    11.    If she goes back she fears that she would again become a  target
         of the traffickers because they would be afraid that she  would  be
         able to identify them (to the police?).  She had never before  been
         away from her home town, and knew nowhere in Albania to  which  she
         could safely take internal flight as a  trafficked  woman  who  had
         escaped she would be marked out.  The gangs had a lot of power  and
         influence and the police were powerless to help.


    12.    The police would be unable to catch the people  responsible  for
         her capture and trafficking or to protect her. They were corrupt."


23.   In paragraph 96 he noted that the appellant's  account  had  not  been
    disputed by the respondent and he said she  had  not  been  disbelieved
    about her core claim.  He said that she would be:

          "returned to Albania as a single girl with a baby, as a  girl  who
         was kidnapped, trafficked and forced to work  as  a  prostitute  in
         Italy after a period of serious  sexual  abuse,  whose  father  was
         killed by her kidnappers and had managed to reach the UK where  she
         was refused asylum but given shelter for over two years".


24.   There was some issue about a claim that her mother  had  reported  the
    traffickers and about a police report which  had  been  produced.   The
    Immigration Judge did not accept that document but stated that  it  did
    not cause him to doubt the appellant's own story.

25.   He,  however,  went  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal,  stating  that  the
    appellant:


         "had been trafficked and had escaped and that is all.  She can  be
        safely returned and there is no real risk  that  her  rights  under
        Articles 2 and 3 will be infringed which is what the respondent has
        said all along."


    He went on to consider that there was no evidence to show that a single
    woman with a child could not settle safely in Tirana.  Internal  flight
    was therefore open to the appellant.

26.   Reconsideration  having  been  ordered  by  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    Latter on 30 January 2006, Senior Immigration Judge  Freeman  found  a
    material error of law in  the  determination  after  a  hearing  on  20
    November 2006. He wrote:

    "1.    The  Immigration  Judge,  in  the  course  of  an  exceptionally
         thorough and clear decision, treated VD [2004] UKIAT 0015 CG as  if
         it still settled the question of whether those once trafficked were
         at any greater risk of being trafficked again,  despite  the  later
         evidence from the State Department report for 2004, to which he was
         referred, suggesting  that  'Re-trafficking  became  a  significant
         problem'.  There  may  be  a  number  of  explanations   for   this
         phenomenon, by no means all of which would suggest  an  affirmative
         answer to the question posed; but they need to be investigated.


    2.     We did not consider that the judge made any  material  error  of
         law in not dealing with the appellant's  evidence  about  telephone
         conversations she had had with her  mother  (relating  to  repeated
         threats by those who had trafficked her) after she left Albania, up
         to August 2005.  At her interview of  12  August  2005  (Q129)  the
         appellant was asked about how  her  mother  and  sister  were,  and
         replied 'They are doing okay but my mother is a  bit  worried  what
         will happen to my sister now she is growing up'.  In our  view  the
         judge was entitled generally to reject the 'mother-based  evidence'
         as he did at �100."


27.   Again, therefore, the basic facts of BM's  appeal  are  accepted.   We
    note the terms of her witness statement and the fact that  BM  was  not
    allowed to go to High School because of the distance from her home  and
    the fact that she was told that she had to  think  about  her  family's
    honour and that her relationship with a man would bring  shame  on  her
    family.  She stated she had never been allowed to go to town on her own
    and added that she did not know whether she had any suitors.  She  said
    (at paragraph 18 of her statement):

         "Someone may have approached my parents  to  ask  for  my  hand  in
         marriage.  If my family did not like the suitor they would not tell
         me.  My family had the power to decide who was good enough in their
         eyes to marry me.  He never told me about any suitors."


    She indicated that she could see that she had been a "good target"  for
    the traffickers as she had no brothers and the only male in her  family
    was her sick father.  She said that she  must  have  been  targeted  by
    someone who knew about her family.  She referred to the attack  in  the
    middle of the night, and to  her  father  being  shot  before  she  was
    abducted.  She went on to describe how she had been "broken in" by  the
    traffickers over a period of ten days and  she  described  her  escape.
    She referred to her relationship in Britain which had led to the  birth
    of her daughter on 21 November 2005.  She went on to say that she  was
    fully integrated in Britain having  completed  "Level  1  and  GCSE  in
    mathematics and biology in July 2005 as part of a health a social  care
    course".  She had also studied English on a part-time  basis,  attended
    Sure Start and had local friends including one with three  children  of
    her own.  She was currently undergoing a beauty and hairdressing course
    at a college in Southend.  She said if she returned to Albania it would
    not be possible to keep it quiet for long that she had been a victim of
    traffickers and it would be obvious that she is  a  single  parent  and
    that by itself was not accepted in Albania.  She and her daughter would
    be ostracised and abused.

28.   In paragraph 105 she said that she feared the gang who trafficked  her
    to Italy and that she did not know what had become of  her  mother  and
    sister.  She believed there was a strong possibility that she would  be
    re-trafficked if she returned.  She went on to say that she  could  not
    disclose her trafficking background to  her  GP  because  she  felt  so
    ashamed and would be frightened to do so.

29.   Dr Roxane Agnew-Davies has also prepared a detailed report,  dated  27
    July 2007, on BM. In paragraph 1.05 of  her  report  she  set  out  her
    conclusions.  She stated  that  BM  presented  with  symptoms  of  post
    traumatic stress disorder but also had additional symptoms  that  could
    not be subsumed within that diagnosis.  She added:

         "While I suspect she has made some recovery since  her  arrival  in
         the UK and I found her to  be  a  committed  parent,  her  symptoms
         render her vulnerable in the longer term."


30.   She referred to the offer of therapeutic support that BM had  received
    from the Poppy Project which  she  described  as  a  specialist  trauma
    service saying that it:

         "may be insufficient to meet her needs but I do not find her  ready
         to access trauma focus therapy.  The clinical implications  of  her
         experiences of forced prostitution over a protracted  period  at  a
         young age increase the probability that Ms (BM) is likely to suffer
         clinically significant and prolonged psychological  problems.   She
         will  remain  vulnerable  to  relapse  when  her  current  symptoms
         resolve.  The psychological conditions impair her coping strategies
         and render her vulnerable in situations of risk.   My  professional
         opinion is that (BM's) return to Albania  would  cause  significant
         detriment to her mental health, jeopardise her  recovery  prospects
         and undermine her parenting capacity."


31.   At paragraph 3.05.13 Dr Agnew-Davies wrote:-

         "With reference to her ex-partner, her  daughter's  father  (AX,  a
         Kosovan national) (BM)  explained  the  relationship  lasted  until
         shortly after her child was born.  She explained, "We never  had  a
         good relationship.  I knew it was apparent while I was  in  college
         in South Wales, I never felt anything for a man in my past.  I just
         did not want it at all.  I just felt my skin crawling  and  ashamed
         and embarrassed.  I never had a feeling of  love  in  my  life.   I
         thought it was something special.  No one can  know  how  something
         can be.  You think you are happy and had good times  together,  but
         we never wanted the same things.  We had  different  thoughts.   He
         was so straight; he wanted to control my life.  I want to be  free,
         not to do stupid things that are not acceptable, but to  do  things
         that most people do, like have friends."


32. Dr Agnew Davies referred to AX being  violent  during  BM's  pregnancy,
    although he was not violent after her daughter had been born. She  said
    that BM had said she wanted to have nothing more to  do  with  men  but
    just to continue with her training.  Dr Agnew-Davies considered that BM
    was suffering from a complex form of PTSD. She said that that condition
    is not an inevitable consequence of trafficking although it is a common
    problem.  She that she did not consider that  BM  presented  a  current
    suicidal risk but went on to say that:-


          "I did not feel confident if she was separated from  her  daughter
         that this would not quickly become an issue,  particularly  in  the
         light of her depressive symptoms.  Suicide attempts are most likely
         when hopelessness is coupled with low self  esteem,  and  there  is
         evidence in this case that (BM's) self esteem is fragile." (4.2.15)




33.   In Section 4.3 of the report Dr Agnew  Davies  refers  to  the  likely
    impact upon BM of her being returned to Albania.  She referred  to  the
    vulnerability of BM on return stating that she associated return to her
    country with death or being killed and stated that:

         "I think it is a risk that she would act on her belief  that  death
         was  preferable  to  further  sexual  violence,   particularly   if
         separated from her daughter".


    She  referred  to  BM  anticipating  rejection  by  the  community  and
    psychological harassment for herself and  her  daughter,  pointing  out
    that  the  degree  of  social  support  or  isolation  was  a  critical
    determinant of recovery from PTSD.  She also stated  that  BM  believed
    that she would be subjected to sexual harassment and  abuse,  including
    rape without hope of protection on return and that that would be highly
    likely to cause her PTSD symptoms to flare up if she were to return  to
    Albania, with the extremely negative consequence of incapacity to  cope
    as a lone parent.


34.   At paragraph 4.3.5 she wrote:

         "In summary I believe that (BM's) current symptoms render her  less
         able to adjust to return to Albania than a healthy person,  or  one
         who has not experienced abuse.  She is likely to  be  triggered  to
         heightened flashbacks, which in turn would increase her symptoms in
         a spiralling fashion.  These would not just include hyper-vigilance
         and  hyper-arousal  but  she  is  more  likely  to  develop   major
         depressive symptoms, including despair, hopelessness  and  suicidal
         ideals.  My professional opinion is that  BM's  return  to  Albania
         would  cause  significant  detriment  to  her  mental  health   and
         jeopardise her recovery prospects.  I  have  stated  above  that  a
         number of factors are likely to contribute to the deterioration  in
         BM's mental health if this were necessary."

35.       Dr Agnew-Davies also gave evidence before us.   Having  explained
    her diagnoses  in  the  context  of  both  PTSD  and  major  depressive
    disorder, Dr Agnew-Davies stated that complex PTSD led to a fundamental
    change in an individual's belief  system  and  the  ability  to  manage
    emotions with dissociation from events, not through a conscious choice,
    which would lead to that  individual  feeling  different  (for  example
    dirty, unmarriageable, defiled or guilty in  an  unrealistic  way)  and
    believing  that  a  perpetrator  of   violence   might   have   "almost
    supernatural powers" in being able to find the sufferer and to read her
    mind.  She stated that a majority of victims of  trafficking  presented
    with complex PTSD which she distinguishing from the PTSD that is  found
    in soldiers or victims of natural disaster.

36.      Asked if there is anything that could affect the  ability  of  the
    appellant to make positive choices, Dr Agnew-Davies stated  that  those
    who suffered sexual abuse were more likely to  be  re-victimised.   Not
    only  because  abusers  were  predatory  and  targeted  their   victims
    selectively but also because it was  her  view  that  victims  who  had
    experienced inescapable abuse both physical and sexual  would  be  less
    likely able to escape and more likely to be trapped  than  someone  who
    had not.  She believed that usual "fight" or  "flight"  responses  were
    suppressed in a victim of abuse and where  such  an  individual  had  a
    dissociative disorder they would be likely to freeze and therefore risk
    being unable to run away or confront an abuser.

37. Dr  Agnew-Davies  stated  that  both  appellants  had  high  levels  of
    avoidance/dissociation - in AM this was was 99% more severe  than  most
    of the  population  and  in  BM  approximately  98%  more  severe  when
    considering the issue of defensive avoidance and 86% more  severe  than
    most when judged on her  ability to  dissociate  herself  from  events.
    She stated that with regard to BM her diagnosis had remained  the  same
    between when she had seen her  in  2007  and  again  in  October  2008,
    although she was slightly less depressed.  Dr Agnew-Davies said that it
    was relevant that neither woman was in counselling and  both  had  been
    here  for  years.   Her  general  impression  was  there  had  been  no
    improvement.

38. She referred to what she referred to as the "Zimmermen Report" entitled
    "Stolen Smiles". This stated that victims of trafficking  showed  minor
    improvements in the first few months but then continued  to  experience
    symptoms for six to nine years.  She stated that these appellants  were
    not unusual in showing a lack of significant improvement.  It  was  her
    view that these appellants would avoid therapy  because  they  did  not
    want to think about or recall their experiences.

39. Dr Agnew-Davies referred to three stages of recovery for  a  woman  who
    had suffered trafficking. The first was getting to safety both  in  the
    environment, and mentally and physically. The second was treatment  for
    acute symptoms, including medication, and the third  was  dealing  with
    long term underlying vulnerability.  Neither of the appellants had  yet
    achieved  the  first  stage,  partially  because  of   their   insecure
    immigration status.  It was her view that if AM accepted that she had a
    choice to remain here and be safe there would  be  a  minimum  risk  of
    suicide but if she were forced  to  return  to  Albania  she  would  be
    operating on the belief that she no longer had a choice and would be in
    a similar position to that of a prisoner in a concentration camp taking
    a cyanide pill rather than facing  torture.   She  emphasised  that  at
    present AM believed that she was in relative safety here.

40. Dr Agnew-Davies was then asked about  whether  or  not  a  woman  would
    voluntarily place herself back in the  situation  re-trafficking.   She
    stated that in thousands of women she had interviewed she had never met
    one who voluntarily chose further abuse.  It was her view that  neither
    appellant was remotely ready for any sexual relationship with a  loving
    partner.

41. Dr Agnew-Davies referred "the Stockholm Syndrome" which  she  said  was
    characterised by three things - the victims would  believe  that  there
    was a severe risk of harm, there was no escape and that  no  one  would
    help and protect them. Therefore they were responsible  for  their  own
    survival.  If they  were  kidnapped  there  would  be  a  psychological
    bonding with the abusers and they would accept the  abusers  mentality.
    This was not out of free will  but  based  on  a  conscious  effort  to
    survive. Where women are abused the three elements of choice -the women
    believing they had a right to choose, being aware that choices  existed
    and having the skills or resources to implement  choice  would  all  be
    compromised.  In effect the trafficker would  convince  the  victim  of
    trafficking that they had no right  to  make  a  personal  choice.   In
    particular women, such as the appellants, who had been taught  that  it
    was their duty to obey men, would have difficulty in making any choices
    against those men who would abuse them.  She stated that it would be  a
    major trigger to a high level of fear if AM thought  that  she  had  to
    return to her family home because of her attitude  to  her  father  and
    what he had done.  In BM's case the situation was  further  complicated
    by the death  of  her  father  and  the  fact  she  had  not  begun  to
    acknowledge her bereavement.  Dr Agnew-Davies referred to  a  situation
    of "learned helplessness" where an abused  woman  who  has  been  in  a
    situation where she had been abused would no longer look for  solutions
    to get away from their abuser.  Particularly in  BM's  case,  the  fact
    that she had been trafficked as a child would have far  longer  lasting
    affects.

42. We also received a report from Ishah Jawaid, a Senior  Outreach  Worker
    at the Poppy Project,  relating  to  AM's  psychological  concerns  and
    setting out  the  difficulties  returning  victims  of  trafficking  to
    Albania, which she referred to as a major source of trafficked victims.
     She referred to statements by a Mrs Latcha, Vice President of  "Useful
    to Albanian Women" stating that the situation for returned  victims  of
    trafficking was very depressing and stating there was only one  shelter
    "Linza" and that resources were very limited.   The  shelter  was  well
    known to traffickers and a good percentage of victims had been found by
    their traffickers at the  shelter  and  had  been  re-trafficked.   The
    shelter could only support them for  six  months  or  a  year  in  very
    exceptional  circumstances.   After  leaving  the  shelter  women  were
    expected to find employment, provide themselves with housing,  security
    and wellbeing.  She stated that given the stigma  of  trafficked  women
    there would be little chance of reintegration.

43. We then heard evidence from Dr Stephanie  Schwandner-Sievers.  She  has
    prepared an extremely lengthy report  which  had  been  updated  on  19
    January 2009 and was based largely  on  a  field  trip  to  Albania  in
    September and October 2008, funded by the  anti-trafficking  office  of
    the Office of Democracy and Human Rights  in  Europe,  ODHIR  (Warsaw).
    With others, she had interviewed the coordinator  of the Office of  the
    National Coordinator  to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings  in  Tirana
    (the Deputy Minister of the Interior), The Centre for Legal  and  Civic
    Initiatives,  an  NGO  providing   legal  assistance  to   Victims   of
    Trafficking,  including 3 members  of  staff  who  were  psychological,
    legal and social counsellors,  The Director of  the  Linza  Shelter  in
    Tirana (the National reception centre for the Victims of trafficking) ,
    Ms Vera Lesko, the Director of the Drop  In  centre  Vatra,  in  Vlora,
    where she also met 19 victims of trafficking, the  Womens'  Association
    in  Dur�s and, in Tirana, she met representatives of various government
    offices  and NGOs.   She  also  met  representatives  of  the  shelters
    "Another Vision" in Elbastan, "Different and Equal" and "Life and Hope"
    as well as a representative of the Organised Crime Directorate  of  the
    Albanian State Police.  She also drew on meetings which she had had  on
    other visits to Albania and referred to the report of Dr.  John  Davies
    entitled "My Name is  Not  Natasha"  on  his  research  among  Albanian
    prostitutes in Lyon.   Her  report  contained  considerable  background
    information on the  workings  of  the  Albanian  State,  corruption  in
    government and in the police and the  relationship  between  corruption
    and trafficking.  Although  she  acknowledged  that  one  of  the  most
    notorious gangs involved in trafficking - the Durres gang  -  had  been
    prosecuted she referred  to  the  lack  of  protection  of  victims  of
    trafficking and the  lack  of  successful  prosecution  of  traffickers
    generally.


44.   Dr. Schwandner-Sievers noted  that  the  UN  Protocol  had  implicitly
    recognised "the existence of both coerced and non-coerced participation
    in sex work" and she referred to a "schism" between  the  two  opposing
    camps in NGOs stating that:

        "the first position includes the possibility of agency and  consent
        rather than victimhood   and  implies  that  'sex  work  is  work';
        consequently, only if coercive   deceptive   and/or  exploitive  it
        should be considered part of 'trafficking'  and as  such  'grievous
        violation of human rights'.

    the other position, she stated,

        "employs  a  historically  rooted,  more  moralised   position   of
        prostitution, which  is  seen  as  never  possibly  consensual  and
        consequently, relied on  the  concept  of  victimhood  rather  than
        agency".

    She referred to the research of Dr. Davies which differentiated between
    "wives" and "whores"  -the  first  group  being  less  aware  of  their
    exploitation for psychological reasons while the second knew what  they
    were entering into  and  were  likely  to  engage  willingly  with  the
    traffickers. It was this last group which she indicated had become  the
    largest group in recent years. However, it was her conclusion that:


        "even Albanian women who consensually  agree  into  sex  work  face
        coercion,  deception  and  slavery  as  an  integral  part  of  the
        experience."


    but it was her opinion that:


        "the theoretical dichotomy separating women into either victims  or
        agents of their fate appears redundant for the Albanian case  where
        the  'total social opprobrium' of women outside male control and/or
        rejected by their families i.e. circumstantial factors of coercion,
        allows agency only within and along paths that ultimately  lead  to
        further sexual exploitation and thus victimisation".


45.   Dr. Schwandner-Sievers emphasised a determination within the  Albanian
    government and NGOs to play down the issue of  trafficking  because  it
    was considered to be a "national shame".  She therefore  believed  that
    the figures  were  manipulated  so  that  the  problem  was  minimised,
    although it appears that even the figures from the shelters  themselves
    indicated that the numbers being identified were dropping.


46.   She  refers  to  the  Vatra  report  as  listing  the  categories  for
    recruitment as being:

        "1) Women and girls, married and divorced, many with  children  and
        extremely poor, who come from rural areas; 2)   girls  between  the
        ages of 14  and  18  years  old;  3)  Students,  living  on  campus
        descending from other cities or rural areas;  4)  trafficked  women
        and girls repatriated from EU countries."

47.   She referred to the report from the shelter "Different and  Equal"  as
    stating that there was a growing  risk  of  internal  trafficking.   Dr
    Schwandner-Sievers referred to Amnesty International's 2008  Report  as
    stating:

         "According to police sources the trafficking of women and children
        decreased sharply in 2007, with thirteen reported  cases  in  which
        the victims were women and seven cases involving children.  However
        NGOs  apparently  suspected  that  considerably  more  cases   went
        unreported."


48.   She noted that the US Trafficking of Persons 2008 Report stated:

        "The  overall  decline  in  victims  identified  [was]  due  to  an
        appropriate application of national federal mechanisms for  several
        months [in 2007] by anti-trafficking police."

      The Director of "Life and Hope" which is in the south of  Albania  had
    said that in the summer and autumn of 2007 only  one  person  had  been
    referred to the shelter despite  the  fact  that  they  normally  would
    receive 20 to 30 cases per month referred from the border police.

49.   The 2007 US State Department  Report  had  stated  that  the  official
    government statistics for 2007:

        "shows an 80%  decline  of  the  number  of  suspected  victims  of
        trafficking, but this number is not independently verifiable."

      The most recent US Trafficking of Persons Report for  2008  which  had
    considered the situation  until  March  2008  referred  to  a  slightly
    increased figure for 2007 - 146 victims rather than 140.

50.   Dr Schwandner-Sievers quoted the Albanian Ombudsman as saying  in  his
    report for 2007 that:

        "As we all know and have it highlighted in all reports made by  the
        monitoring international institutions and bodies, in  the  Republic
        of Albania, specific laws relating to human  rights  implementation
        and protection have all been adopted...  But the  drafting  of  the
        new laws is not sufficient.  The well implementation of the law  is
        a basic element guaranteeing the democracy and the rule of law.  It
        is a fact in Albania nowadays that the efficient implementation  of
        the positive legal framework comes  across  very  serious  problems
        seeking for solutions.  Therefore in our daily life  we  experience
        many negative occurrences of substantial violations of human rights
        and freedoms."

51.   It was the conclusion of Dr Schwandner-Sievers that:

        "...The gap between legal reform, or strategies,  on  paper,  which
        serves the politics of self-representation, and the social  reality
        on the ground does not substantially change, must be related to the
        following factors.  First the government of Albania has, on  paper,
        committed itself to funding  the  implementation  of  the  National
        Strategies Policy recommendations, but  it  is  not  clear  to  the
        present day where this money is supposed  to  come  from.   Funding
        problems and lack of professional capacities appear to be the  most
        pertinent  problems,   generally,   hindering   implementation   of
        Albania's many ambitious reforms aimed at European recognition.  To
        the  present  day,  all  anti-trafficking  work   (in   particular,
        reintegration attempts), which could have a very  real  impact  for
        victims of  trafficking   on  the  ground,  if  at  all...has  been
        conducted by local NGOs such as,  namely  Different  and  Equal  in
        Tirana and Vatra in Vlore.   Both these NGOs are to the present day
        entirely dependent on international donor funding and not supported
        by the government in terms  of  funding...   Secondly,  apart  from
        unsecured  funding,  there  are  also  problems  with  professional
        capacities and standards not just within the  government  but  also
        with the government related shelters and other agencies related  to
        the anti-trafficking fight in Albania...  Thirdly,  Albania  stands
        out worldwide in terms  of  severity  of  corruption,  bribery  and
        organised crime, and the ways in which these phenomena  affect  its
        style of government..."

52.   Dr Schwandner-Sievers went on to indicate ways in which  she  believed
    state officials could  be  corruptly  involved  in  trafficking  either
    directly in running such an operation or participating  in  trafficking
    operations or indirectly by using a trafficked person, for  example  in
    prostitution or domestic help, or refusing to investigate allegations.

53.   Dr Schwandner-Sievers referred to a telephone helpline set up  by  the
    Minister of Interior for victims of trafficking.  However,  she  stated
    when she met anti-trafficking stakeholders who represented all the non-
    government shelters they had not even heard of the number.

54.   When considering the issue of internal flight she stated that  it  was
    now generally perceived as impossible  that  a  deportee  from  Britain
    could anonymously relocate in Albania  because  of  both  personal  and
    social factors and from an administrative point of view.  She had  been
    told by the National Anti-Trafficking Coordinator, Iva Zagmi, that  the
    border police have been trained in  the  procedures  for  dealing  with
    deportees including from Britain at border points.  The rules they  had
    accepted included accepting  the  presence  of  a  social  worker,  and
    representatives from an NGO,  and  using  female  officers  during  the
    identification interview as well as using a questionnaire, which  could
    be  followed  in  identification  procedures.   Dr   Schwandner-Sievers
    acknowledged that a leading police readmission officer at the admission
    centre at the international  airport  had  stated  that  questionnaires
    could not be used as these  would  insult  the  interviewing  officer's
    sense of experience and expertise in the field of organised crime.   He
    had indicated that the questionnaires were not required.  He had  said,
    however, that a representative of the shelter would be present and that
    the purpose of training was to get as much information as possible from
    victims of trafficking so that she would be  identified  as  a  victim.
    However, she could only be helped if she  disclosed  her  identity  and
    asked for  help.   Dr  Schwandner-Sievers  referred  to  the  US  State
    Department "Trafficking of  Persons"  Report  2008  which  stated  that
    authorities would only identify as victims  of  trafficking  those  who
    proactively identified themselves as such.

55.    When  considering  the  issue  of  the  risk  of  re-trafficking   Dr
    Schwandner-Sievers stated that:

        "Given cultural prerogatives, which underpin all societal attitudes
        in Albania, in conjunction with the inadequacy of any other support
        options in Albania as well as security  concerns,  local  NGOs  and
        police continue to regard family reintegration  and  rehabilitation
        as the best of all available options in Albania  and  pursue  these
        regardless of all the  difficulties.  There  have  been  individual
        'success stories' regarding  reintegration  (facilitated,  mediated
        and organised by  the  foreign-donor-funded  NGOs)  however,  these
        presume self-identification of the VOTs, denial of their past...and
        have predominately relied on family  reintegration,  which  is  not
        always an option or can, itself, have detrimental outcomes."

56.   She went on to state that  successful  reintegration  "could  lead  to
    victims of trafficking to  experience  harm  because  of  the  cultural
    concept of shame even if they were returned to their families".

57.   In correspondence between Dr Schwandner-Sievers  and  Dr  John  Davies
    annexed to her report Dr Davies states that:

        "I would argue that women do not re-enter  trafficking  'willingly'
        but are structurally compelled to use  trafficking  routes  because
        irregular migration has  collapsed  into  trafficking  and  because
        trafficking options are the only  way  for  them  to  pursue  their
        actual migration  trajectory  and  social  rehabilitations  through
        foreign  marriage   etc...    Therefore   previous   knowledge   of
        trafficking  only  allows  them  to  better  negotiate  terms   and
        conditions  or  be  better  prepared  to  leave   the   trafficking
        environment next time round...  However it  is  policy  that  holds
        them in place to be abused...  Knowing about trafficking  does  not
        reduce risk or/migration it only allows more nuanced negotiation to
        access  the  trafficking  network...  Because  the  risk   is   not
        trafficking but the total social opprobrium of  being  divorced  or
        'abandoned' in Albania... Using trafficking to escape  such  social
        oppression is often judged the price to be paid  for  a  chance  to
        rehabilitate from a marriage..."

58.   Also annexed to Dr Schwandner-Sievers's report is a  transcript  of  a
    telephone conversation with Mrs Jennifer Hollinger, a CHASTE fellow  at
    Georgetown University.  She stated the highest risk  groups  were  Roma
    because they were particularly marginalised in society and  because  of
    cultural factors.  She went on to respond to the question of what would
    happen to women who were not identified as victims  of  trafficking  on
    return to state:

        "My assumption is (again, we  don't  have  hard  data  for  obvious
        reasons)  that  they  would   be   re-trafficked,   internally   or
        externally.  There may be individual cases who find protection with
        their families, but I suspect that the majority of them  fall  into
        re-trafficking.  They come back with no skills,  and  all  that  is
        left to them is prostitution in Albania as they have to feed  their
        families and/or themselves.  It is a matter of their survival."

59.   Dr. Schwandner-Sievers set out  the  social  mores  within  the  rigid
    patriarchal culture of much of Albania particularly the rural areas and
    among the rural areas particularly in the north.  She referred  to  the
    strict code of honour embodied in the Kanun  of  Leke  Dukagjinit  (Dr.
    Schwandner-Sievers' spelling is used  throughout  this  determination),
    the code of conduct accepted in the north of Albania which  focuses  on
    the concept of family "honour". She emphasised  that the definition  of
    honour within particularly rural, Albanian society was reflected in the
    concept  of  ""kurva"",  which  Ms  Schwandner-Sievers   translated  as
    meaning "a whore", which effectively referred not only to  someone  who
    had committed adultery or was a prostitute but  also  someone  who  had
    been raped or was considered to be of loose  morals.  She  stated  that
    this was the case:


           "because it is not the notion of  female  consent  that  matters
           (and informs our terminological differentiations)" but the  fact
           that all these events share the fact that the women  had  sexual
           intercourse outside the protection/control of men: their fathers
           and brothers before, and their husband after marriage.  In other
           words a "whore" is a woman  categorically  falling  outside  the
           Albanian cultural norms of the family and accepted gender roles.
           According to  the  Kanun,  "kurvinja"  (sexual  contact  outside
           accepted norms)  which  normally  is  translated  as  "adultery"
           requires the killing of both parties involved, men and women, or
           - at best - the expulsion of the woman.  Only death or exile can
           avert her 'shame' from the family".

60.   She did, however, go on to state that these cultural norms were  never
    "strict"  and  people  could  take  individual   choices   within   the
    constraints of local social expectations of how they would comply  with
    such  cultural  conventions.   The  higher  the   social   strata   and
    educational background the  less  likely  was  a  strict  adherence  to
    traditional codes. She emphasised that, however, that  the  concept  of
    "honour" was  still  widely  accepted  in  mainstream  Albanian  family
    attitudes although honour killings were now considered rare in Albania.


61.   She listed the  anti-trafficking  non-governmental  organisations  and
    shelters being Vatra in  Vlore  in  Southern  Albania,  "Different  and
    Equal" in Tirana and a further centre called "Another  Vision".   Vatra
    had housed nineteen victims of trafficking,  both  women  and  children
    when the shelter was visited  in  2008;  and  "Another  Vision"  had  a
    capacity for maybe eight persons at a time. There  is  also  a  transit
    reception centre near the border with Greece called "Life and Hope".

62.   Finally, there was the governmental shelter  known  as  "Linza"  which
    defined itself as a high security centre. It did not provide long  term
    reintegration services.  It was able to house up to 100 people but  was
    never filled even to 50% since it had been  opened.   She  stated  that
    "Different and Equal" reported some training possibilities for  victims
    of  trafficking  and  there  were  some  attempts  by  non-governmental
    organisations to reintegrate returned trafficked women.

63.   She emphasised that there was a risk of re-trafficking.  She  referred
    to Dr John Davies' report entitled "My Name is Not Natasha" in which he
    set  out  reasons  why  women  would  submit  to  re-trafficking.   She
    emphasised that the Director  of  the  Vatra  Centre  had  referred  to
    victims of trafficking  who  had  successfully  reintegrated  by  being
    reunited with their families or  placed  in  rented  accommodation  and
    found employment but said those women would normally have to deny  that
    they ever lived in the shelter and indeed the shelter would assist them
    to invent a fake identity. There is clear evidence that traffickers  or
    merely men looking for women would haunt the shelters and she described
    the lack of security outside the "Different and Equal" shelter.

64.   Her report set out the statistics for the women in the Vatra  shelter,
    broadly 45% originating from the North, 40% from mid  Albania  and  the
    remainder from the South.  Different and Equal's "prot�g�s" in 2007 had
    originated from all parts of Albania but were most urban  (67%)  rather
    than rural.  The risk from families for victims of trafficking, she had
    been told by the Director of Vatra, was particularly  high  because  of
    the mentality of the fathers and brothers in the North.   She  referred
    to a comment from an individual from the Poppy Project which said  that
    the Poppy Project's Albanian prot�g�s were exceptionally  unwilling  to
    return because of the great fears of confronting social stigma.

65.   With regard to the cultural background giving rise  to  social  stigma
    she referred to an  OSCE  Report  stating  that  domestic  violence  in
    Albania was underreported and under-investigated, under- prosecuted and
    under-sentenced.  Traditional societal norms  considered  women  to  be
    subordinate to men.

66.   One section of Dr Schwandner-Sievers report dealt with  the  issue  of
    "adult orphans" stating that such  people,  without  parental  or  male
    support were particularly vulnerable  to  re-trafficking.   Indeed  one
    group of re-trafficked women would consider that:

        "for them, re-trafficking was the only option  as  there  would  be
        nothing for them and no means of survival in Albania and  certainly
        no means of ever finding a husband for them."

67.   With regard to  mental  health  issues  she  referred  to  a  European
    Council Committee for the Prevention of Torture or Inhuman or Degrading
    Treatment stating that during a visit during 2006  there  was  evidence
    of:

         "the persistent failure of the Albanian  authorities  to  implement
         the 1996 Mental Health Act, which includes a number  of  guarantees
         intended to safeguard the mental rights of psychiatric patients".

68.   Her report also referred to the risks for children without  a  father.
    Child trafficking was a concern in Albania and  the  report  stated  at
    paragraph 23 that child labour and the risk of child trafficking should
    be recognised as a problem of great concern. According to DIFD:

        "About 32.8% of children in Albania live  below  minimum  standards
        (less than $2  per  day)....   Furthermore  Albanian  children  are
        facing other dangers that emerged during transition such as  school
        drop-outs, violence, blood feuds ... trafficking, exploitation  and
        criminality."

    That report had said that children of families  which  do  not  have  a
    father were particularly vulnerable.   She emphasised that as  children
    of  unmarried  mothers  the  children  of  both  AM  and  BM  would  be
    particularly at risk and particularly socially vulnerable.

69.   Turning to the position under the Kanun  of  women  with  illegitimate
    children, she quoted from a commentary by Gjecov on the  Kanun  i  Leke
    Dukagjinit:

         "According  to  most  conservative  and  mostly  historical   Kanun
         traditions such a woman with an illegitimate child would incur such
         shame on her family and community that she  should  be  killed:  'a
         woman may be shot in the back for kurvni'" and 'if a  shamed  woman
         or girl who is pregnant and escapes without being killed  and  goes
         to a different  region  both  woman  and  child  are  placed  under
         permanent ban by the banner (=community)'.   If she and  the  child
         returned regardless, they regard it as a provocation to family  and
         community honour that - according to classic Kanun  she  should  be
         publicly executed or burned alive on 'a dung heap'."


    Although she accepted the worst extremes of Kanun culture belong to the
    past and it was mostly "only" sexually abused women  from  the  classic
    Kanun regions in Northern Albanian who had to  fear  their  fathers  or
    brothers for their lives, in the case of  ""kurva"",  family  rejection
    was the most common reaction across Albania.


70.   With regard to the way in  which  the  appellants  were  taken  in  to
    trafficking she stated that those forms  were  not  unusual,  and  were
    consistent with the available background  evidence.   She  stated  that
    kidnapping was the typical recruitment practice but qualified  that  by
    saying:

                 "I have only recently learned through  Davies  of  a  study
         among Albanian prostitutes in France that  the  Albanian  term  for
         'kidnapping' or "rrembej" "can be  used  to  describe  the  violent
         kidnapping of someone against their will ... but its equally common
         usage is to describe the elopement of a daughter against  the  will
         of her father".

    She went on to say that a loophole  in  traditional  marriage  routines
    allowed a man to pick up a woman  at  home  by  way  of  a  common  law
    marriage and that there were some men who would exploit  that  loophole
    and not go through with the later civil ceremony.  This  was  something
    that happened mainly in the north rather than in Tirana.

71.   This was  a "legacy of traditional 'bride robbery  practices'  in  the
    north, which allowed  a  couple  to  circumvent  the  bride's  father's
    cultural property  rights  over  his  daughter  but  could  expose  the
    kidnapped girl to similar trafficking risks (through deception)  as  in
    the case of 'false marriage promise'. "Abduction" accounted for 53%  of
    traffickers' recruitment strategies for the Northern Albanian region of
    Lezha and 27% in the northern region of Puka in 2001. She  did  say  it
    would seem unusual that the future father-in-law would be killed in the
    event of a traditional bride robbery but said that  at  the  time  that
    BM's father  was  exposed  to  criminal  traffickers  such  traffickers
    operated most violently in that region. She did, however, go on to  say
    that Vera Lesko of the Vatra Centre, in her annual reports for 2005 and
    2006, was still reporting rare cases of kidnapping.


72.   In her oral evidence she referred to women who might  be  deceived  by
    promised marriage and end up in  a  relationship  of  co-dependency  or
    women who wanted to be smuggled and have sex in order  to  pay  back  a
    debt and then get out- described by Dr Davies  as  the  50/50  contract
    group.   Dr  Davies  referred  to  one  example  of  a  woman   leaving
    prostitution.  She referred to these women  being  more  likely  to  be
    either divorced or abandoned and without family.


73.   She quoted from the US Country Report 2002 which had said:-

         "Due to the poor economic situation, many  women  and  young  girls
         from all over the country  -  particularly  Berat,  Fier,  Lushnje,
         Shkoder and Vlora - were lured by  men  and  women  from  organised
         criminal groups who promised them jobs in Italy and  Greece.   Some
         men, primarily in the north of the country, also married women  and
         girls under false pretences and took them  abroad  as  prostitutes.
         Other forms of recruitment included promises of marriage, and to  a
         lesser extent, the selling of  victims  to  traffickers  by  family
         members, or kidnapping, including from orphanages."


74. With regard to the risks emanating from previous traffickers there  was
    clear evidence that traffickers could be extremely  violent.  She  said
    that if a  victim  of  trafficking  escaped  or  co-operated  with  the
    authorities previous threats would quickly become true.   She  referred
    to a media report in 2004 which stated that in a case where a woman had
    agreed to testify to police  initially  her  father  returned  home  in
    Albania  to  find  the  mutilated  remains  of   his   other   daughter
    "splattered" around the house.   A  report  on  health  risks  and  the
    consequences of trafficking of woman  and  adolescents  by  the  London
    School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in 2003  had  stated  that  the
    health risk to trafficked women - mostly Albanians trafficked to  Italy
    - found "murder and death to be the major 'health risk'  ".   A  report
    from Vatra had corroborated  those  findings  of  substantial  risk  of
    murder for victims  of  trafficking  who  escaped  or  who  decided  to
    collaborate with the authorities. She quotes from a  2008  report  from
    save the children as  stating:


                  "Traffickers  may  use   violence,   torture,   rape   and
          intimidation to control their victims. Threats against friends and
          family, further force the victims to comply with their demands. To
          make escape more difficult  travel  documents  and  passports  are
          often taken away, and traffickers tell  victims  that  police  are
          involved or that they will  arrest and deport them to ensure  they
          are too afraid to escape."

75.   In her oral evidence Ms  Schwandner-Sievers  confirmed  that  although
    there was no general risk of trafficking for women  there  were  groups
    which were more likely to face trafficking such as  divorced  women  or
    women from the North.  The age group  of  those  being  trafficked  was
    rather broader than that previously noted in the country guidance  case
    of VT in that it was not just those between 14 and 17.  The primary age
    group for those who are trafficked she now considered to be between  17
    and 19.  Traffickers would prefer  young  girls.  She  stated  that  in
    Albania the term prostitute would include  adultery,  prostitution  and
    rape - the issue of consent was  irrelevant.   Women  would  be  blamed
    should they have sexual relations.

76.   Asked whether or not women could rehabilitate  themselves  she  stated
    that it was clear from the report of Dr John Davies that the  only  way
    to rehabilitate themselves was seen by the women as trying  to  find  a
    husband.  The only way to find a husband would be to  move  abroad  and
    that is why women might approach a trafficker to go  abroad.   She  was
    asked by us whether or not it was  extraordinary  that  a  woman  would
    approach a trafficker to be re-trafficked  given  the  brutality  which
    they would have suffered in the  past.    She  answered  that  not  all
    relationships with traffickers were brutal and there were on  occasions
    contractual relationships - it was now the case that  there  were  more
    psychological forms of violence.  She accepted that  wealth  or  indeed
    education would mean that a woman could avoid not only trafficking  but
    re-trafficking.  She referred to Albania being a society  where  people
    were  inquisitive  and  particularly  keen  on  "social   positioning":
    returnees would be questioned on where they came from.

77.   She emphasised that children were considered to belong to the  husband
    rather than the mother.  She referred to single women on their  own  as
    being "fair game" for men and said that even she, while in Tirana,  had
    had to invent a "family" to  avoid  unwanted  attention.  Women  living
    without family support were perceived to be ""kurva"", particularly  if
    they have a child who was without a father.  Even  a  widow  would  not
    live on her own - she would go back  to  her  family  or  that  of  her
    husband.  There was an age at which she would be able to  live  on  her
    own if she had grey hair.

78.   It was her view that the police were still corrupt and she  said  that
    there was little investment in police training.  Albania  had  recently
    been shown to be one of the most corrupt countries in the world.

79.   She gave information relating to procedures  on  return  stating  that
    when a single woman was returned the border police would interview  her
    to check whether or not she was a victims of  trafficking.  The  border
    police had made it clear to her that it would not  be  possible  for  a
    woman to hide her identity.  The  border  police  would  be  likely  to
    contact the families of a victim of trafficking, because belief in  the
    family was so strong the families  would  be  contacted  in  any  event
    despite the case that trafficking often was from families  where  abuse
    had occurred. The border police would contact the home police who would
    contact the family and the border police had stated the families  could
    be at the airport within three hours.  It would depend  on  the  police
    whether or not they would accept a woman's plea that  they  should  not
    contact her family.  If a woman objected to the border police returning
    her to her family they would suspect she was a  victim  of  trafficking
    and she would be offered a place in the Linza shelter  or  possibly  at
    Different and Equal which was also in Tirana.   If a woman had a  child
    it would be a rare occasion where the family would allow the  woman  to
    return and they might well be sent away together or kept hidden.  Their
    presence would be a huge liability to the reputation of the father  and
    the village.  Women with children were not marriageable as  they  would
    be outside the norm. It would be possible for a women to  be  told  she
    could come home but  not  with  the  child.   There  was  an  issue  of
    abandoned children in Albania and a woman could be  forced  to  abandon
    her child, who would then be placed in an orphanage.  If, in  the  best
    case scenario, both were welcomed home the child would share the blame.
     It would be a difficult situation for the child  as  the  child  would
    have to face the gossip from others  and  the  social  ostracism.   The
    child herself would have problems in marrying.

80.   It would be unlikely that a woman such as BM would be returned to  the
    Vatra Shelter which is in the south rather than the  Linza  Shelter  or
    Different and Equal. She would only be sent to Different and  Equal  if
    she was identified as a victim of trafficking.  She said it  would  not
    be possible for the community not to know  the  circumstances  of  AM's
    abduction given that her father had been killed.

81.   Different and Equal would not accept victims of  trafficking  who  had
    mental health problems into their integration programmes and those with
    mental health problems would not be able to stay in the shelter  for  a
    long period.

82.   She was asked about micro loans under  the  National  Anti-Trafficking
    Strategy and she stated that in Albania even the best  strategies  were
    undermined and little evidence of these being  in  any  way  effective.
    Similarly, although there were procedures for obtaining  work  for  the
    victims of trafficking the reality was that local  employment  officers
    abused their positions and ensured members of  their  own  family  were
    employed.

83.   When asked if there was  any  attempt  to  re-educate  the  population
    regarding trafficking she said  there  was  an  awareness  campaign  to
    prevent trafficking but there had been  no  re-education.   There  were
    deeply held views from which neither the government nor indeed the NGOs
    were free.

84.   In cross-examination Mr Blundell put to her the figures of  those  who
    had been re-trafficked.  She indicated that she believed that the  non-
    governmental   organisations   accepted   that   these   figures   were
    understated.  She accepted that there was a  range  of  statistics  and
    acknowledged the continued implementation  of  the  anti-speedboat  law
    which targeted the speedboat route  by  which  traffickers  took  their
    victims to southern Italy from Vlore.

85.   She was then asked about re-trafficking and it was  put  to  her  that
    there had been a significant drop.  In reply to a question from us  she
    indicated that the figures for re-trafficking from Vatra  were  57%  in
    2005, the State Department had referred to 29.5% re-trafficked women in
    2006 and Different and Equal had referred to  20.5%  between  2004  and
    2006.  She was asked if there were  any  relevant  statistics  and  she
    referred to figures from Vera Lesco of Vatra regarding  2007  when  she
    was told that of the women in the shelter 20% had been re-trafficked.


86.   Asked if only particular groups went to shelters she said that it  was
    the evidence of Dr Davies that it was only the most socially inept who
    went to shelters. Others would not be keen to do so because they feared
    exposure, family reunion or community stigma.

87.   She was then asked about the possibility of employment and it was  put
    to her that the base figure was that 49% of victims of trafficking  who
    were returned were employed and it was then put to her by  Mr  Blundell
    that the female employment rate in general in  Albania  was  40%.   She
    replied that there was a huge informal sector and for that  there  were
    no figures.  That would be largely in agriculture and  therefore  those
    women, who were employed, would not  be  included  in  the  statistics.
    Victims of trafficking who returned  would  not  have  access  to  that
    "grey" employment sector.  With  regard  to  childcare  facilities  she
    stated that there were some private facilities which were expensive but
    there were also some state facilities.


88.   Mr Blundell then asked her about protection for witnesses.   She  said
    that she had recently been made aware of this  -  there  had  been  one
    instance where a family had been told that they  would  get  protection
    outside Albania but the government had been unable to  find  a  country
    that would take them.  Vatra had only had one person  who  had  witness
    protection.  The indications were that the courts would not accept  the
    evidence from someone who was protected or that that  individual  would
    not want to classify themselves as a victim of trafficking.


89.   Dr John Davies' report entitled "My  Name  is  Not  Natasha"  is  sub-
    titled "How Albanian Women in France use Trafficking to Overcome Social
    Exclusion (1998-2001)".  It sets out his research into the  experiences
    and attitudes of a group of Albanian women who worked as prostitutes in
    Lyon between 1998 and 2001.  The  basic  conclusion,  set  out  in  the
    initial summary was that:-

        "This thesis contends that many women were originally deceived into
        marriage with men who then exploited  them;  these  deceived  wives
        were subjugated through their exploitation to patrilocal  marriages
        that invested in the husband the ability  to  make  non  altruistic
        household decisions.  This meant  that  their  migration  could  be
        understood by refining the new economics of migration model and the
        role of non-altruistic actors who might exploit its processes. Once
        the nature of trafficking networks became well-known Albanian women
        increasingly refused to accept such  marriages.   However,  because
        other Albanian women who lacked social  networks  able  to  support
        them in their migration  goals,  many  socially  excluded  divorced
        women began to use the trafficking networks as a mobility  strategy
        in pursuit of migration goals  beyond  prostitution.   This  thesis
        thus argues that  many  trafficked  women  were  not  motivated  to
        migrate because of economic considerations but by determination  to
        achieve social rehabilitation through foreign marriage. These women
        wanted to chain migrate but their weak social  networks  could  not
        sustain  their  intended  migration.   Therefore  these  women  use
        trafficking as a means to reach destinations where they could build
        new networks and strengthen old social networks".


90.   Dr Davies interviewed 58 women and a number of the men who  controlled
    them.  He started the  thesis  with  an  analysis  of  trafficking  but
    emphasised that there was evidence that the links made  by  many  state
    agencies might distort the situation on the  ground.   For  example  he
    said:-


        "While many human rights  activists  argue  for  compassionate  and
        holistic treatment of trafficked people, their  agendas  are  often
        subjugated by the State to  the  interests  of  a  law  enforcement
        agenda or migration policy  priorities,  such  as  the  linking  of
        temporary residency permits for trafficked women to  them  agreeing
        to give  evidence  against  their  traffickers.   This  linkage  is
        contested and recently the Council of Europe has given its  support
        to de-linking evidence from the  giving  from  temporary  residency
        (CoE 2002).  Where  responses  offer  the  victims  of  trafficking
        possible residency, a number of politicians, law enforcement agents
        and even refugee workers have complained that  such  visas  are  an
        invitation for women to falsely claim to have been trafficked."


    He pointed out that shelters in Italy, Albania and other parts  of  the
    Balkans have reported a falling  number of women who want  to  use  the
    centres rather than seeing increasing claims for  such  protection  and
    residency.  That was contrasted, he considered, with continuing reports
    that trafficking in the region was increasing which in turn should have
    led to an expectation of an  increasing  number  of  clients  for  such
    centres.  He stated that many women do not seem to see "a  decent  job"
    in their home country as a satisfactory  resolution  of  a  trafficking
    episode.  He went on to say:-


         "Local  television  stations  in  South  East  Albania  have   been
         regularly advertising well paid jobs for women as seamstresses  and
         hairdressers in the local region for a number of  years,  but  many
         young women still express  an  intention  to  leave  Albania.   The
         urgent protestations of those who propose a human rights  programme
         of awareness raising and recovery for trafficked women seem to lack
         resonance  with  the  behaviour  of  some  trafficked   women,   in
         particular women willing to use trafficking as a mobility  strategy
         and especially those women who seek to be repeatedly trafficked".


    Indeed, it was part of his thesis that not only would women seek to  be
    re-trafficked on return to Albania but that they would often  claim  to
    be trafficked women as a mechanism of achieving  the  ultimate  aim  of
    securing residence in another country where  their  economic  prospects
    were far greater than those open to  them  in  Albania.   Moreover,  he
    emphasised that a number of women from different countries  might  well
    be likely to be prepared to travel to  work  as  prostitutes  (he  gave
    examples of this) but they might also claim that they have  been  duped
    by, for example, following up an  advert  for  a  waitress  in  another
    country despite the fact that such adverts would be clearly  understood
    as a "trafficking device". It was his view that trafficked  women  were
    not a homogenous group and that among that group there was a  range  of
    motives and naivety in the way in which they were exploited.


91.   Within the context of Albania he referred to the fact that many  women
    would claim that they had been kidnapped.  He stated  that  in  Albania
    "kidnapping" was often a way in which women would be taken  from  their
    parents' home either because they wished to elope or because the family
    could not afford a "proper" marriage and indeed that this would  be  an
    action in which the woman's family would be complicit.

92.   He referred to  a  number  of  different   groups  of  Albanian  women
    working as prostitutes  in  Lyon,  the  first  being  the  "wives"  who
    considered themselves married to their cuni (their "husband"  or  pimp)
    but stated that "marriage" did not necessarily mean a man and woman had
    formally registered their marriage with the civil authorities.  It  was
    sufficient that the couple had been engaged or lived together for a few
    months to be considered to be a married couple.  Women who  had  eloped
    with their fianc�s were also considered to  be  married.   Those  women
    would tend to give all their income to their cuni.

93.   The other main group he considered were those  who  were  not  married
    and were overwhelmingly "divorced" women.   These were  not  women  who
    had been formerly married and divorced but those  who  had  been  in  a
    publicly known relationship with a man which had then ended.  The women
    had then usually engaged with the traffickers for the first time at  an
    older age than the "wives" and the most common objective was to marry a
    foreign husband. There was also a smaller group of women who  were  not
    divorced and were not the wives of a cuni but were  older  rural  women
    who were married to non-cuni husbands still in Albania and  others  who
    wished to arrange marriages to foreigners.

94.   By the end of the research period he said that  the  "divorced"  women
    had become the largest group of women.  He referred to  a  lot  of  the
    "not married" women as being in a "50% contract" which was in effect  a
    bonded labour contract supposedly agreed for a certain period  of  time
    although this was largely a forced  labour  situation  which  made  the
    women "trafficked people".

95.   In his section (3.4.2) headed "Repeat Trafficking"  Dr  Davies  states
    that women were often deported from the EU as illegal  migrants  rather
    than returned as trafficked women.  Some  women  from  other  countries
    even pretended to be Albanian  so  to  avoid  being  returned  to  more
    distant countries.  These women would do so in  order  that  that  they
    would be able to return more easily to the EU from Albania  than  their
    own place of origin.  He referred to the statement from Vera Lesko that
    in the  Vatra  rehabilitation  project  more  than  60%  had  been  re-
    trafficked.

96.   In his section on "Leaving Albania" Mr Davies stated that  in  Albania
    it was Roma  women  and  rural  women  who  had  been  considered  more
    vulnerable to trafficking. He  referred  to  Vera  Lesko  of  Vatra  as
    stating that more than 60% of the  victims  of  trafficking  came  from
    rural areas "where the backward mentality is prevalent". He quoted  her
    as saying:

        "All the girls in  the  villages  never  enjoyed  the  freedom  and
        civilisation of the girls from the city, because  of  the  backward
        mentality of those areas.  In order to seem  emancipated  they  say
        that they live in the city ... so they say that they come from  the
        city when in fact it is to the contrary."


    It was, however, Dr Davies' experience that only a small proportion  of
    women whom he interviewed had come directly from a  rural  location  to
    their "trafficking episode".  A majority of the  researched  women  had
    spent their whole lives or at least  their  formative  years  in  urban
    locations before leaving Albania.  One of those to whom he  spoke  said
    that it was important to  appear  more  sophisticated  because  of  the
    clients. There was some indication that the trafficker would choose the
    destination of a trafficked woman having taken into account  her  level
    of sophistication.  He indicated that it was possible that  trafficking
    had started for many of the women that he saw in the southern towns  of
    such as Tirana, Feir, Barat and Vlore and that once women were  proving
    harder to recruit in those cities traffickers resorted  to  recruitment
    in other places including rural areas and especially the  rural  north.
    One cuni had said to him:


        "I think it started in Barat and Vlore,  because  there  the  girls
        were more willing to go with boys and it was a way to  get  out  of
        Albania and make money.  The girls there could  speak  Italian  and
        once they were away from their families who would  know  what  they
        were doing ... who would take a girl from the  village  when  there
        were so many from the towns willing to go ...?"


97.   He also reported the attitudes of the women to returning to a  shelter
    in Albania.  One of the women had said to him:-

        "To avoid being put in the centre (after  deportation  from  Italy)
        you have to make sure you have a change of clothes and some  hidden
        money in your bag so you don't look like a whore when you  get  off
        the boat and so you can give the police  baksheesh, because if  you
        don't you can end up having to fuck every policemen  in  Vlore  and
        then spend weeks in the bloody rescue centre while  they  tell  the
        whole world you are a whore.  Most clever women now carry  a  spare
        set of ordinary clothes in their bag and some baksheesh  when  they
        are working to avoid being arrested  in  Albania  and  put  in  the
        centre."


     He went on to say that the researched women wanted to  avoid  detection
    and referral to the Vatra  shelter  so  that  they  could  avoid  their
    families discovering about their sexual  activities  when  the  shelter
    contacted their families.  He indicated women were relieved  that  they
    could pay the police who would let them go as they did not want  to  be
    detained against their will in the Vatra shelter.  He  considered  that
    if they were there they would be stigmatised.  He also  indicated  that
    women would not want to go back to  their  home  areas  because  people
    there would know what they had been doing.


98.   He indicated that many of the women had engaged  with  the  trafficker
    for economic reasons and indeed that the money they had earned could be
    sent back to their families.  However, he said that  it  was  only  the
    women who wanted foreign husbands who considered unemployment  or  poor
    employment prospects to have been  significant  in  their  decision  to
    leave Albania.

99.   It was his experience that the women in the group he  interviewed  had
    all had some education - they were by no means uneducated.

100.  In his section relating to kidnapping he said that none of  the  group
    that he interviewed said they had been violently compelled to  migrate.
    Although  two  women  had  claimed  early  on  to  have  been  forcibly
    kidnapped, drugged and taken illegally  against  their  will  they  had
    later recounted these stories and described  in  detail  how  they  had
    sought out opportunities to migrate by  contacting  known  traffickers.
    One had said:

        "I would tell the NGO people and the police that I had  been  raped
        by fifteen men in Tirana in Albania and drugged  and  that  then  I
        woke up in Italy.  The NGO people believed me but the police  would
        laugh, ... I just didn't want to admit that I chose to do this  ...
        I was ashamed of this life ... it is better to say  I  was  drugged
        and kidnapped ....


        I tell everyone I was drugged and kidnapped by four men ... but  as
        you know I came here with my cuni to make money  and  start  a  new
        life.  I was kidnapped by love and not by drugs but this way I  can
        say my cuni rescued me from the mafia and so there is no  blame  on
        him ..."


    Noting that many reports  referred  to  the  kidnapping  of  women  for
    trafficking he stated that the  "forcible  kidnapping"  threat  was  an
    opportunistic excuse for the already increasing practice of not sending
    teenage girls to school to avoid a very different type of "kidnapping".
     The other form of kidnapping was as a result of young women seeking to
    arrange love match relationships and to avoid arranged marriages.   The
    desire of young  women  in  Albania  to  escape  from  restrictive  and
    repressive social practice has been increasing since 1990 and there has
    been a traditional backlash against their attempts to secure "freedom".
     Women had referred to the difficulties of their  lives  in  the  rural
    area and the lack of freedom to express  themselves  or  even  to  meet
    boys.  Kidnapping a young woman for  the  purpose  of  marriage  was  a
    traditional Albanian custom which was being replaced by love matches or
    an arranged marriage but  he  said  that  Albanians  and  other  Balkan
    marriage  ceremonies  still  include  symbolic  rituals   intended   to
    represent the traditional violent kidnapping of the bride.   He  stated
    when he discussed kidnapping with the researched women  many  described
    themselves as being kidnapped and explained this by  saying  that  they
    had eloped with their cuni without the consent of their family.  One of
    them had said:-


         "I think most of us were kidnapped; we did it for love, because  we
         did not want to be married off to other men.  It is  better  to  be
         kidnapped in love than married in Albania ... kidnapping with  your
         lover is the only way to escape the tyranny of the Albanian family;
         I don't care about the scandal."


101.  It is clearly Dr Davies' belief that women who contacted the  shelters
    were not representative of the whole population of Albanian  trafficked
    women.   He considered that Roma and rural women were  more  likely  to
    use the shelters and therefore those that were in the shelters did  not
    properly represent the trafficked population.  He said:-


         "It is possible that the rural women who were referred  to  Lesco's
         shelter represent  a  particular  population  who  want  to  escape
         violent abuse, and others who did not have the desire or  resources
         to avoid referral.  This could  mean  that  rural  women  are  more
         likely to seek assistance from NGO's to  leave  trafficking  and/or
         that they were less skilled  at  avoiding  contact.   It  was  also
         possible that a self fulfilling prophecy is in action in that urban
         women are able to avoid referral and identification  as  trafficked
         because it is believed that it is the Roma and rural women who  are
         mostly trafficked".


102.  He also wrote that:


         "Awareness of trafficking has  impacted  on  Albanian  trafficking;
         Albanian women receive information about trafficking  from  various
         sources including returning women, the media and  from  formal  NGO
         anti-trafficking programmes.  The increasing awareness of the  risk
         of abusive marriages has clearly affected  the  population  of  the
         researched women.  However, the divorced women  were  not  informed
         about using trafficking to find a foreign husband by the  media  or
         NGO programmes;  this  information  is  passed  to  them  by  other
         trafficked women who  returned  to  Albania  to  visit  with  their
         foreign  husbands  and  demonstrated  how  such   marriages   often
         rehabilitated  them  in  the   local   community.    This   clearly
         demonstrates that information received from other migrants is  very
         important in influencing the behaviour of these  women.   This  has
         implications for understanding the limitations of awareness raising
         programmes.


         Once women had become aware  of  this  recruitment  strategy,  most
         women were able to avoid such trafficking devices and over a period
         of three  years,  trafficking  significantly  changed.  Instead  of
         traffickers recruiting deceived  wives,  an  increasing  number  of
         women sought out the traffickers to enter into contracts  by  which
         they might travel to the EC.  These 50% contracts are made for some
         indeterminate period of time, and the women agree to engage in  sex
         work until they can find a foreign husband.  These women  were  the
         divorced and abandoned women  who  in  Albania  were  subjected  to
         social exclusion and stigma.   They  were  women  who  specifically
         wanted to socially  rehabilitate  themselves  by  marrying  abroad.
         They found their situations in Albania to be  intolerable  and  had
         discovered that marriage abroad was a way to regain  social  status
         and acceptance by their families and local communities."


    He concluded that:


        "Many  are  not  deceived  or  coerced  into  trafficking  as  they
        proactively seek to be trafficked".


103.  He stated that those researched women who were  described  as  "wives"
    were recruited by the acceptance of offer of  marriage  but  were  well
    aware that they were going to be trafficked. However, the 29 women  who
    had entered into 50% contracts were mainly divorced women and those who
    were subject to  social  exclusion  who  were  very  well  informed  by
    trafficking practices and had deliberately engaged with the traffickers
    knowing what was likely to happen. There was some indication that since
    1995 Roma women were willing to travel for sex work.   He  referred  to
    those who considered themselves married to their  cuni  as  having  the
    objectives of building and funding a house, setting up  a  business  in
    Albania, acquiring a car, furnishing the  house  and  capitalising  the
    business. They would consider  that  once  these  objectives  had  been
    achieved they could return to Albania and live a normal family life  as
    a man and wife and start their own family.

104.  He referred to the prevalence  of  domestic  violence  in  Albania  as
    being a serious and widespread problem and quoted Amnesty International
    saying that:

        "Women in Albania were routinely  denied  their  basic  fundamental
        right to be free from violence ... In a recent survey conducted  by
        the Women's Association Refleksione, in Albania, more than  63  per
        cent of women surveyed reported that they had been abused by  their
        husbands or partners.


        An estimated one in three women in Albania have been hit, beaten up
        or subjected to other  physical  violence  within  their  families.
        Some had been  raped,  some  had  been  killed.   Husbands,  former
        husbands or partners are responsible for  most  of  these  acts  of
        violence against women - abuses which are  often  condoned  by  the
        wider community.  Violence against women is widely tolerated on the
        grounds of tradition, even at the highest levels of the government,
        police and judiciary ... Research by  forensic  practitioners  have
        documented an increase in intimate partner violence over  the  last
        five years (Amnesty International 2006 Report)."


105.  A number of the women he interviewed indicated that they would  return
    to Albania to see their families and friends.

Submissions

106.  In summing up Mr Blundell argued that neither appellant  had  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution and in particular that the appellants' case
    based on risk of re-trafficking was not made out, that  former  victims
    of trafficking did not constitute a  particular  social  group  because
    they were not sufficiently  identified  by  Albanian  society  and  the
    available evidence did not demonstrate a real risk of  Article  3  ill-
    treatment.  In any event there  was  sufficient  state  protection  and
    internal relocation was available.  Neither appellant would be at  risk
    of an infringement of their rights under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  on
    return.

107.  With regard to AM he referred to Immigration Judge Kaler's  conclusion
    that she would be accepted back by her family because her father was  a
    "rational"  man.   He  stated  that  nothing  the  Tribunal  had  heard
    indicated that the country situation was such as to lead to a different
    conclusion.

108.  Turning to the issue of whether or not there is  a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution  he  stated  that  it  was  accepted  there  was  not  a
    generalised risk of trafficking for women in Albania and  stated  there
    was no evidence that  the  appellants  in  either  case  faced  threats
    specifically from their former traffickers.  It was therefore  for  the
    appellants to demonstrate there was something in their status as former
    victims of trafficking  which  would  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return.

109.  He went on to submit that there were two  relevant  questions  -  what
    was the quantitative risk of re-trafficking and what were  the  reasons
    for re-trafficking.  With regard to the quantitative risk  he  referred
    to the US AID Report entitled "The  State  of  Efforts  in  Albania  to
    Combat Trafficking in Person 2007-2008".  It gave a figure  of  44%  of
    the victims of trafficking assisted by the non-profit organisations  as
    having been trafficked and exploited before.  The report had stated:-

         "Fifty  of  the  114  victims  of  trafficking  assisted  had  been
         trafficked more than  once.   Yet  only  sixty  of  them  had  been
         assisted previously in shelters in Albania".


    He stated that that equated to 44% and that it indicated that the  work
    of the shelters would appear to have had a positive effect in  reducing
    the risk of re-trafficking with only 60 of the  former  victims  having
    been assisted at a  shelter.   He  put  forward  the  figures  for  re-
    trafficking in the 2005 Vatra report as stating  that  57.5%  were  re-
    trafficked.  The State Department Report of 2006 referred to 29.5%  and
    Different and Equal referred to 20.5% between 2004 and 2006.  44%  were
    referred to by the USAID in 2008 as having been re-trafficked but  only
    32% had previously used a shelter.   He  accepted,  however,  that  the
    figures provided by the shelters could not be a precise  representation
    of the exact number of former victims of trafficking.


110.  He emphasised that the figures produced by the Vatra Centre  showed  a
    striking reduction in the number of individuals recruited from year  to
    year.  He stated that the figures did not show that former  victims  of
    trafficking returned to Albania had no  choice  because  of  social  or
    family stigmatisation but to return to prostitution or to  a  situation
    of abuse.  There was evidence that  they  could  find  other  means  of
    support.

111.  He then returned to the reasons for re-trafficking submitting that  in
    effect Ms Schwandner-Sievers was asserting that  the  reason  for  re-
    trafficking would be poor economic circumstances  so  that  women  felt
    that they had no choice but to return to prostitution.   There  was  no
    evidence that that would happen in these cases because both these women
    had clearly made out that  they  would  never,  in  any  circumstances,
    willingly engage in sexual relations with a man.   With  regard  to  Dr
    Agnew-Davies' evidence he stated that we should not accept  that  these
    appellants would not  be  able  to  operate  the  "fight"  or  "flight"
    reaction because of their psychological state as the reality  was  that
    they had both fled in the past.  Indeed, having fled they had not  been
    at risk from their former traffickers.  In any event he argued that  if
    a former victim of trafficking  returned  to  prostitution  voluntarily
    that could not be considered to be persecution.

112.  Having referred to the UNHCR trafficking guidelines which set out  the
    three central interlinking sets of elements as being:

           "The act: recruitment, transportation, transfer,  harbouring  or
     receipt of persons;
         the means: by threat or use of force or other  forms  of  coercion,
        abduction, fraud, deception abuse of power, abuse of a position  of
        vulnerability, or of giving or receiving payments  or  benefits  to
        achieve the consent of a person having control over the victims;
         the purpose:  exploitation of the victim, including, at a minimum,
        exploitation of prostitution of others or  other  forms  of  sexual
        exploitation, for labour or services, slavery or practices  similar
        to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs."


      He argued that the expert evidence relied on by the  appellants  which
    asserted that social stigmatisation  and  problems  with  reintegration
    would  mean  that  the  former  victims  of  trafficking   for   sexual
    exploitation had no alternative but to return to prostitution in  order
    to support themselves and avoid economic destitution was not  made  out
    and that such a conclusion did not flow from the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal. Even if it were correct, he stated it was plain that the pimp
    to whom the woman in question would turn to be re-trafficked would  not
    exercise force  or  coercion  or  deception,  the  woman  would  return
    voluntarily through a conscious  decision  of  her  own  without  being
    forced or deceived into doing so and accordingly she would know she was
    entering prostitution and was doing so voluntarily.  That  would  place
    such individuals in a separate category from victims of trafficking  as
    they had not been actively coerced into prostitution.  He  stated  that
    the trafficking protocol, at Article 3B, (set out  at  paragraph  4  of
    this determination) expressly dealt with the issue  of  consent  as  it
    states the consent of the victims is irrelevant if any of the means set
    out in Article 3A had been used.   If it were the case  where  a  woman
    had been deceived into prostitution then Article 3B would bite.

113.  In any  event  he  argued  that  there  was  for  trafficked  women  a
    sufficiency of protection and emphasised that it was the  Secretary  of
    State's position that there was no evidence of a real  risk  of  either
    appellant being specifically targeted by former agents  of  persecution
    and no indication that those responsible for trafficking the appellants
    had retained any interest in them.

114.  Mr Blundell argued that the judgments of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 579 and the determination in  FB  (Lone
    women - PSG - internal relocation  -  AA  (Uganda)  considered)  Sierra
    Leone [2008] UKAIT 00090 were of no assistance  to  the  appellants  as
    neither  examined  the  question  of  whether  a   forced   return   to
    prostitution amounted to persecution or treatment contrary  to  Article
    3.  They were cases which related to the issue of  internal  relocation
    and therefore dealing with a different scenario than that at  issue  in
    the present appeal.  The appellant in AA had in any event no choice but
    to enter into prostitution - that was different from  the  position  of
    the appellants in this case.  He then went on to refer to the  position
    of the appellants on return, referring  to  the  availability   of  the
    shelters,  and  the  various  rehabilitation  programmes  available  to
    victims in the shelters and  the  specific  assistance  programmes  for
    victims  of  trafficking  by  the  government.   Moreover  there   were
    childcare facilities available for the appellants.

115.  He also referred to the employment rates  for  women  suggesting  that
    the  Albanian  Government's   initiatives   clearly   facilitated   the
    employment of former victims of trafficking in the past.   He  referred
    to the EC Social Inclusion Report  relating  to  2007  which  said  the
    employment rate for women was  49%.   He  said  that  that  figure  was
    strikingly similar  to  the  figure  for  the  victims  of  trafficking
    utilising the shelters to find employment.  There would be  alternative
    occupations open to the appellants on return.  He argued that there was
    a high level of social integration in terms of employment prospects for
    former victims of trafficking.

116.  He stated that the Secretary of State  accepted  that,  as  a  general
    principle, former victims of trafficking were capable of constituting a
    particular social group - he accepted the determination in  SB  (PSG  -
    Protection regulation - Regulation 6) Moldova CG [2008] UKAIT 00002 but
    said that that depended on whether or not former victims of trafficking
    had a distinct identity in the society in question.  He argued that the
    situation of women returned to Albania was different from that of those
    returned  to  Moldova  and  that  victims  of  trafficking   were   not
    sufficiently identified by their surrounding society  to  constitute  a
    particular social group.

117.  Turning to the issue of sufficiency of protection, he referred to  the
    judgment of the House of Lords in Horvath v SSHD  [2001]  AC  489.   He
    accepted that  the  level  of  protection  had  to  be  sufficient  but
    emphasised that it did not need to amount to a guarantee of  protection
    against isolated and random attacks.  The fact that  Albania  had  been
    downgraded in the latest US Trafficking of Persons Report for  2008  to
    Tier 2 watch list did not indicate a deterioration in the scale of  the
    problem of trafficking in Albania and in fact it was acknowledged  that
    the Albanian Government was making "significant efforts" to comply with
    the  minimum  standards.   There  had  been  prosecutions  of   alleged
    traffickers and seven human traffickers had been convicted.  The report
    indicated that:

         "the sentences for convicted traffickers were appropriately  severe
         ranging from five years  imprisonment  with  fines,  to  six  years
         imprisonment with fines."


    He stated that although the Albanian Government had been criticised for
    allowing its anti-trafficking plan to expire that had now been replaced
    by  the  plan  for  2008-2010.    The  report  set  out  a  number   of
    achievements by the Albanian Government in tackling  trafficking.    He
    referred, indeed, to the fact that Britain had been  selected  to  lead
    the EU police mission to Albania - a mission  funded  by  the  European
    Commission with a sizeable budget with the intention of developing  the
    ability with Albanian law enforcement institutions to improve  policing
    capability in this area.

118.  Turning to the individual cases he  stated  that  with  regard  to  BM
    there  was  no  evidence  of  continued  hostile  interest  from   BM's
    traffickers. There was no evidence that her mother had been  threatened
    since August 2005 and no personal connection  between  the  traffickers
    and BM.  There was no indication they had any inclination to  find  her
    either in her home area or elsewhere in Albania given the time  passed.
     As she had not been bought there was no evidence  that  she  would  be
    viewed as having caused her traffickers to lose  money.  She  would  be
    returning to Albania, in any event, with professional  skills.   Though
    she has been diagnosed with mental health needs these could be  met  in
    Albania.

119.  With regard to AM's appeal, he submitted there was  no  evidence  that
    she  was  still  being  actively  sought  by  her  former  fianc�   and
    traffickers,  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  threats   from   those
    traffickers since she had been in Britain - a significant factor  since
    A and N had apparently accompanied  her  here  and,  although  she  had
    mental health needs there was no reason why  these  could  not  be  met
    appropriately in Tirana.

120.  Mr Blundell emphasised that Albania was a country  with  a  population
    of 3.6 million habitants and that there were a number of  organisations
    offering support, in  the  various  shelters  as  well  as  child  care
    facilitates. The government ran  various  programmes  to  assist  women
    returning to Tirana and that it would therefore not be unduly harsh for
    the appellants to relocate there instead of  returning  to  their  home
    areas.

121.  With regard to Article 8 he said it was accepted that both  appellants
    suffered from complex post traumatic stress disorder, but  the  Council
    of Europe's Commissioner for  Human  Rights  had  described  as  highly
    positive the situation  with  regard  to  mental  health  provision  in
    Albania in that there had  been  steps  taken  in  Albania  to  improve
    psychiatric healthcare. A  Mental  Health  Officer  had  recently  been
    appointed by the Ministry of Health.

122.  Although the US State Department noted negative observations  made  by
    the Ombudsman following his visit to mental  health  institutions,  the
    treatment of those issues was brief and was detailed in the  report  by
    the Council of Europe's Commissioner.  He argued that  Dr  Agnew-Davies
    indicated that there was only a "mild" risk of suicide in AM's case  at
    present and no present risk in BM's case.

123.  Turning to  the  issue  of  suicidal  ideation  his  initial  skeleton
    argument had referred to the relevant five part test in the judgment of
    the Court of Appeal in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  629  but  he  accepted
    that that had been modified by the judgment of  Sedley  LJ  in  Y  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362.   He  argued  however,  that  the
    particular circumstances of the appellants  did  not  mean  that  their
    removal would be a breach of their rights under Article 3 of the  ECHR.
    In so far as there would be an infringement of their right  to  private
    and family life here removal would, in any event,  be  a  proportionate
    response in both cases.

124.  In reply, Mr Jones emphasised that there was a significant problem  of
    re-trafficking and that there was clear evidence that trafficked  women
    would be unlikely to be accepted back into their family homes and  that
    they risked exclusion from society.  He argued furthermore  that  there
    was not a sufficiency of protection for women  who  were  re-trafficked
    and that the various state initiatives had achieved little success.

125.  He went on to refer  to  the  psychological  make  up  of  victims  of
    trafficking and submitted  that  victims  of  trafficking  did  form  a
    particular social group who shared a common background. He asked us  to
    place weight on the evidence of Ms Schwandner-Sievers  that  trafficked
    women would be blamed for the shame they brought on their families  and
    their community.  A woman without support would  also  be  particularly
    socially exposed.

126.  He argued that internal relocation was  not  reasonably  available  to
    victims of trafficking and in particularly not  appropriate  for  these
    appellants, given their psychological condition.

The Legal Framework

127.  In considering this appeal we note the legal framework established  by
    the  Refugee  or   Person   in   Need   of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations SI2006/2525 (the "Protection  Regulations")
    and the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules CM6918 (the  "amended
    Immigration Rules").  Together, these implement  EU  Council  Directive
    2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the qualification status  of  third
    country nationals or stateless persons or refugees or  as  persons  who
    otherwise need international protection.

128.  Regulation 5 defines "acts of persecution" as follows:
        "5(1)    In deciding whether a  person  is  a  refugee  an  act  of
             persecution must be:

             (a)  sufficiently serious by its nature  or  repetition  as  to
                 constitute a severe violation of a basic  human  right,  in
                 particular a right from which  derogation  cannot  be  made
                 under Article 15 of the Convention for  the  Protection  of
                 Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or


             (b)  an accumulation of various measures, including a violation
                 of a human right which is sufficiently severe as to  affect
                 an individual in a similar manner as specified in (a).
        5(2)     An act of persecution may, for example, take the form of:

             (a)  an act of physical or mental violence, including an act of
                 sexual violence;"


129.  The Regulations set out the right of a person to be considered  as  to
    his or her eligibility for humanitarian protection.  Paragraph 339C  of
    the amended Immigration Rules states:
        "339C. A person will be  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  the
              United Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
              (i)      he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port
                    of entry in the United Kingdom;
              (ii)     he does not qualify  as  a  refugee  as  defined  in
                    regulation 2  of  The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
                    International  Protection  (Qualification)   Regulations
                    2006;
              (iii)    substantial grounds have been  shown  for  believing
                    that the person concerned, if  he  is  returned  to  the
                    country of return, would face a real risk  of  suffering
                    serious harm and is unable,  or,  owing  to  such  risk,
                    unwilling to avail himself of  the  protection  of  that
                    country; and
              (iv)     he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian
                    protection."
130.  The paragraph goes on to give a definition of serious harm:
        "Serious harm consists of:
        (i)      the death penalty or execution;
        (ii)     unlawful killing;
        (iii)    torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
             a person in the country of return; or
        (iv)     serious and individual threat  to  a  civilian's  life  or
             person by reason of indiscriminate violence  in  situations  of
             international or internal armed conflict."
131.  The Protection Regulations also set out, inter  alia,  definitions  of
    actors of  persecution  or  serious  harm  and  actors  of  protection.
    Regulation 4 states:
    "(1)   In deciding whether a person is a refugee or a  person  eligible
         for humanitarian protection, protection from persecution or serious
         harm can be provided by:

         (a)      the State; or

         (b)      any party or  organisation,  including  any  international
             organisation, controlling the State or a  substantial  part  of
             the territory of the State.

    (2)    Protection shall be regarded  as  generally  provided  when  the
         actors mentioned in paragraph (1)(a) and (b) take reasonable  steps
         to  prevent  the  persecution  or  suffering  of  serious  harm  by
         operating an effective legal system for the detection,  prosecution
         and punishment of acts constituting persecution  or  serious  harm,
         and the person mentioned  in  paragraph  (1)  has  access  to  such
         protection."
132.  Paragraph 339O of the  Immigration  Rules  deals  with  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.

    "Internal relocation


    339O.- (i)   The Secretary of State will not make:
      (a)  a grant of asylum if in part of the country of origin  a  person
             would not have a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted,  and
             the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of
             the country; or
      (b)  a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the country  of
             return a person would  not  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
             serious harm, and the person can  reasonably  be  expected  to
             stay in that part of the country.


            (ii) In examining whether a part of the  country  of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the  Secretary
             of State, when making his decision on whether to grant  asylum
             or humanitarian protection, will have regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.

            (iii) (i)  applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to return
                  to the country of origin or country of return."

133.  We also note that under Regulation 6 of the Refugee or Person in  Need
    of International Protection Regulations 2006 it is stated:

    "6(d)  A group should be considered to form a particular  social  group
         where, for example:


         (i)      members of that group share an innate characteristic or  a
             common  background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or   share   a
             characteristic or belief that is so fundamental to identity or
             conscience that a person shall not be forced to  renounce  it,
             and


         (ii)     that  group  has  a  distinct  identity  in  the  relevant
             country, because it is perceived as  being  different  by  the
             surrounding society; ..."


    We also note in particular the terms of Rule 339K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which states that:


    "339K. The fact that a person has already been subject  to  persecution
             or serous harm, or to direct threats such persecution or  such
             harm, would be regarded as a serious indication of a  person's
             well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of  suffering
             serious harm unless there are good reasons  to  consider  such
             persecution or serous harm would not be repeated."


134.  Where below we refer to 'risk' or 'real risk' it is to  be  understood
    it is an abbreviated way of identifying respectively:  (i)  whether  on
    return there is a well-founded  fear  of  being  persecuted  under  the
    Refugee Convention;  (ii)  whether  on  return  there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that  the  person  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm within the meaning  of  paragraph  339C  of  the
    amended Immigration  Rules  and  (iii)  whether  on  return  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that a person would face a real  risk
    of being exposed to treatment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.


Discussion

Approach to the evidence

135.  We have set out in paragraph 4 above  the  definition  of  trafficking
    and the evidence not only of these appellants but also from  Dr  Agnew-
    Davies, Dr Schwandner-Sievers and in the report of Dr Davies. While  Dr
    Schwander-Sievers and Dr Agnew-Davies emphasised the  horrific  way  in
    which women who were trafficked were treated  and  their  powerlessness
    both in  the  relationships  with  the  traffickers  as  well  as  with
    officials and their families, Dr Davies' thesis indicated that for many
    of those trafficked there was an element of free  will  both  in  their
    relationships with their cuni but  also  in  their  dealings  with  the
    authorities in the countries to  which  they  were  trafficked  and  in
    Albania and, indeed with their own families.

136.  At the beginning of her report Dr. Schwander-Sievers referred  to  the
    two  approaches  to  the  issue  of  prostitution:  firstly,  that  the
    prostitute was always the victim and  secondly  that  "work  is  work".
    Although that shows an unduly sharp contrast in approach we accept that
    the reports and the research before us reflect the attitudes  of  those
    interviewed and the writers of the reports. In considering the evidence
    before us we are aware that much of the research, in Albania, has  been
    based upon interviews with the women in the  shelters  and  those  that
    work in the shelters. We are satisfied, however,  that the women in the
    shelters are not representative, as they  are  the  least  worldly  and
    possibly the most vulnerable of  trafficked women,  and moreover,  that
    those that work in the shelters and those that had contact  with  them,
    such as those who work for CHASTE, may have a  particular  perspective.
    Dr. Davies' report clearly indicates a different  perspective  when  he
    quotes from what the women he interviewed themselves said. We note  the
    comment by Dr Davies in his email of 30 November 2008 to Dr  Schwander-
    Sievers where he states:


                ".... How "willing" anyone is to do this  .is  really  about
        what sustainable opportunities they have to choose from and frankly
        I don't think a moralist like Lesko understands what many women are
        "willing" to do to escape endless social repression..."

          We have therefore  taken  into  account  the  perspective  of  the
    writers of the various reports which were before  us  when  considering
    the evidence.

        Ways in which women and girls enter trafficking and  those  who  are
    most vulnerable trafficking

137. From the evidence before  us  we  conclude  there  is  clearly  a  wide
    spectrum of ways in which women and girls are taken into or enter  into
    trafficking. These range from  simple  abduction  where  women  may  be
    kidnapped from their homes, which is now  becoming rare (although there
    is an indication that children from orphanages are a vulnerable group),
     to women being duped by a false job offer or by  a  false  promise  of
    marriage where a woman is misled into believing she  is  to  marry  the
    trafficker. However, there is evidence that,  increasingly,  there  are
    women who are complicit with the trafficker, possibly either as "wives"
    or on the "50/50 basis" described by Dr  Davies,  for  either  economic
    reasons or because they see the arrangement as being a  way  to  escape
    from an abusive or traditional family, and who decide to travel abroad,
    possibly to find a foreign husband  in  the  hope  that  they  will  be
    rehabilitated on return to  Albania.  Dr  Schwandner-Sievers  indicated
    that those who are abducted or lured because of a false job  offer  are
    likely to have been virgins and the most likely age group is between 14
    and 20 - although it appears  that  the  age  of  those  likely  to  be
    trafficked is getting older.  It  is  not  just  young  women  who  are
    trafficked - women without protection such as divorced women or  widows
    might also be trafficked.  The attitudes of many of the women  who  are
    trafficked are themselves complex and those  do  not  necessarily  fall
    clearly into the definition of  trafficking  to  be  found  in  the  UN
    Protocol to which we have referred above.

138.  It is arguable that, although  women  are  trafficked  from  all  over
    Albania, Roma and women and  girls  from  the  north  are  particularly
    vulnerable of being duped or abducted by traffickers.  That appears  to
    be largely because the north is a more traditional area where girls are
    kept separate from males outside the family and may well not  have  the
    opportunity to go onto a secondary school, being  kept  at  home  until
    marriage. It is an area where arranged marriages are common and where a
    woman is unlikely to be able to make her own choice of husband.

139.  However, Dr Davies' report indicated that  the  women  he  interviewed
    were from towns.  It is,  therefore,  unclear  where  the  majority  of
    trafficked women are likely to have come from  and,  indeed,  there  is
    evidence that the origin of the women is changing from the  countryside
    to the towns although even that is unclear given  that  many  from  the
    countryside hold out that they are from the towns as they see  that  as
    being a sign of sophistication and therefore a way  of  getting  better
    treatment or better clients.


140.  It was also clear from the papers before us that Albanian  society  is
    male dominated and that domestic violence towards wives  and  daughters
    is prevalent. It may well be that young women,  particularly  from  the
    country districts, accept that there  will  be  violence  within  their
    relationships with men.  It is also clear that poverty  influences  the
    attitudes of families towards their children.  Within  the  documentary
    evidence before us  there  is  an  article  entitled  "A  child  for  a
    television" detailing how one poor family decided that they would trade
    their baby for a television. There is also some evidence  that  fathers
    might be pleased to connive with the trafficker to take  daughters  off
    their hands if they considered that their  daughter's  behaviour  might
    bring dishonour on the family.

141.  It must be noted however,  that,  in  rural  communities  it  was  not
    uncommon for a girl to be "kidnapped" as a means of eloping without the
    express or articulated consent of her father or with the  agreement  of
    her family as a means for a poor family to "marry" off  their  daughter
    without having to pay for an elaborate wedding. Although kidnapping  is
    the  terms  which  was  used  in  that  context  must,  of  course,  be
    distinguished from a situation where woman is abducted.

142.  Although it appears that the relationships between the women  and  the
    traffickers, their cuni or pimps is often  violent  it  is  clear  that
    there is a spectrum of violence in the relationships between those  who
    are forcibly abducted against their will and those who are complicit in
    the trafficking.

        The change in the methods of traffickers and the  society  in  which
    trafficking takes place

143.  It was also clear from the  papers  before  us  that  the  methods  of
    traffickers and the society   in  which  trafficking  takes  place  has
    changed significantly in Albania over the last 20 years.  Dr. Schwander-
    Sievers said that AM's abduction was not unusual when she was taken  in
    2002 but would be unusual now. The social upheaval at the beginning  of
    the 1990's caused traditional Albanian society to  fragment  and  there
    has been increasing depopulation of the  countryside,  particularly  of
    the north. In the cities there is more freedom for  women  and  greater
    economic power.  There is also greater awareness of the dangers that  a
    woman might put herself in by, for example, answering an  advertisement
    for a job as a waitress in Italy. The Government and  NGOs  inform  the
    public of the dangers which young women might face. There  is  also  an
    indication that   there is now less  need  for  traffickers  to  abduct
    women as there  are  women  who  are  prepared  to  approach  them  and
    therefore the trafficker would not need to take the risks  inherent  in
    abducting a woman for trafficking and the  possible  criminal  charges,
    that, theoretically at least, might follow.

144.  It appears to be accepted that the numbers of women coming to  the  EU
    for prostitution have either increased or, at least, have  not  fallen.
    However, the number
        who use the shelters has dropped. One reason for this appears to  be
    that the women who are returned to Albania take steps  to  ensure  that
    they are not referred to  the  shelters  and  are  not  categorised  as
    victims of trafficking. Many, it appears, wish to  get  back  to   what
    they had been doing before as soon as possible, others do not want  the
    stigma of living in a shelter, let  alone  the  restrictions  that  are
    imposed on those who  are given places in a shelter.

        Possibility of re-trafficking

145. Although there was some considerable debate about  the  percentages  of
    victims of trafficking who are  re-trafficked,  the  lowest  percentage
    appeared to be 20%. However, we  consider  that  even  that  figure  is
    unreliable, for  the  reasons  set  out  above,  and  it  is  therefore
    extremely difficult to reach any clear conclusions about the number  of
    women who are re-trafficked let alone the number who are  re-trafficked
    against  their  will,  particularly  given  that  the  figures  of  re-
    trafficked women using the shelters is high but that they may well  not
    be a representative group.  All that can be concluded is that there  is
    evidence that some victims of trafficking have been  re-trafficked  and
    that of those re-trafficked some  are  forcibly  re-trafficked  against
    their will.

146.  However, as we have seen, there is a  wide  range  of  ways  in  which
    women are trafficked from Albania and there is evidence that women  who
    have worked abroad may wish to return to what they  consider  to  be  a
    preferable way of life to living in poverty in Albania.  We accept that
    there may be some women who return to traffickers  voluntarily  because
    they wish to leave Albania,  possibly  because  they  feel  that  their
    position is so compromised there as ""kurva"" that  it  would  only  be
    outside Albania they would be able to find a husband.  We  also  accept
    that there may be some women who work with pimps  on  a  "50/50"  basis
    where in their own minds they consider themselves as an  equal  of  the
    pimp and, of course, there are those who  look  on  themselves  as  the
    "wife" of their cuni and would wish to return  to  him.   While  it  is
    arguable that the fact that women might act in that way would be likely
    to be a reflection of the psychological damage which has been  done  to
    them by being trafficked in the first place, in so far as it  is  their
    decision to be re-trafficked, then, taking into account  the  terms  of
    sub-paragraph (b) of Article 3 of the UN Protocol we consider that such
    arrangements may still fall within the terms of the Protocol.

          The  psychological  effect  of  being  trafficked  on  victims  of
    trafficking

147.   In  all  claims  for  asylum  it  is  important   to   consider   the
    circumstances  of  the  individual  claiming  asylum  including   their
    strength, age, gender and psychological make up.  In assessing  whether
    particular circumstances are such  as  to  amount  to  persecution  or,
    indeed, whether internal relocation is for the individual  unreasonable
    or unduly harsh it is necessary to be aware of the effect that any  set
    of particular circumstances would have on the particular appellant.

148.  At the most violent end of the trafficking spectrum  it  appears  that
    the initial period involves "breaking in" of the victims of trafficking
    by their abductors  including  multiple  rapes,  extreme  violence  and
    imprisonment.  It is likely that many of these women  are  from  poorer
    backgrounds and may well be virgins who have had  little  contact  with
    men other than fathers and brothers before they were trafficked.  Their
    abduction itself is likely to have been violent.  Once  trafficked  the
    victims of trafficking are likely to be denied freedom of any sort  and
    are forced to have sexual relations with men with whom they  would  not
    willingly have entered into any  form  of  relationship.   There  is  a
    likelihood that such treatment will go on for some considerable time.

149.  It is therefore not difficult to see that such  treatment  would  make
    those victims of trafficking feel dehumanised and  it is little  wonder
    therefore that, as found by Dr Agnew-Davies in these cases,  that  they
    are  likely  to  suffer  complex  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
    psychological damage.

150.  Particular weight must therefore be given to the  mental  state  of  a
    victim of trafficking not only when considering whether or not a victim
    of trafficking might face persecution in her home area  but  also  when
    considering issues such as internal relocation or her Article 8 rights.




151.  It is hard to reconcile the evidence of Dr Agnew-Davies that no  woman
    who has been trafficked would ever voluntarily be  re-trafficked  again
    with the evidence of the women who were interviewed by  Dr  Davies.  We
    accept that those who have been brutalised  in  the  process  of  being
    trafficked and who have suffered the complex PTSD which Dr Agnew-Davies
    referred to would be unlikely to be willing  to  be  re-trafficked.  We
    also accept that there  is  a  real  propensity  for  violence  in  any
    relationship between trafficker and the trafficked.

        Circumstances on return to Albania

152.  On return to Albania a victim of trafficking will  be  interviewed  by
    the border police. However, the evidence that Dr Davies put forward was
    that the more sophisticated women would try to ensure  that  they  were
    not identified, whether correctly or not, as victims of trafficking  by
    having a change of clothes in their bags and being able  to  bribe  the
    police to ensure that they were not held at the border.  Dr Schwandner-
    Sievers said that the police were of the view that a woman would not be
    able to hide from them the fact that she had been  trafficked,  but  we
    find persuasive the comments made by the woman who had been interviewed
    by Dr Davies who indicated that the more sophisticated would either  be
    able to enter Albania without difficulty or would pay a  bribe  to  the
    border police so as not to be detained or referred to a  shelter.    Dr
    Schwandner-Sievers said that the police had told her  that  they  would
    contact the woman's family probably through the local police  and  that
    in many cases the  families  would  come  to  pick  up  the  victim  of
    trafficking and may take her back to the family home. If  that  happens
    we accept the evidence of Dr  Schwandner-Sievers  that  it  is  likely,
    certainly in the more traditional parts of the country that, if such  a
    woman is taken back that she will be  kept  hidden  away,  although  in
    those cases where the family have been complicit in the trafficking  of
    the women or are relying on the money that she is sending back it would
    be likely that they would assist her in again leaving the country.  If,
    however, the family had not been complicit in the removal of the  woman
    and did not want  to  assist  her,  those  relatives  might  well  then
    endeavour to ensure that the victim of  trafficking  was  disposed  of,
    probably through marriage, as soon as possible.  Dr  Schwandner-Sievers
    stated,  however,  that  Albanian  society  is  one  where   there   is
    considerable gossip particularly in the villages and so it would not be
    possible for families to avoid others in their  locality  knowing  that
    their daughter had been a victim  of  trafficking,  and  suffering  the
    shame and dishonour which that would bring on the family.

153.  For those reasons there  will  be  cases  where  families  reject  the
    victim of trafficking.  She would then have to  make  her  own  way  to
    another locality.

154.  It is clear from Dr Schwandner-Sievers' evidence that if a  victim  of
    trafficking has a child there would be cases where a family  would  not
    accept the child back as it would be a visible  reminder  of  the  fact
    that their daughter or sister was "unclean".  In extreme cases children
    can be abandoned. There is evidence that in the  past  honour  killings
    have taken place when a  daughter  or  sister  is  considered  to  have
    dishonoured the family by her conduct even though she was the victim of
    rape.  However, the evidence indicates that such "honour" killings  are
    now very rare indeed.

155.  On return, if the victim of trafficking does not agree to  go  to  her
    home or does not disclose where she came from, the  border  police  are
    able to direct the victim of trafficking to a shelter.  If that is  the
    case, as the border police are not empowered to detain a  returnee  for
    any length of time, she will not be  detained.   Where  the  victim  of
    trafficking decides that she does not wish either to return to her home
    or to go to a shelter the police would not be able to force her  to  do
    so.

156.  If the victim of trafficking does go to a shelter then there are  some
    rehabilitation programmes where attempts are made to find work for  the
    victim of trafficking and even, it appears, a system of micro loans  to
    enable the victim of trafficking  to set up in business.  Dr Schwandner-
    Sievers was sceptical of these programmes and of  the  ability  of  the
    victim  of  trafficking  to  hold  down  a  job.   Although  we  accept
    Mr Blundell's proposition that the statistics indicate that the numbers
    of victims of trafficking who are able to find  work  is  in  the  same
    proportion as applies to the female population  as  a  whole,  we  also
    accept the argument that the figures of women in  work  in  Albania  in
    general is much higher because of the "grey" economy as  a  very  large
    proportion of  women  work  on  the  land,  an  alternative  to  formal
    employment that would not be available to a victim of  trafficking  who
    chooses not to return to her family.

157.  Dr Schwandner-Sievers emphasised that the  reality  of  these  various
    programmes was still that it would be difficult for any  woman  without
    family backing to get a job, that  the  agencies  would  be  likely  to
    ensure  that  jobs  went  to   family   members   and   that   societal
    discrimination would mean that anyone who is thought  of  as  ""kurva""
    would  be  shunned  and  have  difficulties  in  integrating  at  work.
    Moreover men in workplaces would be likely to harass any woman who  did
    not have family protection and this would be exacerbated in a situation
    where it was known that the woman had come from abroad.  She  indicated
    that the shelters were themselves insecure and that men,  knowing  that
    they housed victims of trafficking, would be likely to prowl around the
    centres looking for women.

158.  We find  that  it  is  clear  from  the  evidence  that  a  victim  of
    trafficking, especially if accompanied by a small child, would find  it
    significantly more difficult to achieve  re-integration  into  Albanian
    society than would be the case in many other countries. But  that  does
    not mean that all such victims of trafficking will fail to re-establish
    themselves. Each case will turn upon its particular  facts.  Among  the
    features or characteristics that will be relevant to such an assessment
    are these:

                    1) The  social  status  and  economic  standing  of  the
    appellant's family;
                    2) The level of  education  of  the  appellant  and  her
    family;
                    3) The appellant's state  of  health,  particularly  her
    mental health;
                    4) The presence of an illegitimate child;
                    5) The area of origin of the appellant's family;
                    6) The appellant's age.

        We note that among the group who were interviewed by Dr Davies  many
    hoped to return to Albania to build homes, have children, and set up in
    business. We consider women from wealthier backgrounds or those who are
    better educated would find it easier to reintegrate.  Women from  those
    groups would, however, be far less likely to be trafficked in the first
    place.

159.  It is clear that trafficking is a serious problem within  Albania  and
    that Albania is a country with a high level of corruption.  Although we
    accept that there is certainly some statutory protection for trafficked
    women,  we  consider  that  the  level  of  corruption  is  such   that
    notwithstanding that there  have  been  prosecutions,  traffickers  may
    sometimes appear to operate with impunity.  We accept that there is now
    the "speedboat law"  which has stopped the route taken  from  Vlora  to
    Southern Italy but it appears that  although  there  may  now  be  less
    trafficking, by speedboat, across the Adriatic to Southern Italy, other
    routes such as through Kosovo and through Greece have opened up.


       Victims of trafficking as members of a particular social group


160.   It  was  the  respondent's  argument  before  us  that   victims   of
    trafficking were not members of a particular social group and therefore
    would not, in any event, face persecution for a Convention  reason.  Mr
    Blundell accepted that former victims of trafficking and former victims
    of trafficking for sexual exploitation were capable of being members of
    a particular social group. Both counsel referred to  the  determination
    of the Tribunal in SB (PSG - Protection Regulations  -  Regulation  (6)
    Moldova CG [2008] UKIAT 00002.  That determination also put  forward  a
    conclusion, with which we agree, that former victims of trafficking for
    "sexual exploitation" can be considered to be members of  a  particular
    social group in one country but not in another.  In SB it was concluded
    that former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation did  have  a
    distinct identity in  Moldova  because  the  group  was  likely  to  be
    perceived as being different from the surrounding society.


161.  Mr Blundell,  however,  argued  that  the  situation  in  Albania  was
    different. He referred to the judgment of Rix LJ in Chun Len Liu v SSHD
    [2005] EWCA  Civ  249  and  said  that  there  were  three  methods  of
    identification of a particular  social  group:  discrimination  -  even
    discrimination amounting to persecution provided that is not  the  sole
    method of identification; recognition or perception by the  surrounding
    society in general that the  group  in  question  shared  a  particular
    characteristic  or  objective  observations   of   the   distinguishing
    characteristics.  Mr Blundell argued that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    situation of victims of trafficking in Albania to indicate  they  would
    be identified by Albanian society at large.  It would not be considered
    that  they  shared  a  particular   social   characteristic   and   the
    discrimination which they might  suffer  would  be  because  they  were
    merely part of the larger  group  of  "kurva"  -  those  who  would  be
    considered to be of loose morals within the context of the standards of
    behaviour which were expected of Albanian  women.   The  definition  of
    "kurva" was applied because of some sexual act outside marriage. It  is
    not specific to former victims of trafficking but  could  include,  for
    example, adulterers. He  argued  that  there  is  nothing  in  Albanian
    society to suggest that individuals who had been  trafficked  would  be
    viewed collectively in  that  way.  There  was  therefore  no  specific
    identification of  former  victims  of  trafficking  by  society  as  a
    distinct group.  Although he accepted that victims of trafficking often
    faced significant stigmatisation from their families and society  there
    was  no  further  evidence  provided  to  explain  the  extent  of  the
    stigmatisation as alleged  or  of  what  it  consisted.   There  is  no
    reference to such stigmatisation  in  the  US  Trafficking  of  Persons
    Report of 2008.

162.  Mr Blundell referred to a letter from  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office dated 14 October 2008 (page 171  RB(iii))  which  expressed  the
    view that there was no discrimination against victims of trafficking on
    the part of the State, although they might face  this  from  their  own
    families or communities. He argued that the letter indicated that  this
    was more a problem in rural areas rather than cities. He  also  pointed
    out that the letter indicated there was nothing to prevent single women
    with children from integrating into Albanian  society.   He  emphasised
    also the government  did  not  prosecute  victims  of  trafficking  and
    refrained from discriminative treatment against them.

163.  The arguments put forward by  Mr  Jones  referred  to  the  speech  of
    Baroness Hale of Richmond in Hoxha [2005] UKHL 19 where she had said:-

    "37.   If what they fear is capable of amounting to persecution, is  it
         for a Convention reason?  It is certainly capable of being so.   In
         R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal and Another ex  parte  Shah  [1999]
         2AC 629, this house held  that  women  in  Pakistan  constituted  a
         particular social group, because they shared the  common  immutable
         characteristic of gender and were discriminated against as a  group
         in matters of fundamental human rights, for which  the  state  gave
         them no adequate protection.  The fact of current persecution alone
         is not enough to constitute  a  social  group;  a  group  which  is
         defined by nothing other than that its members are currently  being
         persecuted would not qualify.  But women who have been the  victims
         of  sexual  violence  in  the  past  are  linked  by  an  immutable
         characteristic which is independent  of  and  the  cause  of  their
         current ill-treatment.  They are certainly capable of  constituting
         a particular social group under the Convention."


164.  Mr Jones argued that that formulation supported a proposition that  it
    was possible for individuals who shared a past experience to show  they
    were linked by an immutable characteristic which is  capable  of  being
    independent of and  the  cause  of  their  current  ill-treatment.   He
    referred to the general conclusions in SB these stated as follows:-

    "(d)   Summary of General Conclusions:


         112.(a) (i)   Given that the family  is  a  quintessential  social
                  group which exists independently in  society  it  is  not
                  necessary  to  invoke   any   other   characteristic   or
                  circumstances in order to define it.  This  means  it  is
                  not  necessary  to  show  general  discrimination  as  an
                  identifying characteristic of the group.  If, contrary to
                  our view, discrimination is necessary,  then  the  feared
                  future act(s) of persecution can  provide  the  necessary
                  discriminatory  element  without  falling  foul  of   the
                  principle that the group must not be solely  defined  out
                  of fear of persecution because the  family  exists  as  a
                  social group;


                 (ii)  Similarly in cases where the  members  of  a  social
                  group share a common background  which  is  an  immutable
                  characteristic which they cannot change (for example  the
                  sharing of a common past experience) or they ought not to
                  be required to change,  then  if  the  common  background
                  defines a group by giving it a distinct identity  in  the
                  society in question which  is  nothing  to  do  with  the
                  actions of the future persecutors, then the group  exists
                  independently  of  the  feared  future  act(s)   of   the
                  persecution  and  circularity  is  avoided.   It  is  not
                  necessary  to   show   general   discrimination   as   an
                  identifying characteristic of the group. If an element of
                  discrimination is necessary, it can be  provided  by  the
                  fear  of  act(s)  of  persecution  without   leading   to
                  circularity.


             (b)  Where the particular social group relied upon is  a  broad
                  one of gender or a group with  gender  based  identifying
                  features, then discrimination in the wider sense  against
                  a gender must be shown to exist as an identifying feature
                  of the group.


             (c)  "Former victims of trafficking"  and  "former  victims  of
                  trafficking for sexual exploitation" are capable of being
                  members of a  particular  social  group  with  Regulation
                  6(1)(d) because of their shared common background or past
                  experience of having been trafficked.  MP Romania  should
                  no longer be relied upon,  as  it  was  wrongly  decided.
                  However, we emphasise that,  in order for "former victims
                  of trafficking" or "former  victims  of  trafficking  for
                  sexual exploitation" to be members of a particular social
                  group,  the group  in  question  must   have  a  distinct
                  identity in the society in question.


             (d)   The  adjunctive  "and"  in  Regulation  6(1)(d)  of   the
                  Protection  Regulations  should  be  given  its   natural
                  meaning.


             (e)  In the context of Maldovian society a woman who  has  been
                  trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation  is  a
                  member of a particular  social  group  within  Regulation
                  6(1)(e) the particular social group in question  being  a
                  former victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation."


165.  The central issue  therefore  before  us  is  how  former  victims  of
    trafficking for sexual exploitation would  be  identified  in  Albanian
    society.  We accept that they would be  treated  as  "kurva",  that  is
    women who are considered not to comply with strict  Albanian  mores  of
    how to conduct themselves.  But clearly the social group of which  they
    are members is much narrower in that what they share is  the  immutable
    characteristic that they have been trafficked.  Moreover, we accept the
    evidence of Ms Schwandner-Sievers that Albania  is  a  country  with  a
    small population (approximately three and a half million), that it is a
    society where there would be an attempt by those with whom the  victims
    came into contact, either officially, starting with the  border  police
    or when they attempted to find work or merely acquaintances  whom  they
    would meet, to place them within their family context and to  endeavour
    to find mutual acquaintances.  The fact that they had  been  trafficked
    would be an  obvious  inference  that  would  be  drawn  by  the  wider
    population if they went to a shelter and where in that shelter for some
    time. Not only  do  they  share  that  characteristic  but  that  is  a
    characteristic by which they would become known in the  wider  society.
    Certainly, in the eyes of those who would be  most  likely  to  be  the
    actors of persecution - those who had  trafficked  them  in  the  first
    place they would clearly be considered to be members  of  a  particular
    social group - those who had been trafficked  by  the  traffickers  and
    therefore those whom the traffickers might consider to be either  their
    chattel or to be a danger to them.


166   We conclude that just as trafficked women would be  considered  to  be
    members  of  a      particular  social  group  in  Moldova  victims  of
    trafficking in Albania would, applying the dicta of  Baroness  Hale  in
    Hoxha would be members of a particular social group.

    Likelihood of persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to  the  victim  of
    trafficking's rights under Article 3 of  the  ECHR  of  the  victim  of
    trafficking and the issue of sufficiency of protection

167.  It was  not  argued  before  us  that  the  Albanian  State  could  be
    considered to be an  actor of persecution, nor  indeed  was  it  argued
    that the Albanian people in general were actors of persecution.  Rather
    it was argued that both  the  traffickers  from  whom  the  victims  of
    trafficking have escaped, other traffickers and,  in  some  cases,  the
    families  of  the  victims  of  trafficking  were  possible  agents  of
    persecution. It was further argued that there was not a sufficiency  of
    protection for this particular social group.  It  was  also  argued  on
    behalf of the appellants that the lack  of  support  on  relocation  to
    Tirana  would amount to a breach of their rights under Article 3 of the
    ECHR.

168.  We now turn to the persecution  or  ill  treatment  which  victims  of
    trafficking might, on return, face.  We first consider whether  or  not
    victims of trafficking would, on return, have a well  founded  fear  of
    those from whom they have escaped.  While  we  accept  Dr.  Schwandner-
    Sievers contention that traffickers are by their  very  nature  violent
    and that the danger of being murdered by the trafficker  is,  according
    to the information supplied by Vera Lesko of Vatra, high,  we  consider
    that the issue of whether or  not  they  would  pursue  the  victim  of
    trafficking who had escaped from them or  been  returned  is  an  issue
    which must be fact specific. It depends on the relationship between the
    trafficker and the victim  of  trafficking.  The  trafficker  may  well
    consider that there is no point in pursuing a  woman  who  has  escaped
    given that  there  are  others  who  are  willing  to  engage  in  "50%
    arrangements" or, alternatively might consider that unless  the  victim
    of trafficking is pursued and "punished " others they  have  trafficked
    might decided to  flee. Traffickers might  well  want  to  ensure  that
    their methods and the structure of their organisation are not known  to
    the authorities. They might well therefore feel  that  they  would  not
    want the victim to be at large. In cases such as that of AM, where  her
    father was killed, the traffickers might not want the victim to be free
    to testify against them. The trafficker who acts on his own or with one
    or two accomplices is less likely to be able to  either  re-traffic  or
    hurt the victim of trafficking than the trafficker who  is  part  of  a
    large gang.


169.  It is possible that, in cases where there has been a  "false  marriage
    promise" that the woman's family might well feel, particularly in rural
    areas, that they  should  ensure  that  their  daughter  or  sister  is
    returned to the man to whom she was  betrothed.  The  trafficker  might
    well consider that he was entitled to the return of their "wife".

170.    Secondly,  we  consider  whether  or  not  there  is  likely  to  be
    persecution from traffickers with whom the victim  of  trafficking  has
    not  come  into  contact  in  the  past.  We  accept  that  victims  of
    trafficking are psychologically vulnerable and we accept Dr  Schwander-
    Sievers' assessment that traffickers do look for victims of trafficking
    at the shelters and that single women, without protection may  well  be
    harassed. Women who have been trafficked are likely to appear an easier
    target than those who are supported by a social network. However, as we
    have stated above, we consider  that  the  profile  of  women  who  are
    trafficked  is  changing.   Kidnapping  or  abduction  is   now   rare,
    particularly in the towns. Victims of trafficking who were  duped  into
    being trafficked by a "false marriage  promise"  or  by  accepting  the
    prospect of working abroad are unlikely to be taken  in  the  same  way
    again.

171.  In certain circumstances the family of the victim of  trafficking  may
    take action against the victim which amounts to persecution,  a  factor
    which might well mean that she would not be able to return to her  home
    area.  If the victim comes from a rural area, particularly in the north
    of the country, she is more likely to face persecution from her  family
    - in very extreme and rare  cases  that  could  lead,  because  of  the
    family's adherence to the Kanun of Leke  Dukagjinit  and  the  code  of
    "honour" therein, to the victim of trafficking being killed  or  forced
    to commit suicide. In most cases, however, it appears that the societal
    discrimination that the victim of trafficking is likely to suffer would
    mean that she would not be able to live a "normal  life"  even  by  the
    standards of the lives of women in those rural  areas.   That  is,  she
    would not be allowed out of the house and there is a real risk that her
    father or brothers would find a husband for her who is not one whom she
    herself would choose or would consider  desirable  in  any  way.  Being
    forced into marriage is certainly capable of amounting to  persecution.
    Additionally, where the victim of trafficking has a  child,  if  it  is
    considered that the family's sense of "honour" meant  that  a  daughter
    could not live in the family home  with  an  illegitimate  child,  that
    could lead to the family  separating  the  child  from  the  victim  of
    trafficking. That too would amount to persecution.

172.  We have considered the issue of the  general  societal  discrimination
    because the appellant was "kurva".  We do not  consider  that  that  in
    itself would amount to persecution.  There  was  considerable  evidence
    that there is discrimination in the employment market and that women on
    their own would be pestered - we note that Dr Schwandner-Sievers stated
    that, she herself, had to "invent" a family who would  protect  her  to
    avoid undue attentions from young men in Tirana. We  do  not  consider,
    however, that any discrimination which may be faced  by  women  because
    they are on their own in Tirana would reach  a  level  where  it  could
    either amount to persecution or  treatment  contrary  to  their  rights
    under Article 3 of the ECHR.


173.  It is argued that women in  Tirana  -  either  those  that  came  from
    Tirana or those who  went to Tirana as a place of internal relocation -
     without family support would suffer such  deprivation  that  it  would
    amount to persecution or treatment contrary to their  rights  protected
    by Article 3 of the ECHR. While we accept that there is  discrimination
    and that family connections are the usual  way  to  obtain  work,  that
    there is a  shortage  of  housing  and  that  day-care  facilities  for
    children are inadequate, it is the case that there is work,  there  are
    programmes to get women who are returned victims  of  trafficking  back
    into the work force and there is some form of social benefits for those
    that are destitute. We do not therefore conclude that a woman  returned
    to Albania, on her own, would face treatment  contrary  to  her  rights
    under Article 3 of the ECHR. In reaching that conclusion  we  note  the
    terms of the determination of the Tribunal in MK  (Lesbians)  CG  UKAIT
    00036 with which we agree on this issue.

174. Both counsel before us addressed us on the issue of whether  or  not  a
    victim of trafficking returned to Albania would be forced to  become  a
    prostitute, referring to the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 579. We do not consider that  there  is
    any parallel in this case with the circumstances of  the  appellant  in
    AA.   In  Albania,  there  is  the  availability  of  work  other  than
    prostitution for single women. The victim of trafficking, on return  to
    Tirana can access a shelter and is not left on the streets; there  will
    be assistance in finding work and there is some State support. That  is
    very different to the situation of a woman who  returns  to  a  country
    where there is no support from the State and prostitution is  the  only
    way in which she can prevent herself becoming destitute.

        Sufficiency of Protection

175.  We must consider whether there is a sufficiency  of  protection  which
    prevents there being a real risk of former victims of trafficking being
    re-trafficked or harmed by  their  former  traffickers.   We  note  the
    relevant test in the judgment Lord Hope in his speech in the  House  of
    Lords in Horvath [2001] ACT 489 where he said:


             "I consider  that  the  obligation  to  afford  refugee  status
        arises only if the person's own state is  unable  or  unwilling  to
        discharge its own duty to protect its own nationals. I  think  that
        it follows that, in order to satisfy the fear test in  a  non-state
        agent case, the applicant for refugee status  must  show  that  the
        persecution which he fears consist of  acts  of  violence  or  ill-
        treatment against which the state is unable or unwilling to provide
        protection. The applicant may have a well-founded fear  of  threats
        to his life due to famine or civil  war  or  of  isolated  acts  of
        violence or ill-treatment for a  Convention  reason  which  may  be
        perpetrated against him. But the  risk,  however  severe,  and  the
        fear, however well-founded, do not entitle him to the status  of  a
        refugee. The Convention has a more limited objective, the limits of
        which are identified by the list of Convention reasons and  by  the
        principle of surrogacy."


176.  In his judgment Lord Clyde quoted  with  approval  what  was  said  by
    Stuart-Smith LJ in the Court of Appeal. He said:
              "There must be in place a system of domestic  protection  and
        machinery for the detection, prosecution and punishment of  actions
        contrary to the purposes which  the  Convention  requires  to  have
        protected.  More  importantly  there  must  be  an  ability  and  a
        readiness to operate that machinery. But precisely where  the  line
        is drawn beyond that generality is  necessarily  a  matter  of  the
        circumstances of each particular case.
       It seems to me that the formulation presented by  Stuart-Smith  L.J.
       in the Court of Appeal may well serve as  a  useful  description  of
       what is intended, where he said [2000] INLR 15, 26, para. 22):
       "In my judgment there must be in force in the country in question  a
       criminal law which makes the  violent  attacks  by  the  persecutors
       punishable by sentences commensurate with the gravity of the crimes.
       The victims as a class must not be exempt from the protection of the
       law. There must be a reasonable willingness by the  law  enforcement
       agencies, that is to say the police and courts, to detect, prosecute
       and punish offenders."
       And in relation to the matter of unwillingness he pointed  out  that
       inefficiency and incompetence is not the same as unwillingness, that
       there may be various sound reasons why criminals may not be  brought
       to justice, and that the corruption, sympathy or  weakness  of  some
       individuals in the system of justice does not mean that the state is
       unwilling to afford protection. "It  will  require  cogent  evidence
       that the state which is able to afford protection is unwilling to do
       so, especially in the case of a democracy." The formulation does not
       claim to be exhaustive or comprehensive, but it seems to me to  give
       helpful guidance."
177.  We note also the judgement of the Court of  Appeal  in  Noune  v  SSHD
    [2000] EWCA Civ 306  which  emphasised  that  a  person  could  not  be
    disqualified from surrogate protection merely because  law  enforcement
    agencies were "doing their best and  are  not  being  either  generally
    inefficient or incompetent."  We also apply the judgment of the Auld LJ
    Court of Appeal in Bagdanavicius v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1605  where  he
    said:
    "55.    (2) An asylum seeker who claims to be in fear of persecution is
        entitled  to  asylum  if  he  can  show  a  well-founded  fear   of
        persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that there would be
        insufficiency of state protection to meet it; Horvath.
         3) Fear of persecution is well-founded if there  is  a  "reasonable
         degree of likelihood" that it will materialise; R v.  SSHD,  ex  p.
         Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per Lord Goff at 1000F-G;
         4) Sufficiency of state protection, whether from  state  agents  or
         non-state actors, means a willingness and ability on  the  part  of
         the  receiving  state  to  provide  through  its  legal  system   a
         reasonable level of protection  from  ill-treatment  of  which  the
         claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear; Osman, Horvath, Dhima.
         5) The effectiveness  of  the  system  provided  is  to  be  judged
         normally by its systemic ability to deter  and/or  to  prevent  the
         form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment
         of it after the event; Horvath; Banomova. McPherson and Kinuthia.
         6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in  the
         receiving state, a claimant may still have a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution if he can show that its authorities know  or  ought  to
         know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise  to  his
         fear, but are unlikely to provide  the  additional  protection  his
         particular circumstances reasonably require; Osman."
178.  Mr Jones relied on the fact that Albania had been  downgraded  from  a
    Tier 1 to Tier 2 Watch List by  the  US  State  Department  of  State's
    Trafficking in Persons Report 2008 because of:


         "its failures to provide evidence of increasing efforts  to  combat
         trafficking in persons over the past year, particularly in the area
         of  victim  protection.   The  government  did  not   appropriately
         identify trafficking victims during 2007.


179.  The Trafficking in Persons Report 2008 had gone on to state:-

         "Albania is a source country for women and girls trafficked for the
         purpose of commercial sexual exploitation and forced labour ... The
         Government of Albania  does  not  fully  comply  with  the  minimum
         standard for the elimination of trafficking; however it  is  making
         significant efforts to do so.  The Government of Albania is  placed
         on Tier 2 Watch  List  for  its  failure  to  provide  evidence  of
         increasing efforts to combat trafficking in persons over  the  past
         year,  particularly  in  the  area  of  victim   protection.    The
         government has not  appropriately  identified  trafficking  victims
         during 2007.  It also has not demonstrated that  it  is  vigorously
         investigating  or  prosecuting  complicit  officials.    ...    The
         Government of  Albania  did  not  provide  convincing  evidence  of
         progress and law enforcement efforts to  combat  human  trafficking
         during 2007.   ...  The  government  discontinued  anti-trafficking
         training for new and continuing police officers, although  training
         for judges and magistrates continued.  Between June and  July  2007
         the government fired  approximately  20%  of  its  specialised  and
         highly trained anti-trafficking  police  officers  as  part  of  an
         overall police reconstructing effort.  In three separate cases, the
         Ministry of Interior arrested twelve  police  officers  accused  of
         trafficking  in  2007,   including   six   officers   with   direct
         responsibility for anti-trafficking at the  borders.   Prosecutions
         of these cases and several others from the  last  reporting  period
         remain ongoing.   ...  In  2007,  the  government  identified  only
         thirteen women and seven children as victims of trafficking  during
         the reported period. ... At the same  time,  however  NGO  shelters
         reported 146 victims of trafficking during the reporting year."

180.  There is considerable evidence that  there  are  steps  taken  by  the
    Albanian authorities to give support to returned victims of trafficking
    not only by support for  the  shelters  (the  Linza  shelter  is  state
    funded) but also in terms of their own policy for the rehabilitation of
    the victims  of  trafficking  in  the  provision  of  micro  loans  and
    procedures to place former victims of trafficking into the job  market.
    Moreover there is evidence that traffickers are being  prosecuted.   In
    Dr Schwandner-Sievers report she states:-

      "... According to the  latest  EU  progress  report  (November  2008)
        'reliable witness protection remains  weak  with  the  result  that
        victims of trafficking are  reluctant to report  their  traffickers
        to  the  police'  Other  important  sources  similarly   cite   the
        insufficient witness protection programme as the main  risk  factor
        for  VOTs  seeking  state  protection......For  example,    Amnesty
        International in its 2008 report (for 2007) juxtaposes  reports  on
        actual convictions of traffickers, training of  employees   at  the
        Department for the Protection of Witnesses at the Ministry  of  the
        Interior, and approval of standards for the treatment of victims in
        April  2007,  with  the  fact  that  'witness  protection   remains
        problematic and victims are reluctant to report  their  traffickers
        to the police for fear  of  reprisal'.   ...These  findings  appear
        consistent with Vatra's experience of its VoTs being denied witness
        protection even in cases of having denounced their traffickers.


      It was her view that some of the governmental reforms and  legislation
    "have yet to translate into having any impact on  the  ground"  and  she
    went on in her report to state:


        "Vera Lesko of the Vatra shelter in Vlora said, independently,  'we
        still remain in the same situation ..............., even though  we
        have drafted strategies, laws,  structures,  a  witness  protection
        programme, but the number of victims has actually increased.   Even
        though those things have been done well  on  paper,  implementation
        lacks in practice ... We have very good laws,  compliant  with  the
        best international standards but, it  is  the  implementation  that
        remains the challenge'."


181.  The central issues therefore  focus  on  whether  or  not  victims  of
    trafficking  face  a  real  risk  of  persecution  from  their   former
    traffickers because they had escaped  or  of  being  re-trafficked  and
    whether or not there is a sufficiency of protection for  them  with  in
    Albania.   The first issue is, as we have stated above, fact  specific.
    When considering the second issue we note that there are,  in  Albania,
    laws and initiatives to combat trafficking.  It is said that Albania is
    a country which is the third most corrupt  in  the  world  and  Freedom
    House,  in  2008,  summarised  the  situation  there  as  stating  that
    corruption pervaded all areas of life in Albania,   although there were
    some efforts in Albania to address the problem. The judiciary have been
    labelled a  "cesspool  of  corruption"  in  the  European  Commission's
    Progress Report of 2007 which stated that  "efforts  against  organised
    crime are seriously  hampered  by  corruption  at  all  levels  of  law
    enforcement".  Amnesty International's report of May 2007 stated:


          "The prosecution has noted that the  work  of  the  police  played
         little part  in  the  identification  of  traffickers  and  in  the
         collection of  evidence  against  traffickers.   Prosecutions  were
         almost always started on the basis of a  complaint  by  an  alleged
         victim and relied heavily on  their  evidence.   Police  frequently
         fail victims ...........".


182.  There are Government programmes for the re-integration of the  victims
    of trafficking.  There is training for police and judges  and  officers
    at the borders. There has been the  prosecution  of  the  Durres  gang,
    which was perhaps the largest and most wide reaching  of  the  criminal
    gangs in  Albania  which  was  involved  in  many  criminal  activities
    including trafficking. Although we accept that there is little  in  the
    way of witness protection that is effective,  there  is  evidence  that
    there have been prosecutions of police  involved  in  trafficking.   We
    accept that there is considerable corruption in Albania but we conclude
    that the steps taken by the Albanian authorities are sufficient to meet
    the standard of a sufficiency of protection  from  re-trafficking  from
    "new" traffickers as set out in the judgment of Lord Clyde  in  Horvath
    from which we have quoted above. However, when considering the issue of
    whether  or  not  the  victim  of  trafficking  has  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from her former traffickers, should they wish to  re-traffic
    her or harm her  we  consider  that  that  issue  must  again  be  fact
    specific. We note the clear evidence of the brutality of those who have
    abducted women and trafficked them to Europe.   We  consider  that  the
    levels of corruption in Albania and societal attitudes  towards  women,
    particularly those that are thought of as "kurva", are such that it  is
    not possible to reach a clear conclusion that there is in all cases for
    a victim of trafficking  a sufficiency of protection  from  her  former
    traffickers. We conclude that, for each individual it is  necessary  to
    make an assessment taking into account the particular factors  of  that
    individual.  These would include her  age,  her  social,  economic  and
    educational background, the network of support which  she  might  have,
    whether or not she has an illegitimate child and the way in  which  she
    has been trafficked in the past.  If the victim  is  at  real  risk  of
    persecution from her family or  her  "husband"  then  there  is  little
    evidence that the State would intervene, particularly in the  north  of
    the country.


    Internal relocation


183. We consider that the issue of internal relocation is one which  is  one
    which must depend on the particular characteristics of  the  victim  of
    trafficking.   When  considering  the  risk  of  persecution  and   the
    possibilities  of  internal  relocation  the  educational  and   social
    background of the victim of trafficking and the  geographical  location
    of their home area are of crucial importance although,  in  general  it
    appears from the evidence we have heard that the higher the standard of
    education  and  social  standing  of  the  family  of  the  victim   of
    trafficking the less likely it is that they would have been  trafficked
    in the first place.

184.  In respect of the issue of internal relocation we have regard  to  the
    judgment of Lord Bingham of Cornhill in SSHD v AH  (Sudan)  and  Others
    [2007] UKHL 49 where Lord where he stated:
        "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
        approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
        all my noble and learned friends agreed:
        "The decision-maker, taking account of all  relevant  circumstances
        pertaining to the claimant and his country of origin,  must  decide
        whether it is reasonable to expect  the  claimant  to  relocate  or
        whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so . . . There
        is, as Simon Brown LJ aptly observed in Svazas v Secretary of State
        for the Home Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of
        cases. The decision-maker must do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
        material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular case
        falls. . . . All must depend on a fair assessment of  the  relevant
        facts."
        Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
        these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
        easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
        It is, or should be, evident that the enquiry must be  directed  to
        the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
        experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
        relevant. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
        consideration of the applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place  of
        persecution. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving  priority
        to, consideration of conditions generally prevailing  in  the  home
        country. I do not underestimate the difficulty of making  decisions
        in some cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
        expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention is
        to secure a reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-
        founded fear of persecution in their home country or some  part  of
        it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up of living standards
        around the world, desirable though of course that is."
185. We note also the speech of Baroness Hale in the House of  Lords  in  AH
    (Sudan) where she stated:
        "20.     We are  all  agreed  that  the  correct  approach  to  the
             question of internal relocation under the  Refugee  Convention
             is that set out so clearly by my  noble  and  learned  friend,
             Lord Bingham of Cornhill, in Januzi and others v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5, [2006] 2 AC  426,
             at para 21:
                  "The  decision-maker,  taking  account  of  all   relevant
                  circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country
                  of origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to  expect
                  the claimant to relocate or whether  it  would  be  unduly
                  harsh to expect him to do so."
             As the UNHCR put it in their very helpful intervention in this
             case,
                  '  .  .  .  the  correct  approach  when  considering  the
                  reasonableness of IRA [internal relocation alternative] is
                  to assess all the circumstances of the  individual's  case
                  holistically  and   with   specific   reference   to   the
                  individual's  personal   circumstances   (including   past
                  persecution or  fear  thereof,  psychological  and  health
                  condition,  family  and  social  situation,  and  survival
                  capacities). This assessment is to be made in the  context
                  of the conditions in the place  of  relocation  (including
                  basic human rights,  security  conditions,  socio-economic
                  conditions,   accommodation,   access   to   health   care
                  facilities), in order to  determine  the  impact  on  that
                  individual of settling in the proposed place of relocation
                  and whether the individual could live a relatively  normal
                  life without undue hardship.'
             I do not understand there to be any  difference  between  this
             approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of
             his opinion. Very little, apart from  the  conditions  in  the
             country to which the claimant has fled, is ruled out.
        21.      We  are  also  all  agreed  that  the  test  for  internal
             relocation under the Refugee Convention is not to  be  equated
             either with a "well-founded fear  of  persecution"  under  the
             Convention or with a "real risk of ill-treatment" contrary  to
             article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  By
             definition,  if  the  claimant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of
             persecution, not only in the place from which he has fled, but
             also in the place to which he might be returned, there can  be
             no question of internal relocation. The question  pre-supposes
             that there is some place within his country of origin to which
             he could be returned without  fear  of  persecution.  It  asks
             whether, in all the circumstances, it would be unduly harsh to
             expect him to go there. If it is reasonable to expect  him  to
             go there, then he can  no  longer  claim  to  be  outside  his
             country  of  origin  because  of  his  well-founded  fear   of
             persecution. Mercifully, the test accepts that if  it  is  not
             reasonable to expect him  to  go  there,  then  his  continued
             absence from his country of origin remains due  to  his  well-
             founded fear of persecution."
186.  We consider that that  test,  with  its  emphasis  on  the  particular
    characteristics  of  the  individual  is  particularly  apposite   when
    considering the position of  victims  of  trafficking  who  might  face
    internal relocation at a time when they would be suffering  the  trauma
    about which Dr Agnew-Davis spoke in her report and at the  hearing.  We
    emphasise the terms of the intervention of  UNHCR  quoted  by  Baroness
    Hale in her paragraph 20 above. Moreover we would  emphasise  that,  as
    stated above, Albania is a country with a relatively small  population.
    Dr Schwandner-Sievers refers to common socio-cultural conduct in  which
    every person was socially positioned. We  note  the  comment  that  the
    Director of the Anti-Government  Unit,  Ms  Irena  Targa,  made  to  Dr
    Schwandner-Sievers that:

        "Family relations are that strong in Albania, you have to live here
        to understand this is no fairy tale,  how  important  family  links
        are.  A brother might even have trafficked his sister or killed her
        because she was trafficked, but the relationship  is  very  strong.
        This is such a small country; it is not possible to live  somewhere
        without being known.  The family is so close.  For us it is  easier
        to identify everyone immediately.  As soon as  someone  says  their
        surname we know - the police scan the population.  Once the name is
        mentioned, it depends on  the  family,  but  they  come  here  from
        anywhere they can".


187.  We consider therefore that Albania is a country where there is a  real
    fear that traffickers might well  be  able  to  trace  those  who  have
    escaped from them or indeed those whom they  fear  might  expose  them.
    Whether such persons would be motivated to do so is, of course, another
    matter, as we have discussed above.  It is therefore a  country  where,
    at least, internal  relocation  is  problematical  for  the  victim  of
    trafficking.  To that should be added the  difficulties  for  a  single
    woman to reintegrate into a society where the family is  the  principal
    unit for welfare and mutual support as well as, it appears, the channel
    through which employment is most often  obtained.   We  have  therefore
    concluded that internal relocation is unlikely to be effective for most
    victims of trafficking who have a well founded fear of  persecution  in
    their home area, although once again we consider that it  is  important
    to consider each case on an individual basis.


    Risk of Suicide


188.  Of relevance in these cases, and we consider it to be of relevance  in
    many cases of  trafficked  women,  is  their  psychological  state  and
    possible suicidal ideation.   We note the guidelines  set  out  in  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in J v Home Secretary [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    629.   In his judgment Dyson LJ stated, in relation to the  possibility
    that forced return might bring about suicide:
         "25. It should be stated at the outset that the phrase "real  risk"
         imposes a more stringent test than merely that  the  risk  must  be
         more than "not fanciful". The cases show that  it  is  possible  to
         amplify the test at least to the following extent.
         26. First, the test requires  an  assessment  to  be  made  of  the
         severity of the treatment which it is said that the applicant would
         suffer if removed. This must attain a minimum  level  of  severity.
         The court has said on a number of occasions that the assessment  of
         its severity depends on all the circumstances of the case. But  the
         ill-treatment must "necessarily be serious" such  that  it  is  "an
         affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian  principles  to  remove   an
         individual to a country  where  he  is  at  risk  of  serious  ill-
         treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].
         27. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the  act
         or threatened act of removal or expulsion and the inhuman treatment
         relied on as violating the applicant's article 3  rights.  Thus  in
         Soering at para [91], the court said:
         "In so far as any liability under  the  Convention  is  or  may  be
         incurred, it is liability incurred by the  extraditing  Contracting
         State by reason of its having taken action which has  as  a  direct
         consequence the  exposure  of  an  individual  to  proscribed  ill-
         treatment."(emphasis added).
         See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that  the
         examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on  the  foreseeable
         consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."
         28. Thirdly, in the context  of  a  foreign  case,  the  article  3
         threshold is particularly high simply because it is a foreign case.
         And it is even higher where the alleged inhuman  treatment  is  not
         the direct or indirect responsibility of the public authorities  of
         the receiving state, but  results  from  some  naturally  occurring
         illness, whether physical or mental. This is  made  clear  in  para
         [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.
         29. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can  in  principle  succeed  in  a
         suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
         30. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of  a  breach
         of article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance is whether
         the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving  state  upon
         which the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively  well-
         founded. If the fear is not well-founded, that will tend  to  weigh
         against there being a real risk that the removal will be in  breach
         of article 3.
         31. Sixthly,  a  further  question  of  considerable  relevance  is
         whether the removing  and/or  the  receiving  state  has  effective
         mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide. If  there  are  effective
         mechanisms, that too will  weigh  heavily  against  an  applicant's
         claim that removal will violate his or her article 3 rights."
189.  In his judgment in the case of Y (Sri Lanka) v SSHD and Z (Sri  Lanka)
    v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 Sedley LJ stated:
        1. It is necessary, before considering how DIJ Woodcraft dealt with
           this issue, to situate it in the context set by this court in J.
           The fifth principle, it will be recalled, is that:
           ...in deciding whether there is a  real  risk  of  a  breach  of
           article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance is whether
           the applicant's fear of ill-treatment  in  the  receiving  state
           upon  which  the  risk  of  suicide  is  said  to  be  based  is
           objectively well-founded. If the fear is not well-founded,  that
           will tend to weigh against there being  a  real  risk  that  the
           removal will be in breach of article 3.
           If a fear of ill-treatment on return is well-founded, this  will
           ordinarily mean that refoulement (if it is a refugee  convention
           case) or return (if it is a human rights case) cannot take place
           in any event. In such cases the  question  whether  return  will
           precipitate suicide is academic. But  the  principle  leaves  an
           unfilled space for cases like the present one where fear of ill-
           treatment on return,  albeit  held  to  be  objectively  without
           foundation, is subjectively not only real but overwhelming.
         1. There is no  necessary  tension  between  the  two  things.  The
            corollary of the final sentence of �30  of  J  is  that  in  the
            absence of an objective foundation for the fear some independent
            basis for it must be established if weight is to be given to it.
            Such an independent basis may lie in  trauma  inflicted  in  the
            past on the appellant in (or, as here, by) the receiving  state:
            someone who has been tortured and raped by his  or  her  captors
            may be terrified of returning to the place  where  it  happened,
            especially   if   the   same   authorities   are   in    charge,
            notwithstanding that the objective risk of recurrence has gone.
         1. One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in  J  that  what
            may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether  any  genuine
            fear which  the  appellant  may  establish,  albeit  without  an
            objective foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide  if
            there is an enforced return."


190.  In paragraph 36 of his judgment Sedley LJ commented further:


                    "Although a series of cases, of  which  J  is  the  best
         known, have acknowledged that returning  someone  to  a  situation
         which is likely to drive them to suicide is a breach  of  art.  3,
         the mode of reasoning in the  present  case  (which  is  far  from
         unique) is such that no art. 3 "foreign" claim based on a risk  of
         suicide is  likely  ever  to  succeed.  Indeed  Hughes  LJ  in  AJ
         (Liberia) v Home Secretary [2006] EWCA Civ 1736  remarked  on  the
         fact that, so far as the reported cases went, none ever  had.  The
         reasoning is that, since Y had made no attempt at suicide  despite
         more than one refusal of his asylum claim, and since  Z's  attempt
         at suicide had not been seriously life-threatening, and since both
         would ex hypothesi find  on  return  that  their  fears,  even  if
         genuine, are now groundless, there is no  real  risk  that  return
         will impel either appellant to commit suicide. The effect is that,
         apart from an asylum-seeker who actually commits suicide, only one
         who comes close enough to succeeding to manifest a serious  intent
         is going to be regarded as presenting a serious risk of suicide on
         return. Yet the medical logic is exactly the reverse: it  is  that
         individuals who are at serious risk of suicide if returned can  be
         stabilised, using therapy and medication, and kept from  self-harm
         so long as they feel safe here. For such  individuals  the  recent
         past may be no guide at all to the immediate future."

    In that case therefore he found that both of those cases fell into  the
    category set out in paragraph 16 of his judgment. We have applied these
    principles in our consideration of this part of each appellant's claim.






    Current case law

191.  Mr Blundell relied on the  only  country  guidance  case  relating  to
    trafficked women from Albania -  VD  (Trafficking)  Albania  CG  [2004]
    UKAIT 00115.

192.  The appellant in that case was a member of a family who  was  involved
    in a blood feud in Albania.  She had  been  kidnapped  by  two  people,
    raped because she had turned down a proposal of marriage  to  an  older
    man who had been introduced to her by them, her kidnappers having  said
    she had lost them a lot  of  money.   She  then  escaped  and  came  to
    Britain.  Although she had been kidnapped she had not  been  trafficked
    but she did claim a risk of trafficking on return.  The Tribunal, in  a
    short determination, accepted that Albania was a source and  a  transit
    country for the trafficking of women and considered evidence which  had
    indicated that in 2001 official  sources  had  indicated  that  100,000
    Albanian women and girls had been  trafficked  to  Western  Europe  and
    other Balkan countries over the previous ten years.   That  figure  had
    been revised by Vera  Lesko  in  a  report  the  following  year  which
    referred  to  a  number  of  6,000  women  being  trafficked.  It  also
    considered figures from UNICEF, UNOHCHR/OSCE/OGIHR and stated that  the
    indication was that therefore less than 600 victims had been trafficked
    each year.  They placed that in the context of the  overall  population
    of Albania (at that stage an estimated 3.09 million). They  noted  that
    there was evidence that trafficked women fell into the  14  to  17  age
    group and referred to the various ways by which those women and  indeed
    young girls  were  obtained.   It  was  their  view  that  it  was  not
    reasonably  likely,  having  considered  those  statistics,  that   any
    particular individual was at  real  risk  of  being  trafficked.   They
    accepted that there was corruption within Albania but  considered  that
    there was, for that appellant, who would be pursued by the  group  that
    abducted her (it appears because they considered that as the group  had
    not "bought" that appellant in the first place there was no  reason  to
    suppose that she would come across them or their associates again  even
    if she returned to her home area.  We noted the appellant was nearly 28
    years old when she had been abducted and it was not considered that she
    would be likely to be abducted again.  The  Tribunal  in  VD  concluded
    there is nothing in the objective evidence to suggest that lone females
    were at greater risk of abduction.  Because they considered  that  that
    appellant would not be at risk in her home area they did  not  consider
    the issue of internal flight.

193. We have had before us a much larger range of  evidence   and  materials
    relating to the issue of trafficking and conclude that a  consideration
    of the cases of  victims of trafficking require consideration of a  far
    wider number of  factors  when  assessing   the  cases  of  victims  of
    trafficking and it is only after applying those factors on a  case   by
    case basis that it is possible to assess whether or not there would  be
    a real risk of  the    victim  of  trafficking  facing  persecution  on
    return.

Article 8 rights

194. It is claimed by both appellants in these appeals  that  their  removal
    would be an infringement of their rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    In considering those rights  we  note  that  the  correct  approach  to
    applying Art 8 was  articulated  by  Lord  Bingham  of  Cornhill  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [17] in the  now  well-known  5-stage
    test:

           "(1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
           (2)  If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
           (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
           (4)  If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic well-being of the country, for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
           (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?"
195.  We now consider the particular circumstances of the appellants in  the
    instant appeals.




Appeal of AM


196.  We have set out  above  the  facts  in  this  case  as  found  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  We accept that AM's father introduced her to a man,
    A, to whom she believed she was being betrothed, that he  took  her  to
    Pristina where he and a colleague repeatedly  raped  her  and  she  was
    forced to work as a prostitute.  Eventually she became pregnant and was
    then brought to Britain, it having been made clear that she was to work
    as a prostitute here and that  her  child  would  be  sold.   She  then
    escaped.  We note that  Mr Blundell  argued  that  a  finding  by  the
    Immigration Judge that  she  could  return  to  her  family  should  be
    preserved.   We do not accept that assertion as we do not consider that
    that was a clear finding by the Immigration Judge, let alone a  primary
    finding or that it was a finding which was preserved.  In any event  we
    would add that we have before us considerable  background  evidence  in
    the context of which that issue should be  reconsidered.  Mr.  Blundell
    referred to the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  DK  (Serbia)  and
    others v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1747 which referred to a  decision  being
    reopened in  "exceptional  circumstances"  and  we  consider  that  the
    circumstances in this case are such that that would be  appropriate  in
    any event.

197.  We  also  have  before  us  the  evidence  of  Dr  Agnew-Davies  which
    indicates that this appellant would have been  unlikely  to  have  been
    able to have given clear instructions with regard to  the  attitude  of
    her father at the time she was interviewed by her solicitors, when  she
    gave a statement in which she said she would be able to return  to  her
    family home.  When she gave her evidence before us she  said  that  she
    did not believe that her family would accept her  child,  that  if  she
    were to return home she would be kept indoors because of the  shame  of
    what she had done and she would be married,  as  quickly  as  possible,
    against her will, to someone who would be not her choice of husband but
    would be likely to be a man with a disability who could  not  find  any
    other wife.

198.  We find that there is a real risk that if she returned to  her  family
    they would separate her from her child. Dr. Schwandner-Sievers evidence
    in relations to the mores of families in rural areas and their  concept
    of "honour" fortify us in that conclusion. That  in  itself  would,  we
    consider,  amount  to  persecution  for  a  reason  recognised  by  the
    Convention because not only was she a member  of  a  particular  social
    group - a woman who had been trafficked - but also she is a  member  of
    the more closely defined group, a victim of trafficking who fell within
    the category of "kurva" and who had a child.   We consider that  it  is
    not reasonably likely that her father, whom she has always described as
    a man who was brutal towards her mother, would tolerate her  daughter's
    presence.

199. Moreover AM made it clear in her statement that she feared  the  return
    of A, the  man  to  whom  she  believed  she  was  betrothed,  and  his
    accomplice, N. Mr Blundell's argument was that nothing had  been  heard
    further from them, they had not lost any money  on  her  and  therefore
    there was no reason why she should be of interest to them. However, the
    reality is that they knew her father and  knew  where  she  lived.   We
    accept that given A's connections with  her  family  and  her  father's
    workplace he would be likely to find out that  she  had  returned.   He
    would have a  clear incentive to ensure that AM did  not   expose   the
    fact that he was a trafficker and we find that given his brutality  and
    ruthlessness in the past,  there is a real risk that AM would be likely
    to be at risk from him. He would also be able to claim that she was his
    "wife" and therefore that he had a proprietorial interest in  her.   We
    consider that there is a real risk that he would wish to re-traffic her
    and separate her from her child. He would treat her with  brutality  as
    he had in the past  and  that  treatment  was  such  as  to  amount  to
    persecution.   The treatment she would receive from him would amount to
    persecution for a Convention  reason:  that  she  was  a  member  of  a
    particular social group. Finally, we consider that there is a real risk
    that he might  put forward the claim that he was entitled to take  AM's
    daughter who was, after all, conceived when AM had been  put  into  his
    care by her father. We consider the terms  of  Paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules are relevant here because  the  situation  of  AM  on
    return is not a situation where there are  good  reasons  too  consider
    that the persecution would not be repeated. Given  that  the  Kanun  of
    Leke Dukagjinit is still a powerful force in Northern  Albania,  we  do
    not consider that in that remote part of the country the  police  would
    interfere in any action that her father or her  "husband"  would  take.
    She does not have a sufficiency of protection in her home area.

200.  We have therefore concluded that AM  would  face  persecution  in  her
    home area.  We then consider whether or not internal relocation is open
    to her. We do not consider that it  is.   We  note  the  terms  of  the
    Opinion of  Baroness  Hale  in  AH  (Sudan)  in  the  House  of  Lords,
    emphasising that the particular characteristics of the  individual  are
    of relevance when considering internal  relocation.  We  are  satisfied
    that AM is a particularly vulnerable individual.  She  would  not  have
    any support in Tirana.  We consider,  having  taken  into  account  the
    report of Dr Agnew-Davies, that she  would  be  unable  to  cope  in  a
    shelter and would not be able to access the support mechanisms, such as
    they are in Tirana. We find that she might  well  become  the  prey  of
    traffickers, if not A and N, then other traffickers who we accept prowl
    around the shelters. Such traffickers  would  have  no  compunction  in
    separating her from  her  child.   She  is  a  particularly  vulnerable
    individual and we do not see that she would be  able  to  cope  with  a
    young child and find work and given societal  norms  would  be  further
    disadvantaged because she would be looked  upon  as  "kurva"  and  this
    would reinforce her own belief  that  she  was  unclean.   We  consider
    therefore that it would not be reasonable and indeed  would  be  unduly
    harsh for her to be  expected  to  re-establish  herself  elsewhere  in
    Albania.

201.  We therefore consider that AM would be likely  to  suffer  persecution
    on return to Albania and,  for  the  same  reasons  would  also  suffer
    treatment contrary to her rights under Article 3 of ECHR.  With  regard
    to her rights under Article 3, we  also  believe  that  they  would  be
    infringed because of  her  suicidal  ideation.  Applying  the  test  as
    relevant test as set out by Sedley LJ in J  we  consider  that  removal
    would be an infringement of her rights under Article 3 of the ECHR  for
    that reason alone. We consider that there is a real risk that she would
    commit suicide on removal if she was served with removal directions  as
    we consider, particularly having listened to her final statement,  that
    it has been established that there is a real risk that she would commit
    suicide rather than have her daughter returned to Albania.  We  do  not
    accept that safeguards could be put in place to ensure that  she  would
    not do so.

202.  In considering whether or not  the  rights  of  this  appellant  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR would be infringed we apply the relevant 5  stage
    test set out in paragraph 187 above. We consider that her removal would
    be an infringement of her private and family life  here.  We  note  the
    elements of  private  life  here  -  her  work  and  training  and  her
    friendships - but also the fact that she is living with her child here.
    We consider that there is a real risk that on  return  to  Albania  she
    would be separated from her child.  That is a clear infringement of her
    rights under Article 8: we follow the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
    in EM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1531 in this regard.  While  the
    removal of the appellant would be in accordance with the  law  in  that
    she has no right  to  remain  here  (apart  from  her  right  to  claim
    international protection) it would clearly not be  proportionate  given
    the factors which we have set out above. We would add that  her  mental
    health    would also be a factor which  would  mean  that  her  removal
    would not be proportionate.

203.  For theses reasons we find that her Article 8  rights  would  also  be
    infringed by her removal. We therefore consider that her appeal  should
    be allowed on both asylum and human rights grounds,  under  Articles  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.

Appeal of BM

204.  The accepted facts in this case are that  BM  was  abducted  from  her
    home when her father was shot.  At the time she was a minor,  aged  16.
    She was raped, brutally treated and forced to  work  in  a  brothel  in
    Albania before being transported to Italy.

205.  We do not consider that she will be able to return safely to  live  in
    her home area.  She has no male  protection  there  now  and  would  be
    rejected by society in her village.  The fact that she too has a  young
    illegitimate child would mean that she would be  severely  stigmatised.
    Moreover, she was abducted by men who had been reported to  the  police
    for the murder of her father.  They could simply not  risk  her  return
    because of her ability, possibly, to identify them.   Given  that  they
    went to her village in the first place we consider it  is  likely  that
    they would still have contacts within the local area which  would  mean
    they would be aware that the appellant had  returned  and  we  consider
    there is a real risk that they would then take steps  to  kill  or  re-
    traffic her.  As a young woman  on  her  own  with  a  child  in  rural
    northern Albania we do not consider that there would be  a  sufficiency
    of protection for her in her home area.

206.  We have considered whether or  not  she  would  be  able  to  relocate
    internally and whether it would be reasonable to expect her to  do  so.
    We find that it would not. We consider that  it  is  reasonably  likely
    that the criminal gang who were willing to kill her father when she was
    kidnapped may well find out where she was and would again take steps to
    kill her or take her out of the country.  Even if  that  were  not  the
    case we conclude that, given her psychological state, she would not  be
    able to survive without more than the support she might  receive  in  a
    Shelter.   Given her psychological state we consider that she would  be
    unable  to  avail  herself  of   the   various   programmes   for   the
    rehabilitation of former victims of trafficking. She also has  suicidal
    ideation, which, placing weight on the  report  of  Dr  Agnew-Davis  we
    consider might well be realised if she were forced to return. Again  we
    place weight on the judgment of Sedley LJ in Y (Sri Lanka).

207.  We therefore conclude that  she  does  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution on return to Albania and for the same  reason  we  consider
    that she would face treatment contrary to her rights under Article 3 of
    ECHR on return. We also consider that the risk of suicide in  her  case
    is made out to the required standard.

208. In considering the article 8 rights of this appellant  we  again  apply
    the relevant structured approach which we have set out in paragraph 187
    above. We find that BM is exercising both private and family life, with
    her daughter, here. Her  removal  would  be  an  infringement  of  that
    private and family life as we consider that it could  well  lead  to  a
    situation where she would  be  separated  from  her  child.   While  we
    consider that (apart from the fact that the appellant  is  entitled  to
    asylum here) her removal would be lawful but we do not consider that it
    would be proportionate, given  the  strength  of  her  ties  with  this
    country and the fact that we conclude that her  mental  state  is  such
    that she would not be able to access the support  mechanisms  available
    in Tirana.

Conclusions

209. The evidence in these appeals reflects not only the perspective of  the
    writers  of  the  reports  we  have  studied  in  their  attitudes   to
    prostitution, polarised in the dichotomy between the attitudes that the
    prostitute is always the victim and that "work is work".   The evidence
    also reflects the changing nature of Albanian society and the  changing
    attitude of the Albanian Government  to  the  problem  of  trafficking.
    Since 1990 there have been  changes  in  rigid  societal  attitudes  to
    women, particularly in the towns, and a movement  of  people  from  the
    countryside to the towns.  This has led to changes in  the  profile  of
    those who are trafficked and also what they might face on  return.  The
    Albanian authorities are taking steps to  prevent  trafficking  and  to
    rehabilitate those who return after being  trafficked.  How  successful
    either attempt is a matter of considerable debate.

210. These appeals are appeals  of  women  who  have  been  trafficked  from
    Albania for the purpose of prostitution.  In this determination we have
    considered the position of such women. We would  emphasise  that  while
    Albania  is  a  source  country  for  women  who  are  trafficked   for
    prostitution that does not meant that there is a  real  risk  of  being
    trafficked for Albanian women in general  or  even  for  those  without
    family protection.

211.  Albania is a significant  source  of  women  who  are  trafficked  for
    prostitution in Europe.  Traditional,  rigid  social  mores  are  still
    relevant when considering the situation which  trafficked  women  would
    face if returned, but Albanian society is  changing  and  this  affects
    both the way in which trafficked women are treated on return  and  also
    in the profile of the women who  are  trafficked.   The  age  of  those
    likely to be trafficked appears to have gone up from between 14 and  20
    to those in their  late  teens.     However,  it  is  not  unusual  for
    trafficked women to be older particularly where  they  have  themselves
    approached the trafficker. While it was considered  in  the  past  that
    women from the countryside and particularly Roma were  most  vulnerable
    to being trafficked that profile has changed and it is now not possible
    to profile  victims of trafficking who may come from both the towns and
    the country and can include students  or those with some education.

212. Whereas, in the past, the most common way in which women  entered  into
    trafficking was  by abduction or a false  promise  of  marriage  or  by
    advertisements offering to arrange work abroad,  there now  appears  to
    be a much higher proportion of trafficked women who have approached the
    traffickers themselves, having made  a  decision  that  working  as   a
    prostitute in Europe is preferable to  the life that they might lead in
     Albania or as  a  means  of  rehabilitating  themselves  if  they  are
    considered  to  be  "kurva",  typically  after  a  long  term  informal
    relationship has ended and the male partner  has  departed.   The  fact
    that this source of women exists means that  it  is  less  likely  that
    traffickers would have to take the serious criminal step  of  abducting
    their  victims,  although  women  may  still  be  deceived  into  being
    trafficked.  While this may still take place in rural areas, increasing
    knowledge of the dangers of accepting offers of work, for example, as a
    waitress, abroad means that women are less likely to be trapped in that
    way. Where a woman enters into  a  contractual  relationship  with  the
    trafficker that relationship cannot properly be considered to be one of
    trafficking unless it can be shown that the trafficker is in a position
    of control over the woman, although the reality appears to be that even
    such contractual arrangements are likely to  involve  intimidation  and
    violence as a means of control.

  213.  Traditional  Albanian  society,  particularly  in  the   north,   is
    influenced by the strict code of "honour" embodied  in  the  "Kanun  of
    Leke Dukagjinit" which sets out how  a  woman  should  behave  and  the
    inferior role of women in society. At its worst, and  very  rarely,  it
    can lead to honour killings of women who are thought to have damaged  a
    family's honour by having stepped outside rigid standards of behaviour.
    Such women are referred to as  "kurva"  and  may  face  discrimination.
    Families may well consider that having  an  illegitimate  child  brings
    particular dishonour on a family and for  that  reason  are  likely  to
    refuse to have the trafficked woman returned to them, or if they accept
    her back, would refuse to take the child.  Albania has a  large  number
    of children who have been abandoned. Victims of trafficking may well be
    considered by their families and by society to be a very poor  marriage
    prospect and they could face being forced into a marriage with  someone
    whom they would not choose themselves.

214.   Each case will turn on its own  particular  facts  or  circumstances.
    The treatment which such women might receive from their families  could
    in certain circumstances amount to persecution. They  may  also  be  at
    risk from their former  traffickers,  particularly  if  the  trafficker
    considers that he has some right over them if he  has  entered  into  a
    financial arrangement  with  their  family  or  alternatively  if  they
    consider that the trafficked woman would be able  to  give  the  police
    evidence of crimes which they have committed. In other cases there  may
    be nothing to indicate that either the  trafficker  or  the  victim  of
    trafficking's family would be likely to harm her.

215. If a victim of  trafficking  seeks  internal  relocation  the  Albanian
    State and NGOs provide shelters and other  forms  of  assistance  which
    means that the victims of trafficking will not be  destitute.  Although
    Albania is a traditional society where family connections are important
    in obtaining work it cannot be said that  a  woman  on  her  own  would
    necessarily be forced to live in such  difficult  circumstances  as  to
    amount to article 3 ill treatment.

216. While, in  general  the  Albanian  State  can  be  thought  to  provide
    protection to the "Horvath" standard, corruption and the  deference  to
    family and to "husbands" means that,  in  some  cases,  sufficiency  of
    protection will not exist. Each case must  be  considered  on  its  own
    facts.

217.  If a victim of trafficking is  unable  to  return  to  her  home  area
    either because she might be at danger  from  her  family  or  from  the
    trafficker then internal relocation may  be  available.  However,  when
    considering internal relocation it is important to have regard  to  the
    individual circumstances of the victim of trafficking and the nature of
    the trafficking process. A woman who has been abducted may well  be  in
    danger from the former trafficker  and  the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
    protection must be assessed in each case.

218.  Where a victim of trafficking has been  abducted,  the  act  of  being
    trafficked, the initial "breaking in"  period  and  the  brutality  and
    imprisonment which are likely to follow while the woman  is  forced  to
    act as  a  prostitute  are  events  likely  to  have  such  a  profound
    psychological affect as to rise to a  risk  that  the  individual  will
    suffer from PTSD from which it may take many years for her to  recover.
    That will, in turn, make it difficult for her to function  normally  on
    return or to reintegrate into Albanian society. The fact that a  victim
    of trafficking has suffered such trauma must be taken into account when
    assessing her ability to relocate  internally,  and  will  also  be  an
    important issue when considering  any  potential  infringement  of  her
    Article 8 rights. If she has a child, who might not be accepted by  her
    family, the rights of that child must also be taken into consideration.
    When considering the issue of relocation and the use of the shelters it
    should be accepted that the  shelters  cannot  guarantee  security  and
    there is a risk of re-trafficking.  Where there is evidence of suicidal
    ideation this should be carefully considered within the context of  the
    victim of trafficking's Article 3 rights.


219.  Victims of trafficking in Albania are members of a  particular  social
    group.  We note the conclusions of the Tribunal in VG and consider that
    there is little distinction between trafficked  women  in  Moldova  and
    those in Albania. But that does not mean of  course  that  establishing
    such membership will be sufficient to make out a case to be  recognised
    as a refugee. The question to be addressed in each case will be whether
    a particular appellant will face a real risk of persecution on  account
    of her membership of such a group.

220.  Finally, we would  comment  that  the  Council  of  Europe  Convention
    against Trafficking in Human Beings of 1 April  2004  was  ratified  by
    Britain on 17 December 2008 and came into force in Britain on  1  April
    2009. Articles 12, 13 and 14 state:



    Article 12 - Assistance to victims



    1.      Each Party shall adopt such legislative or  other  measures  as
        may be necessary to assist victims in their physical, psychological
        and social recovery. Such assistance shall include at least:


      a     standards of living  capable  of  ensuring  their  subsistence,
             through   such   measures   as:   appropriate    and    secure
             accommodation, psychological and material assistance;


           b     access to emergency medical treatment;


           c     translation and interpretation services, when appropriate;


      d    counselling and information,  in  particular  as  regards  their
             legal rights and the services available to them, in a language
             that they can understand;


      e     assistance to enable their rights and interests to be presented
             and considered at appropriate stages of  criminal  proceedings
             against offenders;


      f     access to education for children.


      2     Each Party shall take due account of  the  victim's  safety  and
             protection needs.


      3     In addition, each  Party  shall  provide  necessary  medical  or
        other assistance to victims lawfully resident within its  territory
        who do not have adequate resources and need such help.


      4     Each Party shall adopt the rules under  which  victims  lawfully
        resident within its territory shall be authorised to have access to
        the labour market, to vocational training and education.





            5    Each Party  shall  take  measures,  where  appropriate  and
        under the conditions provided for  by  its  internal  law,  to  co-
        operate  with  non-governmental   organisations,   other   relevant
        organisations  or  other  elements  of  civil  society  engaged  in
        assistance to victims.



        6        Each Party shall adopt such legislative or  other  measures
        as may be necessary to ensure that assistance to a  victim  is  not
        made conditional on his or her willingness to act as a witness.


      7     For the  implementation  of  the  provisions  set  out  in  this
        article, each Party shall ensure that services are  provided  on  a
        consensual and informed basis, taking due account  of  the  special
        needs of persons  in  a  vulnerable  position  and  the  rights  of
        children in  terms  of  accommodation,  education  and  appropriate
        health care.





   Article 13 - Recovery and reflection period



    1 Each  Party  shall  provide  in  its  internal  law  a  recovery  and
        reflection period of at least 30 days, when  there  are  reasonable
        grounds to believe that the person concerned is a  victim.  Such  a
        period shall be sufficient for the person concerned to recover  and
        escape the influence of traffickers  and/or  to  take  an  informed
        decision on cooperating with the competent authorities. During this
        period it shall not be possible  to  enforce  any  expulsion  order
        against him or her. This provision  is  without  prejudice  to  the
        activities carried out by the competent authorities in  all  phases
        of the  relevant  national  proceedings,  and  in  particular  when
        investigating and prosecuting the offences concerned.  During  this
        period, the Parties shall authorise the persons concerned  to  stay
        in their territory.


      2          DURING THIS PERIOD, THE PERSONS REFERRED TO IN PARAGRAPH  1
        OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE ENTITLED  TO  THE  MEASURES  CONTAINED  IN
        ARTICLE 12, PARAGRAPHS 1 AND 2.

      3          The Parties  are  not  bound  to  observe  this  period  if
        grounds of public order prevent it or if it is  found  that  victim
        status is being claimed improperly.



    Article 14 - Residence permit



    1 Each Party shall issue a renewable residence permit  to  victims,  in
         one or other of the two following situations or in both:


           a     the competent  authority  considers  that  their  stay  is
             necessary owing to their personal situation;


           b     the competent  authority  considers  that  their  stay  is
             necessary for the  purpose  of  their  co-operation  with  the
             competent   authorities   in   investigation    or    criminal
             proceedings.


      2          The  residence  permit  for  child  victims,  when  legally
          necessary, shall be issued in accordance with the  best  interests
          of the child  and,  where  appropriate,  renewed  under  the  same
          conditions.


      3          The non-renewal or withdrawal  of  a  residence  permit  is
          subject to the conditions provided for by the internal law of  the
          Party.


      4          If a victim submits an  application  for  another  kind  of
          residence permit, the Party concerned shall take into account that
          he or she holds, or has held, a  residence  permit  in  conformity
          with paragraph 1.


      5     Having regard to the obligations of Parties to which Article  40
          of this Convention refers, each Party shall ensure  that  granting
          of a permit according to this provision shall be without prejudice
          to the right to seek and enjoy asylum.



221. It was not argued before us that  these  appellants  should  have  been
    entitled  to   leave  under  the  provisions  of  the   Convention   on
    Trafficking in Human Beings and we have therefore not  considered  that
    issue in this determination.




Decision


222.  In each of these appeals the Tribunal has found  that  the  making  of
    the previous decision involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law. We set aside the previous decisions.

223.  For the reasons set out above our decisions are  that  each  of  these
    appeals is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.

Signed



Senior Immigration Judge McGeachy
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                 Appendix: List of Documentation considered

|"My name is not Natasha": How Albanian women in France  |May 2009           |
|use trafficking to overcome social exclusion (1998-2001)|                   |
|Albanian Ministry of interior: national strategy on     |2008-2010          |
|Combating  trafficking in persons                       |                   |
|Amnesty International Report: Albania                   |2008               |
|Commission of the European Communities Commission Staff |2008               |
|working document, Albania, 2008 Progress Report         |                   |
|US Aid: The Albanian initiative co-ordinated action     |2008               |
|against human trafficking                               |                   |
|International Organisation for Migration United Nations | 29 September 2008 |
|in Albania                                              |                   |
|Anti-slavery - Vera Lesko and the hearth                |5 September 2008   |
|US Department of Labour Bureau of International Labour  |5 September 2008   |
|Affairs, Albania.                                       |                   |
|Anti-slavery trafficking Albania                        |5 September 2008   |
|Central Intelligence Agency: The World Fact Book -      |21 August 2008     |
|Albania                                                 |                   |
|BBC Country Profile Albania                             |3 July 2008        |
|United States Department of State: Trafficking in       |June 2008          |
|Persons Report                                          |                   |
|United States Department of State: Country Report on    |11 March 2008      |
|Human Rights Practices 2007                             |                   |
|Foreign and Commonwealth Office UK: Country Profile,    |28 February 2008   |
|Albania                                                 |                   |
|Republic of Albania  Evaluation report on the           |2005-2007          |
|implementation of the national Strategy against         |                   |
|Trafficking  in Human Beings                            |                   |
|Open Society Institution: Violence Against Women: Does  |2007               |
|the Government Care in Albania                          |                   |
|Different and Equal Annual Report                       |2007               |
|Vatra Annual Report                                     |2007               |
|Amnesty International: "No Place to Call Home"          |2007               |
|Violence against Women: Does the government care in     |2007               |
|Albania                                                 |                   |
|Amnesty International: Albania, Respecting the Rights of|21 November 2007   |
|Orphans to Housing                                      |                   |
|Foreign and Commonwealth Office: Human Rights Annual    |2007               |
|Report                                                  |                   |
|UNHCR Report by the Commissioner of Human Rights on his |27 October 2007 - 2|
|visit to Albania                                        |November 2007      |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada response to     |5 October 2007     |
|Information Requests - Procedures for registering       |                   |
|complaints against the police                           |                   |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada National        |1 October 2007     |
|Response to Information Requests - identity documents   |                   |
|required to obtain social services                      |                   |
|Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada National        |18 July 2007       |
|Documentation Pack: Albania                             |                   |
|USAID Albania: Shelter Helps Young Women Rebuild Lives  |5 February 2007    |
|Human Rights Watch: Albania                             |2006               |
|"Different and Equal" a study of the reintegration      |2006               |
|process of former Albanian victims of human trafficking |                   |
|US Department of State Albania Country Reports on Human |2006               |
|Practices                                               |                   |
|Women's Organisations, Albania                          |19 June 2006       |
|Amnesty International Albania: Violence against Women in|30 March 2006      |
|the family                                              |                   |
|Amnesty International: Albania: Violence against Women  |March 2006         |
|and the Family  "it is not her shame"                   |                   |
|Amnesty International Obligations: under the UN         |1 February 2005    |
|Convention against Torture                              |                   |
|Human Smuggling and Trafficking Centre Fact Sheet       |January 2005       |
|Distinction between human smuggling and human           |                   |
|trafficking                                             |                   |
|Asylum Aid Report: "Safe for Whom?", extracts on Albania|30 June 2004       |
|International Labour Organisation, employment policy    |2004               |
|review Albania                                          |                   |
|New York Times: "For Albanians, it has come to this: a  |13 November 2003   |
|son for a TV"                                           |                   |

