
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


Barnett and others (EEA Regulations: rights and documentation) [2012] UKUT
00142 (IAC)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2012                               |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                         BEVERLY ANTOINETTE BARNETT
                            DARRIEUX RAJIV MURPHY
                         NASTASSIA MELLISSIA MURPHY
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed by AJA Solicitors

(1)  In  applications  under  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
Regulations 2006, care must be taken to identify both  the  relevant  rights
being asserted and the relevant  documentary  confirmation  which  is  being
sought in respect of those rights.

 (2)  The requirement in regulation 17(1)(a) and (2)(a) for  the  production
of a valid passport relates to the passport of the applicant,  not  the  EEA
national.

(3) The "proof"  that  the  Secretary  of  State  can  lawfully  require  in
applications under regulations 17 and 18 in  order  to  entitle  a  non  EEA
national to a residence card (regulation 17) or a permanent  residence  card
(regulation 18) may, nevertheless, depending on  the  circumstances,  entail
the production of  the  passport  or  other  identity  document  of  an  EEA
national; but it is unlawful to  refuse  applications  merely  because  such
documentation is not forthcoming.  The Secretary of State needs  to  show  a
valid reason why it is required.

(4) This is particularly so in the case of regulation 18, given  that  there
is likely to be relevant material relating to  such  documentation  on  file
from a previous, successful, application.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

1.   The respondents are citizens of Jamaica. The first  respondent  is  the
    mother of the  second  and  third  respondents.  On  24  May  2011  the
    respondents applied to the Secretary of  State  to  be  issued  with  a
    permanent  residence  card,  pursuant  to  the  Immigration   (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, on the basis that the respondents were
    the family members of a Polish citizen, Marcin Bialachowski,  and  that
    the  respondents  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  him  in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five
    years  (regulation  15(1)(b)).   The  first   respondent   married   Mr
    Bialochowski in  London  on  19  March  2005  and  she  and  the  other
    respondents (who are her dependants)  thereafter  lived  with  him  for
    what appears to be accepted by the Secretary of State as a period of at
    least five years.

2.   On 22 September 2011 the Secretary of State  refused  the  respondents'
    applications. The respondents appealed against that decision and on  21
    November 2011 their appeal was heard at Taylor House by a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The judge allowed the respondents'  appeals  under
    the 2006 Regulations. On  13  December  2011  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission to the Secretary of State to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

3.   The notice of immigration decision put the matter starkly, as follows:

         "As you  have not produced a valid passport  or  national  identity
         card of a qualified person,  you  do  not  qualify  for   Permanent
         Residence as the family member of an EEA national.


         You do not have a basis of stay in the  United  Kingdom  under  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

4.   The reasons for refusal letter had this to say:

         "Regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006 makes provision for acquiring the right to  reside
         in the United Kingdom  permanently  for  EEA  nationals  and  their
         family members.  A family member of an EEA national who is  not  an
         EEA national and has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national family member in accordance with these Regulations  for  a
         continuous period of 5 years may acquire permanent residence.


         On final consideration of your application, it is clear that   your
         EEA family member has exercised Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom
         over  a continuous five year period.  It is also  clear  that   you
         and your 2 children have resided in the  United  Kingdom  over  the
         same five year period and meet these  parts  of  the  criteria  for
         issuing Permanent Residence under Regulation 15 of the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

         However this department wrote to your representatives on 18  August
         2011 requesting that  they submit a valid passport or  national  ID
         card for your EEA family member as evidence of their nationality or
         identity. Your representatives replied and stated that the ID  card
         that was originally  submitted  with  your  application  was  still
         valid.


         Checks undertaken by this department with the UKBA national forgery
         documentation unit have revealed that your EEA family members [sic]
         national ID card is no longer accepted as a valid form of ID.    It
         is now  UKBA  policy  to  refuse  entry  to  Polish  citizen  [sic]
         attempting to travel to the  UK on the type of  ID  that  your  EEA
         family member submitted in support of your application.


         Your application for Permanent Residence is  therefore  refused  on
         the basis that insufficient ID has been   provided  to  demonstrate
         that you are still related to a qualified EEA national as claimed.


         Therefore, it has been decided to refuse to issue the  confirmation
         that you seek with reference to Regulation 17(1)(A)  [sic]  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."



The proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

5.   As is unfortunately so often the case, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not enjoy the benefit of hearing representations from the Secretary
    of State, because no Presenting Officer was provided.  Under a  heading
    entitled "My Findings of Credibility and Fact" the judge said this:


         "12.     Only the first appellant [i.e. now the  first  respondent]
             gave evidence to the Tribunal.


         13.  The respondent [i.e. the Secretary of State] has not  produced
             a copy of  the policy referred to in the refusal decision.   I
             do not know the value or effect of the policy as regards  this
             appeal.


         14.  The appellants appear to meet the appropriate requirements  of
             the 2006 regulations.


         15.  The first appellant's husband is working  in  Ireland  at  the
             present moment and requires his passport. The first  appellant
             and the EEA national are having much matrimonial  difficulties
             and he is unwilling to send his passport the purpose  of  this
             hearing [sic]. In any event it would be illegal to do so.


         16.  The respondent has accepted the EEA national's identity  cards
             in the past  as  a  valid  form  of  identification.   He  has
             provided a copy  of  his  passport.  It  is  unclear  why  the
             identity card that was acceptable in the past   is  no  longer
             acceptable now.


         17.  Although there has been  reference  to  the  national  forgery
             documentation unit, there is no implication that the documents
             produced by the EEA national are false in any way.




         18.  All of the appellants meet the 2006 regulations.  I  therefore
             allow the appeals under the 2006 regulations."


6.   The  relevant  paragraphs  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal are as follows:

         "3.  It is submitted that for the 'Issue of a residence card' under
             regulation 15 it is  necessary  (EEA  Regulation  17  1(a)  to
             produce a valid passport and (b) proof that the  applicant  is
             such a family member [sic].


         4.   It is submitted that a failure of the appellant(s) to  produce
             that valid passport cannot be ignored by the judge who  relies
             on the Polish  ID  card,  that  is  not  acceptable,  for  the
             appellant(s) to succeed in their appeals.


         5.   It is submitted that  the  judge's  failure  to  consider  the
             relevant  EEA  Regulation/Rule  leads  him  into  a   material
             misdirection in law."

7.   In granting permission to appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered
    that the -

         "Judge of the First-tier Tribunal could  not   understand  why  the
         identity card which had apparently been  previously  acceptable  to
         the respondent was no longer acceptable. Whether or  not  that  had
         been the position in the past, in relation to proving other things,
         this application appears to  require  the  production  of  a  valid
         passport, see below Regulation 17.


             '17. - (1) The Secretary of State must issue a residence  card
             to a person who is not an  EEA  national  and  is  the  family
             member of a qualified person or of  an  EEA  national  with  a
             permanent  right  of  residence   under   regulation   15   on
             application and production of -


             (a) a valid passport; and


             (b) proof that the applicant is such a family member'."



The 2006 Regulations - rights and documents

8.   As emerged at the  hearing  on  5  March  2012,  the  question  of  the
    lawfulness of the  UKBA's  policy  towards  certain  Polish  ID  cards,
    although potentially interesting, has no relevance to the  respondents'
    applications and the subsequent appellate  proceedings.   In  order  to
    understand why this is so, it is necessary to look at the structure  of
    the 2006 Regulations and of the EP  and  Council  Directive  2004/38/EC
    ("the Citizens Directive") to which those Regulations are  intended  to
    give effect.

9.   The Regulations follow what is a broadly  logical  sequence.   After  a
    series of interpretative provisions in Part 1, Part 2 deals  with  "EEA
    Rights".  Regulation 11 concerns the arrival in the United  Kingdom  of
    an EEA national who "must be admitted  ... if he produces on arrival  a
    valid national identity card or passport issued by an EEA state".

10.  Regulation 11(2) makes similar provision in respect of a family  member
    of an EEA national, a family member  who  has  retained  the  right  of
    residence and persons (whether EEA nationals  or  family  members)  who
    have secured a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom under
    regulation 15.  Such persons must, like the EEA  national,  produce  on
    arrival a valid passport, as well as an EEA family permit, a  residence
    card or a permanent residence card (regulation 11(2) and (3)).

11.  Thus, from the very beginning of Part 2 of  the  2006  Regulations,  it
    can be seen that there is a high degree of interconnection between,  on
    the  one  hand,  rights  and,  on  the   other,   official   forms   of
    documentation.  The EEA national arriving in the United Kingdom  needs,
    first of all, to prove his identity as such a national by  means  of  a
    valid national ID or passport issued by the EEA  State.   Although  the
    question of what is meant by the validity of such documentation is  not
    directly in issue in the present appeals, it seems to me that in  order
    for an ID card or passport to be "valid" it  needs  (a)  to  have  been
    formally issued as such by the EEA State; (b) genuinely  to  relate  to
    the individual seeking to rely upon it; and (c) not to have expired.

12.  The  references  in  regulation  11(2)(b)  to  an  EEA  family  permit,
    residence card and permanent residence card are highly  significant  in
    the context of the present appeals. The requirements for the  issue  of
    an EEA family permit are set out in regulation 12. They  cover  both  a
    "family  member"  and  an  "extended  family  member",  as  defined  in
    regulations 7 and 8 respectively.  Thus, for example,  provided  he  or
    she meets certain requirements, a family member who wishes to accompany
    the EEA national to the United Kingdom is entitled to the issue  of  an
    EEA family permit so that, on arrival, this document can  be  presented
    for the purposes  of  regulation  11(2),  together  with  the  holder's
    passport.

13.  Regulations 13, 14 and 15 deal respectively with the initial  right  of
    residence,  extended  right  of  residence  and  permanent   right   of
    residence, all of which logically follow the initial right of admission
    to the United Kingdom. The initial right of residence under  regulation
    13 is, in the case of the EEA national, dependent  upon  that  national
    holding a "valid national identity card or passport issued  by  an  EEA
    State" (regulation 13(1)).  In the case of a family member, the initial
    right depends on the holding of a "valid passport" (regulation  13(2)).



14.  Following the initial right of residence, regulation 14  considers  the
    extended rights of residence, after the initial three month period.  At
    this point, we turn to the concept of the "qualified person" defined in
    regulation 6 to include what might be regarded the paradigm  categories
    of workers, job seekers and the self-employed. The family member  of  a
    qualified person if entitled to reside in the  United  Kingdom  for  as
    long as he or she remains such a family member; the same is true of the
    family member of an EEA national with a permanent right of residence.

15.  As for permanent rights of residence, as we have  already  seen,  these
    are covered by regulation 15.  The main way in which a permanent  right
    of residence may be acquired is through  continuous  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom for five years "in accordance with  these  Regulations".
    In the case of a family member, that residence has to be "with the  EEA
    national" (regulation 15(1)(b)).

16.  Part 3  of  the  Regulations  is  entitled  "Residence  Documentation".
    Regulation 16 concerns the issue of a "registration certificate",  both
    in relation to an EEA national and in relation to a family member.  The
    EEA national has to provide a valid identity card or passport, together
    with proof that he or she is a  qualified  person  (regulation  16(1)).
    For the purposes of regulation 16, the family member also has to be  an
    EEA national (regulation 16)(3)).

17.  To what particular right does regulation 16 correspond?  The answer  is
    given by Articles 7 and 8 of the Citizens Directive.  The  former  sets
    out the circumstances in which Union citizens "shall have the rights of
    residence on the territory of another Member State for a period  longer
    than three months".  Those requirements correspond with  regulation  14
    of the 2006 Regulations, read with the relevant definitions in Part  1.
    Article 8.1 of the Directive states  that  "for  periods  of  residence
    longer than three months, the  host  Member  State  may  require  Union
    citizens to register with the relevant authorities".  The rest of  that
    Article describes the ambit of the requirements that Member States  may
    impose  for  the  issue  a  registration  certificate.   They   include
    requirements to present "a valid identity card or passport" (7.3, 7.5).
     In the case of the United Kingdom, regulation 16 represents the result
    of the United Kingdom's decision to impose such a requirement.




The residence card

18.  For family members who are  not  EEA  nationals,  the  formal  document
    recognising that he or she has an entitlement to reside in  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to the  extended  rights  of  residence  described  in
    regulation 14, is a "residence card".  Although  regulation  17(1)  has
    been set out in the grant of permission to appeal,  it  is  helpful  at
    this point to set out paragraphs (1) and (2) in full.

         "17. - (1) The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to  a
             person who is not an EEA national and is the family member  of
             a qualified person or of an  EEA  national  with  a  permanent
             right of residence under  regulation  15  on  application  and
             production of -


             (a)  a valid passport; and
             (b)  proof that the applicant is such a family member.


         (2)  The Secretary of State must issue a residence card to a person
             who is not an EEA national but who is a family member who  has
             retained the right of residence on application and  production
             of -


             (a)  a valid passport; and
             (b)  proof that the applicant  is  a  family  member  who  has
             retained the right of residence."




Whose passport?

19.  Whose passport is referred to in regulation 17(1)(a)  and  (2)?   Given
    that, throughout the Regulations, proof  of  the  identity  of  an  EEA
    national can be given, either  by  means  of  a  valid  ID  card  or  a
    passport, it is, I consider, clear that the  passport  in  question  is
    only that  of  the  family  member  who  is  making  application  under
    regulation 17.   There  is  nothing  in  Article  10  of  the  Citizens
    Directive (issue of residence cards) that requires or even  suggests  a
    contrary interpretation.

20.  As we have already seen, the Secretary of  State,  in  her  grounds  of
    application, and the First-tier Tribunal, in its grant  of  permission,
    expressly identified the requirement in regulation 17(1)(a) to  produce
    a valid passport as applying in the present appeals to the passport  of
    the first respondent's husband.  But the  above  analysis  makes  plain
    that, even if regulation 17 did apply to the present appeals (which, as
    I shall explain, it does not), the Secretary of State cannot  point  to
    regulation 17(1)(a) as constituting a requirement for  the  respondents
    to produce Mr Bialochowski's passport.


Which regulation?

21.  In fact, regulation 17 does not apply in the present cases. Although  a
    superficial  reading  of  regulation  17(1)  might  suggest  that   the
    regulation concerns applications by family members for permanent rights
    of residence, that is not so.  The words "permanent right of residence"
    in regulation 17(1) are part of the phrase  "an  EEA  national  with  a
    permanent right of residence".  For the issue of a residence card,  the
    family member must be the family member of  either   (1)  "a  qualified
    person" or  (2) "an EEA national with a permanent  right  of  residence
    under regulation 15".  The fact that is so is made clear by  regulation
    18, the relevant provisions of which read as follows:

         "Issue of a document certifying permanent right of residence and  a
         permanent residence card


         18. - (1) The Secretary of State must issue an EEA national with  a
         permanent right of residence under regulation 15  with  a  document
         certifying  permanent  residence  as  soon  as  possible  after  an
         application for such a document and proof that the EEA national has
         such a right is submitted to the Secretary of State.


         (2) The Secretary of State must issue a person who is  not  an  EEA
         national who has a permanent right of residence under regulation 15
         with a permanent residence card no later than six months after  the
         date on which an application for a  permanent  residence  card  and
         proof that the  person  has  such  a  right  is  submitted  to  the
         Secretary of State."

22.  Regulation 18 is, accordingly,  the  provision  which  deals  with  the
    documentation of the permanent right of residence under regulation  15.
    As can be seen, regulation 18 contains no reference to any  requirement
    to produce "a valid passport" or "a valid national identity card";  nor
    does anything in Chapter IV of  the  Citizens  Directive,  which  makes
    provision for the right of permanent residence.

23.  In the case of the respondents,  it  is  clear  from  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and the respondents' bundle that they  made  application
    under form  EEA  4  for  "Permanent  Residence".   It  was,  therefore,
    necessary for the Secretary of State to determine their applications by
    reference to regulation 18.  However, as is plain from the last  quoted
    paragraph of the refusal letter (paragraph 4 above), the  Secretary  of
    State wrongly determined the applications by  reference  to  regulation
    17(1)(a).


Proving the right

24.  Although there is no specific requirement under  regulation  17  or  18
    for the family member applicant to submit a  valid  passport  or  other
    identity document relating to the EEA national, both regulations, quite
    properly, require the applicant to adduce  proof  that  he  or  she  is
    entitled to a residence card or a permanent  residence  card.   In  the
    case of regulation 17, the proof required is that "the appellant  is  a
    family member who has retained the right of residence".  In the case of
    regulation 18, it is that the person in question provides  "proof  that
    the person has such a right" (i.e. a permanent right of residence under
    regulation 15).

25.  The requirement of proof may, indeed, entail proving  the  identity  of
    the EEA national.  However, by the time one  comes  to  an  application
    under regulation 18, it is likely  that  the  issue  of  identity  will
    already have been satisfactorily resolved for the Secretary of  State's
    purposes. Indeed, it is common ground in the present appeals  that  the
    respondents' earlier successful applications  were  accompanied  by  Mr
    Bialachowski's passport.  As a general matter, the Secretary  of  State
    cannot lawfully insist under regulation 18 on an applicant's  producing
    the EEA national's passport or other identity document, unless the same
    is genuinely required in order to prove the right which  the  applicant
    is asserting, in order to be granted the permanent residence card.

26.  The present appeals are, in fact, a good example of  where  it  is  not
    reasonable for the Secretary of State to insist on seeing the  passport
    or other identity document.  Even  if  one  were  to  assume  that  the
    reasons for refusal letter was issued with regulation 18 in  mind,  the
    requirement for proof  of  identity  was  completely  unnecessary  and,
    hence, unlawful.  As can be seen from paragraph 4 above, the  Secretary
    of State in fact accepted that the respondents met the requirements  of
    regulation 15. In the circumstances, it was wholly unnecessary for  the
    Secretary of State to require any identification document  relating  to
    Mr  Bialachowski  "to  demonstrate  that  you  [presumably  the   first
    respondent] are still related to a qualified EEA national as  claimed".
    Given that the respondents had  lived  for  over  five  years  with  Mr
    Bialachowski and that no issue is taken  as  to  whether,  during  that
    time, he remained a qualified person, it  was  irrelevant  whether  the
    first respondent thereafter remained married to him.  She  had  already
    acquired a permanent right of residence. In any event, the Secretary of
    State took no issue with whether  the  parties  were,  in  fact,  still
    married or with Mr Bialachowski's presence in Ireland (as to  which  it
    is noted that temporary absences not exceeding six months a year do not
    break continuity of residence- Article 16.2).

27.  Mention needs to be made of Article 25 of the Citizens Directive.  This
    provides as follows.

          "General provisions concerning residence documents


          1.  Possession of a registration certificate  as  referred  to  in
             Article 8, of a document certifying permanent residence,  of  a
             certificate attesting submission of an application for a family
             member residence card, of a residence card or  of  a  permanent
             residence card, may under  no  circumstances  be  made  a  pre-
             condition for the exercise of a right or the completion  of  an
             administrative formality,  as  entitlement  to  rights  may  be
             attested by any other means of proof.


          2.   All documents mentioned in paragraph 1 shall be  issued  free
             of charge or  for  a  charge  not  exceeding  that  imposed  on
             nationals for the issuing of similar documents."


28.  As can be seen, Article 25  does  not  prohibit  a  Member  State  from
    requiring production of a valid identity card or passport in  order  to
    be entitled to a registration certificate  etc.  On  the  contrary,  it
    would be odd if it did, since Articles 5 (right of entry), 6 (right  of
    residence for up to three months) and 8 (administrative formalities for
    Union citizens) all contain  requirements  to  present  or  hold  valid
    identity cards or passports and these requirements have been reproduced
    for the United Kingdom  in  the  2006  Regulations  (see  paragraph  16
    above), wherever such a requirement  is  imposed  or  permitted  to  be
    imposed by the Directive. The point, however, is that, by the stage one
    reaches the issue of entitlement to the permanent right  of  residence,
    there is no longer any express requirement to submit identity documents
    or passports.


Conclusions

29.  The general conclusions that emerge may be stated as follows.   (1)  In
    applications under the 2006 Regulations, care must be taken to identify
    both the relevant rights being asserted and  the  relevant  documentary
    confirmation which is being sought in respect  of  those  rights.   (2)
    The requirement in regulation 17(1)(a) and (2)(a) for the production of
    a valid passport relates to the passport of the applicant, not the  EEA
    national.  (3) The "proof" that the Secretary  of  State  can  lawfully
    require in applications under regulations 17 and 18 in order to entitle
    a non EEA national to a residence card (regulation 17) or  a  permanent
    residence card (regulation 18)  may,  nevertheless,  depending  on  the
    circumstances, entail the production of the passport or other  identity
    document of an EEA national; but it is unlawful to refuse  applications
    merely because such documentation is not forthcoming.  The Secretary of
    State needs to show a valid reason why it  is  required.  (4)  This  is
    particularly so in the case of  regulation  18,  given  that  there  is
    likely to be relevant material relating to such documentation  on  file
    from a previous, successful application.


Error of Law, setting aside and re-making the decision

30.  Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge reached  the  right  result,  in
    allowing the appeals, he did so in a way which is, in  its  own  terms,
    difficult to follow and, in any event, failed to appreciate the correct
    regulation which was in play. The determination thus contains an  error
    of law.  I set it aside and re-make the decision in the appeals.

31.  For the reasons I have given, the Secretary of State was  not  entitled
    to refuse the applications for the reasons she gave.  On the  contrary,
    as is evident from the reasons for  refusal  letter,  she  should  have
    granted the  applications,  on  the  basis  that  the  respondents  had
    satisfied her that they were persons who had attained permanent  rights
    of residence under regulation 15, and so  were  entitled  to  permanent
    residence cards under regulation 18.   Their  appeals  are  accordingly
    allowed.


                               Signed                                  Date




                                                                  Upper
Tribunal Judge Peter Lane
