
[pic]
AI

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

          VT (Dublin Regulation: post-removal appeal) Sri Lanka [2012] UKUT
00308 (IAC)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2012                                |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     VT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah, instructed by Messrs Patricks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Auburn, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor

(1)  An out of country appeal may be made to the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
person who has been removed to an EU member State  pursuant  to  the  Dublin
Regulation  (Council  Regulation  343/2003/EEC).  However,  paragraph  6  of
Schedule 3 to the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act
2004 precludes the appellant from bringing the appeal on  any  grounds  that
relate to the Refugee  Convention,  including  human  rights  grounds  which
effectively "overlap" with Refugee Convention issues. If the substance of  a
ground involves persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason,  paragraph  6
excludes that ground, whether or not the ground makes  actual  reference  to
the Refugee Convention.

(2)  The effect of NS v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]
EUECJ C-411/10 (21 December 2011) is to require paragraph 6  of  Schedule  3
to be "read down", where the EU State to which the appellant has  been  sent
pursuant the Dublin Regulation is shown to be  one  whose  asylum  processes
are experiencing major operational problems,  involving  systemic  flaws  in
the  asylum  procedure  and  reception  conditions  for  asylum  applicants,
resulting in inhuman or degrading treatment of  asylum  seekers  transferred
to that State. In order to establish such a state of  affairs,  there  needs
to be material of the kind referred to at [90] of NS, such  as  regular  and
unanimous reports of international  non-governmental  organisations  bearing
witness to the practical difficulties in the receiving  State,  UNHCR  high-
level pronouncements and EU Commission reports.

(3)  Where such a "systemic deficiency"  in  the  asylum  processes  of  the
receiving State is found to exist, paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 is to  be  read
down, so as to be  compatible  with  EU  law.  In  such  circumstances,  the
Tribunal would, accordingly, allow  the  appeal,  to  the  extent  that  the
removal decision is held to be not in accordance  with  the  law.  It  would
then be for the respondent to secure the appellant's return  to  the  United
Kingdom, where his or her claim to be in need  of  international  protection
would be substantively considered  by  the  respondent  and,  if  necessary,
determined on appeal.

(4)  Unless such  a  systemic  deficiency  can  be  shown,  paragraph  6  of
Schedule 3 applies, without qualification. It is  not  permissible  to  read
down that provision on the basis only of evidence concerning the  individual
appellant.

(5)  The effect of (2) to (4) above means that  the  same  area  of  enquiry
applies in appeals governed by Schedule 3, where a  systemic  deficiency  is
being asserted, as  it  does  in  a  judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
decision to certify under paragraph 5 of Schedule 3,  prior  to  a  person's
removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.  Where  the  Administrative  Court  has
specifically addressed the issue in such proceedings, prior to the  person's
removal, the Tribunal, in considering the out of country appeal  brought  by
that person, should regard the Court's findings as a starting point  and  as
likely to be authoritative on  the  issue  of  systemic  deficiency  in  the
receiving State, insofar as  those  findings  were  based  on  the  same  or
similar evidence as that before the Tribunal.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This case involves the nature of an appeal under section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against a decision of  the
    respondent to remove a person  from  the  United  Kingdom  to  a  "safe
    country" listed in Part 2 of Schedule 3 to the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004, where the country concerned  is
    a Member State  of  the  European  Union.   In  particular,  this  case
    concerns the relationship between Schedule  3  and  Council  Regulation
    343/2003/EC, Establishing the Criteria and Mechanisms  for  Determining
    the Member State Responsible for Examining an Asylum Application Lodged
    in One of the Member States by a Third-Country National (the  so-called
    "Dublin Regulation"; sometimes called Dublin 2).

2.    The relevant United Kingdom legislation is set out in the Schedule  to
    this determination.


The appellant

3.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  11  October
    1978.  He is at present in Romania where, at the date of the hearing in
    the Upper Tribunal, he was detained in a prison in Bucharest.  As  will
    be seen, the circumstances which have led the appellant to be  in  this
    position are, in many respects, the subject of disagreement between the
    parties to the present appeal.  According  to  the  appellant,  he  was
    experiencing persecution in Sri Lanka and, as a  result,  in  2010  the
    services of an agent were enlisted in order  to  remove  the  appellant
    from that country.  In August 2010,  the  appellant  found  himself  in
    Romania, for the first time.  He says that this arose as  a  result  of
    his agent handing him over to a gang of human traffickers, who  decided
    to take him to Romania.  It is common ground  that  the  appellant  was
    arrested by the Romanian authorities in August 2010 and that he claimed
    asylum in that country, following his arrest.

4.    The appellant says that he was detained in Romania, where due  to  the
    weather, poor food and insanitary conditions, he became unwell.  He was
    abused by fellow inmates.  Prior to that, the police who  arrested  the
    appellant had  attacked  him  and  stolen  his  money.   The  appellant
    asserted that he was not  given  any  opportunity  to  explain  to  the
    Romanian authorities why he feared persecution in Sri Lanka.  This  was
    notwithstanding the fact that, according to the appellant, he had scars
    on his body as a result of his ill-treatment in his home country.

5.    It is also common ground that,  at  some  point,  the  appellant  left
    Romania.  According to the appellant's first witness statement, this is
    what happened:-

         "14.     Having felt unwell, been left  without  any  money  in  my
             pocket, having no way to tell my difficulties to anyone in  my
             language, due to the hard time  given  [me]  by  the  inmates,
             having no-one to listen to my complaints I  felt  that  I  was
             going to die.


         15.      The agent who pushed me in to Romania thought I may report
             him to the police about his human  trafficking  business.   He
             therefore without my consent or knowledge smuggled me into Sri
             Lanka."

6.    On return to Sri Lanka, the appellant  asserts  that  the  authorities
    arrested, detained and tortured him.  The appellant's  uncle,  however,
    was able to strike "a deal with an officer and secured my release by an
    inside deal" (paragraph 17).  Once again fearing for his  life  in  Sri
    Lanka, the appellant secured the assistance  of  another  agent,  which
    resulted in the appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom on 17 January
    2011.


Events in the United Kingdom

7.    According to the respondent, when  the  appellant  was  asked  at  his
    asylum screening interview on 31 January 2011 about  the  circumstances
    leading to his arrival in the United Kingdom, the appellant  said  that
    he had flown from Sri Lanka, via Dubai.  He also said that he  had  not
    claimed asylum or been fingerprinted in any other country  outside  Sri
    Lanka.  The appellant told the interviewer that he was  living  in  the
    United Kingdom with an uncle and elder brother (the latter having  been
    granted leave to remain under the immigration rules in November 2010).

8.    The respondent took the appellant's fingerprints.  It was  established
    that these matched those of a person  fingerprinted  in  Romania  on  1
    September 2010, who was recorded as having claimed  asylum  in  Romania
    the following day.

9.    On 9 February 2011, the  appellant  was  further  interviewed  by  the
    respondent.  The appellant said that he had been in Romania  for  about
    two weeks before he had been fingerprinted but that he had  then  flown
    back to Sri Lanka about a  week  later  with  the  help  of  an  agent,
    arriving in that country on 15 September 2010.

10.   On 15 February 2011 the  respondent  sent  a  formal  request  to  the
    Romanian authorities, pursuant to  the  Dublin  Regulation,  requesting
    those  authorities  to  accept  responsibility  for   considering   the
    appellant's asylum application.  Also on 15  February,  the  respondent
    received information from the  appellant's  representative,  indicating
    that the appellant claimed to have been  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    army.  The respondent considered the appropriateness of the appellant's
    detention and concluded that it was still appropriate, as he was  being
    removed to Romania,  not  Sri  Lanka.   It  was  also  noted  that  the
    appellant failed to mention in his asylum screening interview  that  he
    had been tortured.

11.   On 28  February  2011,  the  Romanian  authorities  formally  accepted
    responsibility for the appellant's asylum application.


The respondent's decisions

12.   On 1 March 2011, the respondent informed the appellant by letter  that
    the Romanian authorities  had  accepted  that  Romania  was  the  State
    responsible for examining the appellant's application for asylum.   The
    respondent's letter stated that, by virtue of paragraph 3(2) of Part  2
    of Schedule 3 to the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc) Act 2004, Romania was to be treated as a place:-

         "(a)     where your life and liberty  will  not  be  threatened  by
             reason of your race, religion, nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group, or political opinion; and


         (b)      a place from which you will not be sent to  another  State
             in contravention of your Convention rights; and


         (c)      from where you will not be sent to another State otherwise
             than in accordance with the Refugee Convention."

13.   The letter continued by stating that  the  respondent  "will  normally
    decline to examine the asylum application substantively if there  is  a
    safe third country to which the applicant can be sent.   There  are  no
    grounds for departing from this practice in  your  case".   The  letter
    then certified "that the conditions mentioned in paragraphs 4 and 5  of
    Part 2 of Schedule 3  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 are satisfied, namely that:-

         "(a)     it is proposed to remove you to Romania, and


         (b)      in the Secretary of State's opinion you are not a national
             citizen of Romania."

14.   Under the heading "Right of appeal", the letter concluded  by  telling
    the appellant that he should refer to the attached notice of  decision,
    appeal  form  and  accompanying  leaflet  given   to   him   with   the
    certification "for details of how and when to appeal".

15.   The immigration decision in question was to remove  the  appellant  as
    an illegal entrant.  The notice of decision said this:-

         "You are entitled to appeal this decision under  section  82(1)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  after  you  have
         left the United Kingdom.  A notice  of  appeal  is  enclosed  which
         explains what to do and an Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  leaflet
         which explains how to get help.  The appeal must be made on one  or
         more of the following grounds:


           . That the decision is not in accordance  with  the  immigration
             rules;

           .  That  the  decision   is   unlawful   because   it   racially
             discriminates against you;

           . That the decision is unlawful because it is incompatible  with
             your rights under the European Convention on Human Rights;

           . That the decision breaches rights which you  have  as  an  EEA
             national or member of such a person's family  under  community
             treaties relating to entry or residence in the United Kingdom;

           . That the decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law;

           . That a discretion under the Immigration Rules should have been
             exercised differently.

         You should not appeal on grounds which do not apply  to  you.   You
         must  also  give  arguments  and  any  supporting  evidence   which
         justifies your grounds" (original emphases).




The judicial review

16.   Although the immigration decision, to which  we  have  just  referred,
    and which gave rise to the proceedings in the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    this Tribunal, was made on 26 April 2011, it was  not  the  first  such
    decision made in respect of  the  appellant.   Following  certification
    under Schedule 3, the respondent had, in fact, made  a  decision  on  2
    March 2011 to remove the appellant to Romania, setting  directions  for
    that removal to be carried out  in  10  March.   The  appellant  sought
    permission of  the  Administrative  Court  to  judicially  review  that
    decision.

17.   In his JR application grounds, the appellant  asserted  that  "I  have
    family members in the UK and that I had arrived in January 2011.  I had
    informed [the respondent] that I had a brother and family in the UK  as
    well as other relatives and friends."  He then went on to  assert  that
    he was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, as  he  had  been
    tortured by the Sri Lankan army and that he had scars on his body.   He
    was "mentally much stressed and cannot tolerate being in detention  nor
    being sent to Romania".  Whilst in Romania, the appellant "was racially
    attacked and told to go back to [my]  country.   Romania  is  not  safe
    country."  The appellant asserted that the respondent had  not  applied
    the five-step "Razgar" test and contended that, under  that  test,  the
    appellant's removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    family life in the United Kingdom.

18.   The respondent filed an Acknowledgement of Service in respect  of  the
    appellant's judicial review application.  The information we  have  set
    out above regarding the appellant's asylum application  and  subsequent
    interviews is  largely  taken  from  the  summary  grounds  of  defence
    attached to the AOS.  In  this  regard,  we  note  that  the  appellant
    disputes the assertion that, during his interview, he said that he  had
    claimed asylum in Romania.

19.   Both in her summary grounds of  defence  and  in  her  letter  to  the
    appellant  of  30  March  2011,  responding  to  the   appellant's   JR
    application, the respondent set out her reasons for concluding that the
    appellant's Article 8 rights would not be violated by removing  him  to
    Romania.  The AOS also relied upon case law,  including  KRS  v  United
    Kingdom [2008] ECHR 1781 and Nasseri [2009] UKHL 23 in support  of  the
    proposition  that  "signatories  to  the  Dublin  Regulation  are  also
    signatories to the ECHR and the 1951 Convention relating to the  status
    of refugees...and can be relied  upon  to  honour  their  international
    obligations".

20.   On 4 April 2011, HH Judge Shaun Spencer QC, sitting as a Deputy  Judge
    of the High Court, refused the  appellant's  application  for  judicial
    review.  Further removal directions were  then  set,  pursuant  to  the
    making of the fresh decision to remove  the  appellant  as  an  illegal
    entrant.


Removal to Romania

21.   On 10 May 2011 the appellant was removed from the  United  Kingdom  to
    Romania.  Once outside the United Kingdom, the  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of 26 April to remove him.
     The grounds of appeal are dated 18 July 2011.  They complain that  the
    Romanian authorities have not fairly processed the  appellant's  asylum
    claim and that his asylum claim was refused because it was  alleged  he
    had failed to attend his interview.  "But he was in detention,  so  the
    allegation made  by  the  Romanian  authorities  suggesting  that  [the
    appellant] had failed to attend is not true."   The  appellant  further
    submitted that he had had no access to any interpreter in Romania.

22.   Paragraph 6(iv) of the grounds gives a  somewhat  different  story  to
    the one we have described  earlier,  concerning  the  circumstances  in
    which the appellant left Romania for Sri Lanka in 2010:-

         "I thought unless I leave the camp, I was going to die in the camp.
          I got out from the camp and contacted my agent who was outside the
         camp.  When the agent heard my story, my agent said that  he  could
         not do anything other than returning me to Sri Lanka.  He  took  me
         to Sri Lanka..."

23.   In order to understand the appellant's  complaint  that  the  Romanian
    authorities  had  not  substantively  determined  his   asylum   claim,
    following his enforced return to that country in 2011, it is  necessary
    to refer to the English translation of  a  document  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle of documents for the hearing on 2 July  2012.   This
    concerns the official transcript of proceedings in the Court of  Appeal
    in Bucharest, relating to a legal  action,  "initiated  by  petitioner"
    [the appellant] "against  the  Romanian  Immigration  Authority".   The
    complaint concerned the decision to detain the appellant.  The document
    asserts that an  interpreter  in  the  English  language  "Mrs  Mihaela
    Istrati" was in attendance "in order to translate  all  submissions  to
    [the appellant]".  It is also recorded that "another person attends  on
    behalf of the Romanian  immigration  office,  Sri  Lankan  citizen  and
    English speaker, to ensure that the submissions are  indeed  translated
    to  [the  appellant]".   The  record  went  on  to  describe  how   the
    proceedings had been put back in order for the  appellant  to  be  made
    aware of various documents filed by  the  immigration  authority.   The
    appellant was  recorded  as  stating  that  he  suffered  from  "mental
    problems, namely that he always thinks someone wants to kill him.  When
    prompted by the court to explain how the  release  from  the  reception
    centre can assist him given the circumstances, [the appellant] explains
    that if released from  the  centre,  he  could  care  for  his  health.
    Furthermore, he requests the asylum in Romania  to  be  granted."   The
    appellant then explained "that his older brother lives  in  London  and
    could help him.  Therefore he asked the court to allow his petition  to
    be granted for freedom in Romania."

24.   Counsel for the immigration authority,  however,  told  the  Court  of
    Appeal that "There was a previous decision to  remove  the  Sri  Lankan
    under escort for crossing the Romanian border illegally.   He  had  the
    chance to make submissions about  his  status  on  02.09.2010  when  he
    applied for the status of refugee, an application dismissed by  RIO,  a
    decision uncontested by [the appellant]."  The appellant then submitted
    "that he does not know the Rules in Romania and  he  did  not  get  any
    help.  He does not want (sic) to go to London."  The court  found  that
    continued detention of the  appellant  was  lawful.   In  doing  so  it
    recorded that on 2 September 2010 the appellant had  "applied  for  the
    status of  refugee  on  Romanian  territory  to  be  granted,  and  his
    application was rejected by the RIO by  administrative  decision,  made
    final and binding as it was not challenged".

25.   At the Upper Tribunal hearing on 2 July, we allowed  Ms  Jegarajah  to
    call  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's  brother   regarding   the
    interpreter issue, as set out in the document we have just  summarised.
    During a break in proceedings, we were informed that  the  brother  had
    telephoned the appellant on his mobile telephone in Romania  (where  it
    was said he remained in detention).  The brother told  us  in  evidence
    that the appellant had said that the Sri Lankan speaker referred to  by
    the Court of Appeal was not a proper interpreter but a fellow  detainee
    in the same prison.  The Romanian authorities had asked this person  to
    interpret (we assume, between Tamil and English), as they had not got a
    suitable interpreter of their own.  This person  was  a  fellow  asylum
    seeker and three weeks later, according to the oral  evidence,  he  was
    deported from Romania.

26.   The appellant's bundle contains a number of other documents,  relating
    to periodic challenges by the appellant of his continued  detention  in
    Romania.  The last of these, dating from 30  January  2012,  post-dates
    the proceedings and determination in the First-tier Tribunal, to  which
    we must turn in due course.  It is, however, convenient to refer to the
    Court of Appeal proceedings at this point in our determination.

27.   The document at pages 15  to  17  of  the  appellant's  bundle  is  an
    English translation of an application by the Chief Detective  Inspector
    of the Romanian  Immigration  Service  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  for
    permission to grant an extension  of  the  public  custody  time  limit
    relating to the appellant.

28.   The application describes the  appellant  as  having  entered  Romania
    illegally on 26 August 2011 and as  having  applied  for  asylum  on  2
    September 2010.  It would seem that the reference  to  26  August  2011
    must be a reference to 2010.  It is stated that the asylum  application
    was considered and rejected by a decision dated 23 September 2010 which
    was "deemed definitive and binding".

29.   After describing the  appellant's  leaving  Romania  illegally,  being
    encountered by the United Kingdom authorities and  return  to  Romania,
    the application makes reference to a request of the appellant on 11 May
    2011 for "access to a new asylum seeking procedure".  That request  was
    rejected on 25 January 2012 "made final  and  binding".   Efforts  were
    then made to secure the return of the appellant to Sri Lanka, with  the
    involvement of the  Sri  Lankan  Embassy  in  Warsaw.   The  appellant,
    however, failed  to  cooperate.   At  page  16,  we  observe  that  "on
    26.01.2012 [the appellant] filed again a  new  request  for  access  to
    asylum procedure, which is now under consideration".


The proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

30.   On 7 December 2011  the  appellant's  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clayton, sitting at Taylor  House.   The  appellant  was
    represented on that occasion by Mr C Yeo of Counsel; but that  fact  is
    not recorded  in  the  judge's  determination.   Although  the  judge's
    handwritten record of proceedings records  Mr  Yeo's  making  extensive
    legal submissions, none of  these  feature  in  the  determination.  Ms
    Jegarajah informed us that the appellant had  taken  his  case  to  the
    European Court  of  Human  Rights  ("ECtHR"),  where  proceedings  were
    currently stayed.

31.    The  operative  paragraphs  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   judge's
    determination are as follows:-

         "5.      Romania is a member of the European Union and a  sovereign
             state.  The Appellant is complaining of ill-treatment  by  the
             Romanian authorities, but it is not for the UK to  comment  on
             whether an EU sovereign state did or did not comply  with  the
             minimum standards agreed by EU signatories.  The Appellant was
             properly returned to  Romania  under  the  provisions  of  the
             Dublin 2 Regulations.  The Appellant's removal from the UK was
             delayed by his application for Judicial Review which  was  not
             successful.


         6. A person fleeing from persecution would  be  expected  to  claim
             asylum at the first available opportunity.   It  would  appear
             the appellant did not intend to terminate his first  visit  to
             Europe in Hungary and then travelled to Romania, but  both  of
             these countries  are  sovereign  states  and  members  of  the
             European Union.


         7. When the found [sic] Romania  not  to  be  to  his  liking,  the
             Appellant then returned to Sri Lanka and travelled to the  UK,
             which was doubtless his destination of choice.   Upon  arrival
             in the UK he denied having made any asylum claim in any  other
             country until confronted with the evidence  from  the  EURODAC
             European fingerprint database, which confirmed  a  match  with
             those taken from him in Romania on 10 September 2010.


         8. The Appellant has claimed asylum in Romania but  has  also  been
             charged and  convicted  with  a  criminal  offence  there.   I
             conclude  he  is  now  complaining  about   prosecution,   not
             persecution.  He was properly returned to  Romania  after  his
             application for Judicial Review in the UK failed.  I therefore
             find there is no valid appeal before me."

32.   We were not addressed regarding any issue relating to Hungary.   There
    does not appear to have been any  suggestion  from  either  the  United
    Kingdom or Romanian authorities that Hungary should be the  country  to
    which  the  appellant  would  be  returned,  pursuant  to  the   Dublin
    Regulation.  We say no more about this matter.

33.   Permission to appeal the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    granted on the grounds submitted by the appellant.  In  summary,  these
    were that the judge had erred  in  finding  that  there  was  no  valid
    appeal; that she had failed to engage with Mr Yeo's submissions,  which
    were to the effect that the Romanian authorities had failed properly to
    determine  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum;  that   the   Romanian
    authorities do not comply with the minimum standards agreed by  the  EU
    with regard to reception conditions for asylum  seekers;  and  that  an
    irrebutable presumption, such  as  that  set  out  in  paragraph  6  of
    Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act, that Romania would  not  act  in  the  ways
    there described, was contrary to EU law as clarified in NS v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2011]  EUECJ  C-411/10  (21  December
    2011).


Was there an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal?

34.   In both his written and oral submissions on behalf of the  respondent,
    Mr Auburn was careful not to suggest that the appellant  did  not  have
    any right of appeal at all, once outside the United Kingdom.   Instead,
    Mr Auburn submitted  that  the  appellant  cannot  bring  the  form  of
    challenge he is, in fact, making, by means of statutory appeal  out  of
    country.  For the appellant, Ms Jegarajah submitted that the  appellant
    plainly had a right of appeal.   The  notice  of  immigration  decision
    given to the appellant had informed him as much.

35.   There can be no doubt that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  law
    in holding that there was no valid appeal  before  her.   The  manifest
    purpose of section 33 and Schedule 3 is not to preclude a person in the
    position of the appellant  from  appealing,  once  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, an immigration  decision  to  remove  that  person  from  this
    country.  The purpose of  those  provisions  is,  rather,  severely  to
    circumscribe the grounds in section 84 of  the  2002  Act  which  might
    otherwise be used by an appellant.  The judge ought, therefore, to have
    engaged with the basis on which the appellant had sought  to  challenge
    the immigration decision and to have explained why (if she  thought  it
    to be  the  case)  the  appellant's  grounds  could  not  be  advanced.
    Accordingly, not only was  the  judge's  final  conclusion  wrong;  the
    peremptory nature of her determination deprived the  appellant  of  any
    proper understanding of why (despite Mr Yeo's submissions) he had  lost
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

36.   We accordingly find that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    contains an error of law.  We have decided to  set  that  determination
    aside.  The result is that the decision in the appellant's appeal falls
    to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

37.   The effect of certification under paragraph 5 of  Schedule  3  was  to
    preclude the appellant from bringing an  in-country  appeal  under  the
    2002 Act against the removal decision in reliance on:-

         "(a)     an asylum claim which asserts that to remove the person to
             a specified State to which this Part applies would breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, or


         (b)      the human rights claim  insofar  as  it  asserts  that  to
             remove the person to a specified  State  to  which  this  Part
             applies would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
             Act 1998 because of the possibility of removal from that State
             to another State."




The effect of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act

38.   In the present case, the battleground of the parties  is  paragraph  6
    of Schedule 3:-

         "6.      A person who is outside the United Kingdom may  not  bring
             an immigration appeal on any ground that is inconsistent  with
             treating a State to which this Part applies as a place -

             (a) where a person's life and liberty are  not  threatened  by
                  reason of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a
                  particular social group or political opinion,
             (b) from which a person will not be sent to another  State  in
                  contravention of his Convention rights, and
             (c) from which a person will not  be  sent  to  another  State
                  otherwise than in accordance with the Refugee Convention."

39.   Notwithstanding the drafter's use of double negatives in paragraph  6,
    its intended  ambit  is  sufficiently  clear.   Paragraph  6  does  not
    preclude  a  person  outside  the  United  Kingdom  from  bringing   an
    immigration appeal in respect  of  matters  unrelated  to  the  Refugee
    Convention.  Thus, for example, an appeal may be brought on the  ground
    that the immigration decision in question was not  in  accordance  with
    the law, for reasons of formal invalidity.  An appeal may be brought on
    the ground that the immigration decision racially discriminates against
    the appellant.  More  significantly,  perhaps,  paragraph  6  does  not
    preclude an appellant from appealing on the ground that the immigration
    decision violated his or her right to respect for private and/or family
    life under Article  8  of  the  ECHR;  for  example,  by  severing  the
    appellant  from  family members in the United Kingdom.

40.   On the other hand, it is clear that paragraph 6 has been  deliberately
    drafted so as to exclude asylum-related  grounds  based  on  the  ECHR,
    which effectively "overlap" with Refugee Convention issues.   The  same
    is true of overlap between  the  Refugee  Convention  and  humanitarian
    protection under the Qualification Directive.  This is  the  effect  of
    the words "any ground which is inconsistent with treating a State..."

41.    Accordingly,  a  purported  ground  of  appeal  which  involves,  for
    example, alleged racial or social group persecution cannot be  brought,
    either specifically as regards the Refugee Convention or as regards  an
    alleged violation of Article 3 of the ECHR.  Indeed, if  the  substance
    of an appellant's complaint is actual or threatened  persecution,  then
    the ground may  not  be  advanced,  whether  or  not  it  makes  actual
    reference to the Refugee Convention.

42.   The reason why paragraph 6 is the key provision  in  this  appeal  was
    acknowledged by Ms Jegarajah in  oral  submissions.   She  acknowledged
    that the appellant would not be able to succeed in his  appeal  on  the
    basis that paragraph 6 has the effect we have just described, since the
    substance of his appeal was entirely covered by sub-paragraphs  (a)  to
    (c).  That is indeed so, when one  considers  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Although the appellant  had  raised
    Article 8 issues in his judicial review, these did not feature  in  his
    grounds of appeal.  The appellant's case is that he is experiencing ill-
    treatment at the hands of the Romanian authorities and non-State agents
    in the shape of fellow detainees; and that this treatment has a  racial
    motivation.  It is also plain that  the  appellant's  account  involves
    allegations  of  mistreatment  of  asylum  seekers   in   Romania,   in
    circumstances where such persons constitute a particular social  group.
    The rest of the appellant's case  involves  an  assertion  that,  as  a
    result of the inadequate way with which his case has been dealt with in
    Romania, the authorities in that country are likely to  return  him  to
    Sri Lanka in contravention of his ECHR rights and of his  rights  under
    the Refugee Convention.

43.   As advanced by Ms Jegarajah, the appellant's case is that,  regardless
    of the effect paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 would  have  on  the  appellant
    that provision has to be "read down" in order to be compatible with  EU
    law.  This is despite the fact that section  33  and  Schedule  3  were
    intended to give effect to the Dublin Regulation (No 343/2003) whereby,
    as a general matter, asylum applications of third-country nationals are
    to be dealt with by the Member  State  in  which  the  applicant  first
    arrived.  For the respondent, Mr Auburn accepted that, in the light  of
    the relevant case law, paragraph 6 cannot be  read  as  an  irrebutable
    proposition of law.  Counsel were, accordingly, agreed that paragraph 6
    does not always have the effect its words suggest, and that in  certain
    circumstances it has to be read down so as to  be  compatible  with  EU
    law. However, they disagreed as  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    obligation to read down arises.


The case of NS

44.   In advancing their respective cases, Counsel agreed that the  case  of
    NS was of particular significance.  It is,  accordingly,  necessary  to
    deal with this case in some detail. NS arose as a result of  references
    for a preliminary ruling made to the Court of Justice of  the  European
    Union ("CJEU") by the  Court  of  Appeal.   In  particular,  the  third
    question posed by the Court of Appeal  was  "in  essence,  whether  the
    obligation on the Member State which would transfer the  asylum  seeker
    to observe fundamental rights, precludes the operation of a  conclusive
    presumption that the responsible  State  will  observe  the  claimant's
    fundamental rights under European  law  and/or  the  minimum  standards
    imposed by the ... directives" [71].

45.   At [75] to [80] the Court set out the following basic propositions:-

         "75.     The Common European Asylum System is based on the full and
             inclusive  application  of  the  Geneva  Convention  and   the
             guarantee that nobody will be sent back to a place where  they
             again risk being persecuted.  Article 18 of  the  Charter  [of
             Fundamental Rights] and Article 78 TFEU provide that the rules
             of the Geneva Convention and  the  1967  Protocol  are  to  be
             respected (see Joined Cases C-175/08, C-176/08, C-178/08 and C-
             179/08  Salahadin  Abdulla  and  Others  [2010]  ECR   I-1493,
             paragraph 53, and  Case  C-31/09  Bolbol  [2010]  ECR  I-5539,
             paragraph 38).


         76.      As stated in paragraph 15 above, the  various  regulations
             and directives relevant to the cases in the  main  proceedings
             provide that they  comply  with  the  fundamental  rights  and
             principles recognised by the Charter.


         77.      According to settled case-law, the Member States must  not
             only interpret their national law in a manner consistent  with
             European Union law but also make sure they do not rely  on  an
             interpretation of an instrument of secondary legislation which
             would be in conflict with the fundamental rights protected  by
             the European Union legal  order  or  with  the  other  general
             principles of European Union law (see, to that effect, Case C-
             101/01 Lindqvist [2003] ECR I-12971, paragraph 87, and Case C-
             305/05 Ordre des barreaux  francophones  et  germanophone  and
             Others [2007] ECR I-5305, paragraph 28).


         78.      Consideration of the texts  which  constitute  the  Common
             European Asylum System  shows  that  it  was  conceived  in  a
             context  making  it  possible   to   assume   that   all   the
             participating States, whether Member States or  third  States,
             observe fundamental rights, including the rights based on  the
             Geneva Convention and the 1967 Protocol, and on the ECHR,  and
             that the Member States can have confidence in  each  other  in
             that regard.


         79.      It is  precisely  because  of  that  principle  of  mutual
             confidence  that  the  European  Union   legislature   adopted
             Regulation No 343/2003 and  the  Conventions  referred  to  in
             paragraphs 24 to 26  of  the  present  judgment  in  order  to
             rationalise the  treatment  of  asylum  claims  and  to  avoid
             blockages in the system as a result of the obligation on State
             authorities to examine multiple claims by the same  applicant,
             and in order to increase legal certainty with  regard  to  the
             determination of  the  State  responsible  for  examining  the
             asylum claim and thus to avoid forum shopping,  it  being  the
             principal objective of all these  measures  to  speed  up  the
             handling of claims in the interests both of asylum seekers and
             the participating Member States.


         80.      In those  circumstances,  it  must  be  assumed  that  the
             treatment of asylum seekers in all Member States complies with
             the requirements of the Charter, the Geneva Convention and the
             ECHR."

46.    This  basic  proposition  was,  however,  subject  to  the  following
    qualifications:-

         "81.  It is not however inconceivable  that  that  system  may,  in
             practice, experience major operational  problems  in  a  given
             Member State, meaning that there is a  substantial  risk  that
             asylum seekers may, when transferred to that Member State,  be
             treated  in  a  manner  incompatible  with  their  fundamental
             rights.


         82.      Nevertheless, it cannot be concluded from the  above  that
             any infringement of a fundamental right by  the  Member  State
             responsible will affect the obligations of  the  other  Member
             States  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  Regulation   No
             343/2003.


         83.      At issue here is the raison d'�tre of the  European  Union
             and the creation of an area of freedom, security  and  justice
             and, in particular, the Common European Asylum  System,  based
             on mutual confidence and a presumption of compliance, by other
             Member States, with European Union  law  and,  in  particular,
             fundamental rights.


         84.      In addition, it would be not be compatible with  the  aims
             of Regulation No 343/2003 were the slightest  infringement  of
             Directives 2003/9, 2004/83 or  2005/85  to  be  sufficient  to
             prevent the transfer of an asylum seeker to the  Member  State
             primarily responsible. Regulation No 343/2003 aims  -  on  the
             assumption that the fundamental rights of  the  asylum  seeker
             are observed in the Member  State  primarily  responsible  for
             examining the application - to establish, as is apparent inter
             alia from points 124 and 125 of the Opinion in Case  C-411/10,
             a clear and  effective  method  for  dealing  with  an  asylum
             application.  In order to achieve that  objective,  Regulation
             No 343/2003 provides  that  responsibility  for  examining  an
             asylum application lodged in a European  Union  country  rests
             with a single Member State, which is determined on  the  basis
             of objective criteria.


         85.      If the mandatory consequence of any  infringement  of  the
             individual provisions of Directives 2003/9, 2004/83 or 2005/85
             by the Member State responsible were that the Member State  in
             which the asylum application  was  lodged  is  precluded  from
             transferring the applicant to the first mentioned State,  that
             would add to the criteria for  determining  the  Member  State
             responsible set out in Chapter III of Regulation  No  343/2003
             another  exclusionary  criterion  according  to  which   minor
             infringements of the abovementioned directives committed in  a
             certain Member State may exempt that  Member  State  from  the
             obligations provided for under Regulation No 343/2003.  Such a
             result would deprive those obligations of their substance  and
             endanger  the  realisation  of  the   objective   of   quickly
             designating the Member  State  responsible  for  examining  an
             asylum claim lodged in the European Union.


         86.       By  contrast,  if  there  are  substantial  grounds   for
             believing  that  there  are  systemic  flaws  in  the   asylum
             procedure and reception conditions for  asylum  applicants  in
             the  Member  State  responsible,  resulting  in   inhuman   or
             degrading treatment, within the meaning of Article  4  of  the
             Charter, of asylum seekers transferred  to  the  territory  of
             that Member State, the transfer  would  be  incompatible  with
             that provision."

47.   In R (on the application of Efrem Medhanye) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2012] EWHC 1799  (Admin),  Kenneth  Parker  J  has
    recently had occasion to examine the effect of NS in the context  of  a
    judicial review to remove a claimant to Italy under the  provisions  of
    the Dublin Regulation.

48.   At [7] of his judgment, the Judge held that the  finding  at  [81]  of
    NS, that it was "not inconceivable" that the system in a  Member  State
    may experience operational problems such that there  is  a  substantial
    risk of asylum seekers transferred there facing treatment  incompatible
    with their fundamental rights, was "entirely consistent with  the  test
    to be applied under the ECHR, for the purposes  of  which  there  is  a
    'significant evidential presumption' that Italy would comply  with  its
    international obligations: R (Elayathamby)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWHC  2182
    (Admin), paragraph 42(1) applying MSS v Belgium and Greece [2011]  ECHR
    108 (GC)".

49.   At [8] the Judge, likewise, held that the  findings  of  the  CJEU  at
    [86] of NS, regarding there being "substantial  grounds  for  believing
    that there are systematic flaws in the asylum procedure  and  reception
    conditions for asylum applicants" was "also  entirely  consistent  with
    the test under the ECHR.  It was  the  systemic  flaws  in  the  asylum
    procedure and reception conditions in Greece that led the court in  MSS
    concluding that Belgium had acted in breach of the  ECHR  by  returning
    the applicant to Greece."

50.   At [90] and [91] of NS, the CJEU addressed the issue of what  sort  of
    evidence  might  be  required  in  order  to  demonstrate  the   "major
    operational problems"  or  "systematic  deficiency"  [89]  required  to
    displace the general proposition identified at [75] to [80]:-

         "90.     In finding that the  risks  to  which  the  applicant  was
             exposed were proved, the European Court of Human  Rights  took
             into  account   the   regular   and   unanimous   reports   of
             international non-governmental organisations  bearing  witness
             to the practical difficulties in  the  implementation  of  the
             Common European Asylum System in  Greece,  the  correspondence
             sent by the United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees
             (UNHCR) to the Belgian  minister  responsible,  and  also  the
             Commission reports on the evaluation of the Dublin system  and
             the proposals for recasting Regulation No 343/2003 in order to
             improve  the  efficiency  of  the  system  and  the  effective
             protection of fundamental rights (M.S.S. v Belgium and Greece,
             � 347-350).


         91.      Thus, and contrary to  the  submissions  of  the  Belgian,
             Italian and Polish Governments, according to which the  Member
             States lack the instruments  necessary  to  assess  compliance
             with fundamental rights by the Member State  responsible  and,
             therefore, the risks to  which  the  asylum  seeker  would  be
             exposed were he  to  be  transferred  to  that  Member  State,
             information such as that cited by the European Court of  Human
             Rights enables the Member States to assess the functioning  of
             the asylum system in the Member State responsible,  making  it
             possible to evaluate those risks."

51.   In Medhanye, Kenneth Parker J at [11] observed that, in  the  passages
    we have just cited, the CJEU had "adopted essentially the same position
    as that adopted by the ECtHR in regard to the nature and extent of  the
    evidence required to  rebut  the  assumption  (or  in  ECHR  terms  the
    presumption) of compliance with international obligations".

52.   In rejecting the submission (not made in our case) that  NS  had  not,
    in effect, dealt with Article 1 of the Charter and  that  there  might,
    accordingly, be circumstances in which the CJEU would  find  there  had
    been a violation of Article 1 (right to  dignity)  without  necessarily
    finding a breach of Article 4 (prohibition of torture  and  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment), Kenneth Parker J made the following
    findings, which we respectfully consider distil the essence and general
    effect of NS:-

         "14.     In my judgment, this submission rests upon  a  fundamental
             misreading of what NS has decided.  In NS  the  constitutional
             issue  was  novel   and,   I   would   respectfully   suggest,
             controversial.  The European  Union  aspires  to  be  a  close
             union, if not a federal system: it is far more, especially  at
             this stage of its development, than  a  collection  of  nation
             states bound together by treaty (as  is  the  case  under  the
             ECHR, which of course does not purport to represent any system
             of political union).  The central principle of such a union is
             that  member  states  of  the  union  have  mutual  trust  and
             confidence  in  each  other,  particularly  mutual  trust  and
             confidence that each state will faithfully comply with binding
             provisions  of  union  law,   including,   most   importantly,
             provisions of union law protecting fundamental  human  rights.
             In that  context,  it  might  be  thought  that  it  would  be
             inconsistent with the principle of mutual trust and confidence
             to impose a legal duty  on  one  member  state  in  effect  to
             monitor whether another member state was  complying  with  its
             obligations under  union  law,  including  its  obligation  to
             respect fundamental human rights.  The United States is  often
             presented as the paradigm of a mature federal union:  although
             I have not researched  the  question,  I  would  be  surprised
             indeed if constitutional or federal law in the  United  States
             does, or could legitimately, require one state of  the  Union,
             before, for example, extraditing a citizen to another State of
             the Union, to satisfy itself that the sister State  would  not
             treat the citizen inconsistently with his or her rights  under
             the  Constitution.   It  might  be  assumed  that  the  public
             authorities, including the  judicial  branch,  of  the  sister
             State would, compliant with a solemn  and  binding  obligation
             under the Constitution, ensure that the fundamental rights  of
             the citizen were respected in their  territory,  and  that  it
             would run  counter  to  the  principle  of  mutual  trust  and
             confidence if other States were under any obligation, or  even
             had a discretion, to investigate whether there was a  systemic
             failure to discharge that duty.


         15.      The CJEU expressly  recognises  the  principle  of  mutual
             trust and confidence as the "raison d'�tre"  of  the  European
             Union.  It might have been  thought,  therefore,  that,  under
             that principle, one Member State could not properly be obliged
             to determine whether another Member State was  complying  with
             its legal duties under EU  law.   However,  the  CJEU,  having
             recognised both the importance of asylum law and practice  and
             of respect for fundamental human rights, decided that in  this
             context  Member  States   did   have   such   an   obligation.
             Nonetheless, with due regard to the "raison d'�tre" of the EU,
             the CJEU very carefully and with  great  precision  delineated
             precisely the nature and  scope  of  the  legal  duty  of  the
             transferring Member State.  The nature and scope of  the  duty
             is set out in paragraph 86 of the judgment of the CJEU.  In my
             view, given in particular this important constitutional  issue
             at stake in NS, that  duty  simply  excludes  the  independent
             operation of Article 1 of  the  Charter.   When  read  in  the
             correct  context,  that  is  what  the  Court  is  saying   at
             paragraphs 114-5 when it states that Articles 1, 18 and 47  of
             the Charter do not lead to a different  answer,  namely,  that
             the only question that the transferring State need address and
             answer is the one identified at paragraph 86 of  the  judgment
             of the CJEU, which makes no  allusion  to  Article  1  of  the
             Charter."




Submissions

53.   In her oral submissions,  Ms  Jegarajah  conceded  that  she  was  not
    seeking on behalf of the appellant to  demonstrate  that  there  is  in
    Romania any "systemic deficiency" of the kind required in NS.  Although
    there were a number of materials in the appellant's bundles  containing
    criticisms of the behaviour of the Romanian authorities,  Ms  Jegarajah
    did not submit that these amounted to "regular and unanimous reports of
    international non-governmental organisations  bearing  witness  to  the
    practical difficulties in the implementation  of  the  Common  European
    Asylum System" in Romania.  Even if she had done so, we would not  have
    found that those materials came anywhere near meeting the NS test.

54.   Instead, Ms Jegarajah based  the  appellant's  case  on  the  specific
    evidence of what had happened to him in Romania, both  as  regards  his
    alleged  ill-treatment  there  and  as  regards  deficiencies  in   the
    application of asylum law and procedures  by  the  authorities  in  the
    actual circumstances of the appellant.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the
    respondent had not raised any credibility issues  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's allegations, as set out in the various  written  materials,
    including his witness statements, and those of his brother.   The  case
    was a very disturbing one and the appellant needed to be  brought  back
    to the United Kingdom from Romania so that  he  could  have  his  claim
    substantively determined. Although, in her earlier written submissions,
    Ms Jegarajah had suggested that the issue in the present case might  be
    suitable for a preliminary reference to the CJEU, she  did  not  pursue
    this on 2 July.

55.   In response to  Ms  Jegarajah's  submissions  on  2  July,  Mr  Auburn
    submitted that to accept what Ms Jegarajah had proposed would cause the
    collapse of the Dublin Regulation approach, which was based  on  mutual
    trust and confidence between Member States.


Discussion

56.   On this issue, we accept Mr Auburn's submissions and reject  those  of
    Ms Jegarajah. Even if the suggestion of a reference had  been  pursued,
    we consider the matter to be acte clair.

57.   There is nothing that has been brought to our attention  in  the  case
    law to support the submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant.   Ms
    Jegarajah provided us with a synopsis in English of an ECtHR case, IM v
    France (9152/09 - February  2012),  where  the  full  judgment  is  not
    available in English.  That case involved a Sudanese asylum  seeker  in
    France  who,  but  for  the  Strasbourg  Court's  application  of   its
    procedural rule 39, precluding his deportation from  France  while  the
    ECtHR proceedings were ongoing, would have been exposed to real risk of
    Article 3 ill-treatment.  In IM's case, the application of French fast-
    track asylum procedures had not given him the opportunity of having his
    claim properly considered and adjudicated.

58.   Ms Jegarajah drew attention to IM as  instancing  individual  failures
    in a Member State's asylum procedures, notwithstanding the  absence  of
    the sort of systemic deficiencies recently identified in  the  case  of
    Greece.  We do not, however, find that IM takes the present appellant's
    case any further forward.  No-one  doubts  that,  even  in  States  not
    experiencing "major operational problems", an individual applicant  may
    experience less than satisfactory treatment in the processing of his or
    her asylum claim.  That may be the case  with  the  present  appellant.
    But it would, in our view, undermine  the  Dublin  Regulation  and  the
    legislation which underpins it if an individual who had  been  returned
    to the State tasked with processing his or her asylum claim  were  able
    to have the returning State adjudicate upon (a) the  receiving  State's
    treatment of that person, as an asylum seeker;  and  (b)  whether  that
    person  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in   and,   hence,
    refoulement to, a non-Member State.

59.   Since in this scenario, the receiving  State  is,  ex  hypothesi,  one
    whose  adherence  to  the  Conventions  and  Charter   has   not   been
    successfully called into question on a  general  basis,  it  cannot  be
    right for the tribunals and courts of the United Kingdom to adjudicate,
    at a distance, upon the individual  facts  of  the  case.   The  proper
    course, as Mr Auburn submitted, is for the individual in the  receiving
    State to pursue redress in that State and, if that is not  forthcoming,
    in Strasbourg.  Indeed, that is precisely what  the  appellant  in  the
    present case has done.  We were told that proceedings in Strasbourg are
    currently stayed, pending the outcome of  the  present  proceedings  in
    this Tribunal.  That, in itself, demonstrates the dysfunctionality that
    will arise if Ms Jegarajah's submissions are correct.   Not  only  will
    the proper process of seeking  appropriate  redress  in  the  ECtHR  be
    subverted: the prospect arises  of  the  judicial  authorities  of  two
    Member States being simultaneously  engaged  in  determining  the  same
    individual's asylum claim.

60.   It may be argued that, on the facts of the present  case,  no  further
    judicial or other proceedings in  respect  of  the  appellant's  asylum
    claim are likely in Romania. If, as we were  informed,  the  ECtHR  has
    become seized of the matter, this would suggest  domestic remedies have
    been exhausted. On looking more closely,  however,  that  is  far  from
    certain.  We have already noted the reference in one of  the  Court  of
    Appeal documents to a third asylum claim being made  by  the  appellant
    and being (in January 2012 at least) ongoing.  We do not  know  whether
    anything has come of that. But, in any event, we  have  not  been  told
    (and do not  know)  if  any  appeal  against  an  adverse  decision  is
    possible.  Quite apart from this, we  know  from  the  processes  which
    obtain in the United Kingdom that, even when an  asylum  applicant  has
    become "appeal rights exhausted", legal challenges based on an asserted
    fear of persecution may still be possible.  In short,  if  we  were  to
    accept the appellant's submissions on this issue, United Kingdom courts
    and tribunals would risk expending time and effort on  resolving  cases
    that could be properly resolved in the receiving State.

61.   In such a scenario, judicial fact-finders in the United Kingdom  would
    face the  obvious  problem  that,  unlike  their  counterparts  in  the
    receiving State, they will be unable to receive oral evidence from  the
    appellant who is present in their courtroom.  They would, therefore, be
    highly likely to be in a worse position to make sustainable findings of
    fact, compared with the court or tribunal in the receiving  State.   Ms
    Jegarajah's response to this was that the effect of  our  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal could be limited to ensuring that he was returned to
    the United Kingdom, where his asylum claim could then be  substantively
    considered by the respondent.  That solution, however, would do nothing
    to prevent major damage occurring to the "principle  of  mutual  trust"
    identified in NS.

62.   We  do  not  rule  out  the  possibility  of  evidence  concerning  an
    individual's  position  in  the  receiving  State  playing  a  part  in
    supporting a case based on  "systemic  deficiency"  evidenced  by  "the
    regular  and  unanimous  reports  of   international   non-governmental
    organisations".  Indeed, it is hardly  likely  that  a  case  would  be
    advanced on such a basis, which did not involve an appellant in an  out
    of country appeal under Schedule 3 asserting that he or  she  had  been
    personally subjected to improper treatment in the receiving State  (but
    see paragraphs 63 and 64 below).  Nevertheless, the consequence of  our
    conclusion that paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 falls to be  read  down  only
    where such a systemic deficiency is established  is  that  it  will  be
    unnecessary for the appellant to show he or she has been  subjected  to
    such treatment in the receiving State. The Tribunal will find that  the
    immigration decision appealed is not in accordance with the  law,  with
    the consequence that it will  be  for  the  respondent  to  secure  the
    appellant's return to the United Kingdom, where his or her claim to  be
    in  need  of  international  protection  will  then  be   substantively
    considered by the respondent and, if necessary, determined  on  appeal.
    In short, the result will be as described by Ms Jegarajah (paragraph 61
    above); but only where a systemic deficiency in the receiving State has
    been established.

63.  We should say that, had the  appellant's  case  been  advanced  on  the
    basis that there is currently a relevant systemic deficiency in Romania
    and if (contrary to our conclusion in the preceding paragraph), we  had
    been required to make findings regarding the appellant's situation,  we
    would have had considerable  difficulty  establishing  the  appellant's
    individual  circumstances   in   that   country.   Notwithstanding   Ms
    Jegarajah's submission that the respondent had not taken issue with the
    appellant's credibility, there are manifest problems in  accepting  the
    appellant's allegations regarding his  treatment,  which  the  Tribunal
    could not properly ignore, and which the respondent could not  properly
    be said to be debarred from raising (subject to  procedural  fairness).
    As we have seen, he has given two significantly different  accounts  of
    how he left Romania for Sri Lanka.  His description of the attitude and
    behaviour of the Romanian  authorities  does  not  fit  well  with  the
    material which he has seen fit to adduce  from  those  authorities;  in
    particular, in relation  to  his  alleged  inability  to  make  himself
    understood through an interpreter.  At pages 44 and 45 of the larger of
    the appellant's bundles, there is a "To whom  it  may  concern"  letter
    dated 28 November 2011 from Manuela Josan, who  states  that  he  is  a
    "solicitor in Romania".  Whether or not this letter has been translated
    from Romanian into English is unclear.   At  any  event,  it  bears  no
    letter  heading.   It  repeats  the  appellant's  allegation  that  the
    Romanian immigration authorities "will not properly consider his asylum
    claim as there is no interpreter facility".  Mr  Josan,  however,  sets
    out in some detail  what  the  appellant  "told  me",  as  regards  his
    treatment in detention, his trip to the United Kingdom  and  return  to
    Romania and his need for medical treatment and support.  How  Mr  Josan
    was able to converse with the appellant is unexplained.

64.   These problems seem  to  us  to  underscore  the  correctness  of  the
    approach based on systemic deficiency. In an out of country  appeal  of
    the present kind, the Tribunal does not need to make findings about the
    credibility of the individual appellant in relation to his  experiences
    in the receiving State or in the "home" State; and it will  usually  be
    sensible for the Tribunal to decline to do so.

65.   Thus, to reiterate, we find that paragraph 6  of  Schedule  3  to  the
    2004 Act falls to be qualified or read down only where there is  shown,
    on the basis of the kinds of evidence identified in NS, to  be  in  the
    receiving State a "systemic deficiency in the asylum procedure  and  in
    the reception conditions of asylum seekers" in that State.  Where  such
    evidence is lacking, the Tribunal must apply paragraph 6,  without  any
    qualification.  It is not permissible to read down  that  provision  on
    the basis only of evidence concerning the individual appellant.

66.   The effect of our finding is that the same area of enquiry applies  to
    appeals governed by  Schedule 3 as it does  in  judicial  review  of  a
    respondent's decision to certify under paragraph 5 of Schedule 3, prior
    to a person's removal from the United Kingdom.  Ms Jegarajah  submitted
    that it was not appropriate to assess the ambit of paragraph  6,  which
    concerns an appeal, by reference to such a judicial  review.   We  have
    not done  so.   Rather,  the  principles  of  EU  law  that  drive  the
    conclusion we have reached in relation to paragraph 6 are, on analysis,
    the same as inform the Administrative Court's approach  to  pre-removal
    judicial review.

67.   The consequence of the two approaches being the same  means  that,  in
    an appeal where a "systemic deficiency" is being asserted, the Tribunal
    should have regard to any relevant findings made in the course  of  any
    judicial review proceedings that may have been brought by the person in
    question against the removal decision, prior  to  removal.   Where  the
    Administrative  Court  has  specifically  addressed  this  issue,   the
    individual is subsequently removed and then brings an  out  of  country
    appeal subject to Schedule 3, the Tribunal should regard  the  findings
    of the Court as a starting point and as likely to be  authoritative  on
    the issue of systemic deficiency in the  receiving  State,  insofar  as
    those findings were based on the same or similar evidence as that which
    is now before the Tribunal.

68.   Mr Auburn submitted that there is  no  obligation  on  a  Tribunal  to
    consider evidence based on "events alleged to have  taken  place  after
    [the removal decision] was made and acted  upon".   We  do  not  agree.
    Insofar as evidence emerges post-removal, in the context of an  appeal,
    which demonstrates that there are now  (or  can  now  be  seen  to  be)
    systemic deficiencies of the kind with  which  we  are  concerned,  the
    Tribunal must engage with that evidence (section 82(4) of the 2002 Act;
    LS (Gambia) [2005] UKAIT 00085).

69.    Applying  these  legal  principles  to  the  circumstances   of   the
    appellant's case, although there is a valid appeal before us (as  there
    was before the First-tier Tribunal), the grounds sought to be  advanced
    by the appellant are grounds which he is  precluded  from  bringing  by
    reason of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act.  It  follows  that
    the appellant's appeal must be dismissed.


Decision

70.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal having  been  set  aside,
    we re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.

71.   With the agreement of the parties, we make an order under rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public to identify the appellant.






                               Signed
                                   Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane



                                  SCHEDULE

Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

82.   Right of appeal: general

    (1)    Where an immigration decision is made in respect of a person  he
         may appeal [to the Tribunal].


    (2)    In this Part 'immigration decision' means -
         (a)      refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,
         (b)      refusal of entry clearance,
         (c)      refusal of a certificate of entitlement under  section  10
             of this Act,
         (d)      refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in the
             United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person
             has no leave to enter or remain,
         (e)      variation of a person's leave to enter or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom if when the variation takes effect  the  person
             has no leave to enter or remain,
         (f)      revocation under section 76  of  this  Act  of  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom,
         (g)      a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions  under  [section  10(1)(a),  (b),
             (ba) or (c)] of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  (c.33)
             (removal of person unlawfully in United Kingdom),
         (h)      a decision that an illegal entrant is to be  removed  from
             the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8  to
             10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971  (c.77)  (control
             of entry: removal),
         [(ha)    a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  section  47  of   the
             Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 (removal: persons
             with statutorily extended leave),]
         (i)      a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions given by virtue of paragraph  10A
             of that Schedule (family),
         [(ia)    a decision that a person is to be removed from the  United
             Kingdom by way of directions under paragraph 12(2) of Schedule
             2 to the Immigration Act 1971 (c.77) (seamen and aircrews),]
         [(ib)    a decision to make an order under section 2A of  that  Act
             (deprivation of right of abode),]
         (j)      a decision to make a deportation order under section  5(1)
             of that Act, and
         (k)      refusal to revoke a deportation order under  section  5(2)
             of that Act.


    (3)    ...


    [(3A)  Subsection (2)(j) does  not  apply  to  a  decision  to  make  a
         deportation order which states that it is made in  accordance  with
         section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007; but -
         (a)      a decision that section 32(5) applies  is  an  immigration
             decision for the purposes of this Part, and
         (b)      a reference in this Part to an appeal against an automatic
             deportation order is  a  reference  to  an  appeal  against  a
             decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  section   32(5)
             applies.]


    (4)    The right of appeal under  subsection  (1)  is  subject  to  the
         exceptions and limitations specified in this Part.

...

84.   Grounds of appeal

    (1)    An appeal under section 82(1) against  an  immigration  decision
         must be brought on one or more of the following grounds-
         (a)      that the decision is not in  accordance  with  immigration
             rules;
         (b)      that the decision is unlawful by virtue of section 19B  of
             the Race Relations Act 1976 (c.74) (discrimination  by  public
             authorities);
         (c)      that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (public authority not to  act  contrary
             to Human Rights Convention) as  being  incompatible  with  the
             appellant's Convention rights;
         (d)      that the appellant is an EEA national or a member  of  the
             family of an  EEA  national  and  the  decision  breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the Community Treaties in respect  of
             entry to or residence in the United Kingdom;
         (e)      that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with  the
             law;
         (f)      that the person taking the decision should have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by immigration rules;
         (g)      that removal of the appellant from the United  Kingdom  in
             consequence of  the  immigration  decision  would  breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or
             would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998
             as being incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights.


    (2)    In subsection (1)(d) 'EEA national' means a national of a  State
         which is a contracting party  to  the  Agreement  on  the  European
         Economic Area signed at Oporto on 2 May 1992 (as it has effect from
         time to time).


    (3)    An appeal under section 83 must be brought on the  grounds  that
         removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would  breach  the
         United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.


    (4)    An appeal under section 83A must be brought on the grounds  that
         removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would  breach  the
         United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.]


...

86.   Determination of appeal

    (1)    This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1) [,  83  or
         83A.]


    (2)    [the Tribunal] must determine -
         (a)      any matter raised as a ground of appeal (whether or not by
             virtue of section 85(1)), and
         (b)      any matter which section 85 requires [it] to consider.


    (3)    [the Tribunal] must allow the appeal in so far  as  [it]  thinks
         that -
         (a)       a decision against which the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
             treated as being brought was not in accordance  with  the  law
             (including immigration rules), or
         (b)      a discretion exercised in making a decision against  which
             the appeal is brought or is treated as  being  brought  should
             have been exercised differently.


    (4)    For the purposes of subsection (3)  a  decision  that  a  person
         should be removed from the United Kingdom under a  provision  shall
         not be regarded as unlawful if it could have been lawfully made  by
         reference to removal under another provision.


    (5)    In so far as subsection (3) does not apply, [the Tribunal] shall
         dismiss the appeal.


    (6)     Refusal  to  depart  from  or  to  authorise   departure   from
         immigration rules is not the  exercise  of  a  discretion  for  the
         purposes of subsection (3)(b).


...

92.   Appeal from within United Kingdom: general

    (1)    A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is  in  the
         United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind to which this section
         applies.


    (2)    This  section  applies  to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision of a kind specified in section 82(2)(c), (d), (e), (f)  [,
         (ha)] and (j).


    [(3)   This section also applies to an appeal against refusal of  leave
         to enter the United Kingdom if -
         (a)      at the time of the refusal the appellant is in the  United
             Kingdom, and
         (b)      on his arrival in the United  Kingdom  the  appellant  had
             entry clearance.


    (3A)   This subsection applies to a refusal of leave to enter which  is
         a deemed refusal  under  paragraph  2A(9)  of  Schedule  2  to  the
         Immigration Act 1971 (c.77) resulting from cancellation of leave to
         enter by an immigration officer -
         (a)      under paragraph 2A(8) of that Schedule, and
         (b)      on the grounds  specified  in  paragraph  2A(2A)  of  that
             Schedule.


    (3C)   This subsection applies to a refusal of  leave  to  enter  which
         specifies that the grounds for refusal are that the leave is sought
         for a purpose other than that specified in the entry clearance.


    (3D)   This section also applies to an appeal against refusal of  leave
         to enter the United Kingdom if at  the  time  of  the  refusal  the
         appellant -
         (a)      is in the United Kingdom,
         (b)      has a work permit, and
         (c)      is any of the following (within the meaning of the British
             Nationality Act 1981 (c.61)) -
             (i) a British overseas territories citizen,
             (ii)      a British Overseas citizen,
             (iii)     a British National (Overseas),
             (iv)      a British protected person, or
             (v) a British subject.]


    (4)    This section also applies to an appeal  against  an  immigration
         decision if the appellant -
         (a)      has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim,  while
             in the United Kingdom, or
         (b)      is an EEA national or a member of the  family  of  an  EEA
             national and makes a claim to the Secretary of State that  the
             decision breaches the appellant's rights under  the  Community
             Treaties in respect of entry to or  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom.


...


Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004

...

33.   Removing asylum seeker to safe country

    (1)    Schedule 3 (which  concerns  the  removal  of  persons  claiming
         asylum to countries known to protect refugees and to respect  human
         rights) shall have effect.


    (2)    ...


    (3)    ...


...

                                           SCHEDULE 3

                                   PART I

                                INTRODUCTORY

1.-   (1)        In this Schedule -

         'asylum claim' means a claim by a person that to remove him from or
         require him to leave the United Kingdom  would  breach  the  United
         Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention,
         'Convention rights'  means  the  rights  identified  as  Convention
         rights by section 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (whether or
         not in relation to a State that is a party to the Convention),
         'human rights claim' means a claim by a person that to  remove  him
         from or require him to leave the United Kingdom would  be  unlawful
         under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority  not
         to act contrary to  Convention)  as  being  incompatible  with  his
         Convention rights,
         'immigration appeal' means an appeal under  section  82(1)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c.41) (appeal against
         immigration decision), and
         'the Refugee Convention'  means  the  Convention  relating  to  the
         Status of Refugees done at Geneva on 28 July 1951 and its Protocol.


    (2)     In  this  Schedule  a  reference  to  anything  being  done  in
         accordance with the Refugee Convention is a reference to the  thing
         being done in accordance with the  principles  of  the  Convention,
         whether or not be a signatory to it.


                                   PART 2


              FIRST LIST OF SAFE COUNTRIES (Refugee Convention
                            AND HUMAN RIGHTS (I))


2.    This Part applies to -

    (a)    Austria,    (n)  Italy,
    (b)    Belgium,    (o)  Latvia,
    [(ba)  Bulgaria]   (p)  Lithuania,
    (c)    Republic of Cyprus,    (q)  Luxembourg,
    (d)    Czech Republic,  (r)   Malta,
    (e)    Denmark,    (s)  Netherlands,
    (f)    Estonia,    (t)  Norway,
    (g)    Finland,    (u)  Poland,
    (h)    France,     (v)  Portugal,
    (i)    Germany,    [(va)      Romania]
    (j)    Greece,     (w)  Slovak Republic,
    (k)    Hungary,    (x)  Slovenia,
    (l)    Iceland,    (y)  Spain, and
    (m)    Ireland,    (z)  Sweden.


3.    (1)   This paragraph applies for the purposes of the determination  by
         any person, tribunal or court whether a  person  who  has  made  an
         asylum claim or a human rights claim may be removed -

         (a)      from the United Kingdom, and
         (b)      to a State of which he is not a national or citizen.


    (2)    A State to which this Part applies shall be treated, in  so  far
         as relevant to the question mentioned in sub-paragraph  (1),  as  a
         place -


         (a)      where a person's life and liberty are  not  threatened  by
             reason of his race, religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
             particular social group or political opinion,
         (b)      from which a person will not be sent to another  State  in
             contravention of his Convention rights, and
         (c)      from which a person will not  be  sent  to  another  State
             otherwise than in accordance with the Refugee Convention.


4.    Section 77 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (c.41)
    (no removal while claim for asylum pending) shall not prevent a  person
    who has made a claim for asylum from being removed -

    (a)    from the United Kingdom, and
    (b)    to a State to which this Part applies;


    provided that the Secretary of State certifies that in his opinion  the
    person is not a national of citizen of the State.


5.-   (1)   This paragraph applies where the Secretary  of  State  certifies
         that -

         (a)      it is proposed to remove a person to a State to which this
             Part applies, and
         (b)      in the Secretary of State's opinion the person  is  not  a
             national or citizen of the State.


    (2)    The person may not bring an  immigration  appeal  by  virtue  of
         section 92(2) or  (3)  of  that  Act  (appeal  from  within  United
         Kingdom: general).


    (3)    The person may not bring an  immigration  appeal  by  virtue  of
         section 92(4)(a) of that Act (appeal from  within  United  Kingdom:
         asylum or human rights) in reliance on -


         (a)      an asylum claim which asserts that to remove the person to
             a specified State to which this Part applies would breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention, or
         (b)      a human rights claim in so  far  as  it  asserts  that  to
             remove the person to a specified  State  to  which  this  Part
             applies would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
             Act 1998 because of the possibility of removal from that State
             to another State.


    (4)    The person may not bring an  immigration  appeal  by  virtue  of
         section 92(4)(a) of that Act in reliance on a human rights claim to
         which  this  sub-paragraph  applies  if  the  Secretary  of   State
         certifies that the claim is clearly unfounded; and the Secretary of
         State shall certify  a  human  rights  claim  to  which  this  sub-
         paragraph applies unless satisfied that the claim  is  not  clearly
         unfounded.


    (5)    Sub-paragraph (4) applies to a human rights claim if, or  in  so
         far as, it asserts a matter  other  than  that  specified  in  sub-
         paragraph (3)(b).


6.    A  person  who  is  outside  the  United  Kingdom  may  not  bring  an
    immigration appeal on any ground that is inconsistent with  treating  a
    State to which this Part applies as a place -

    (a)    where a person's life and liberty are not threatened  by  reason
         of his race, religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
         social group or political opinion,
    (b)    from which a person  will  not  be  sent  to  another  State  in
         contravention of his Convention rights, and
    (c)    from which a person will not be sent to another State  otherwise
         than in accordance with the Refugee Convention.


