
                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                      |Appeal Number: AA/05898/2015        |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 September 2016                        |On 5th December 2016          |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 KARWAN [J]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A. Chohan, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iran, of Kurdish ethnicity, born on 6
August 1997. He arrived in the United Kingdom aged 16 on 18 December 2013
and claimed asylum, on the basis that he and his father had been supporting
the PJAK peshmerga by providing them with food, as a result of which the
Appellant's father was arrested and his mother then arranged for the
Appellant to leave Iran for fear that he too would be arrested. His asylum
application was refused on 19 March 2015 and his appeal against this
decision was dismissed by FtTJ Ferguson in a decision promulgated on 3
September 2015. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 3
December 2015 and, in a decision dated 26 February 2016, following a
hearing on 16 February 2016, DUTJ Hall found a material error of law and
adjourned the appeal for a hearing de novo with two findings preserved viz
(i) the finding on the Appellant's Iranian nationality and (ii) the extent
of his co-operation with the authorities regarding tracing his family does
not weigh heavily in his favour [28]. At [18] DUTJ Hall held: "findings
need to be made regarding the involvement of the Appellant and his father
with PJAK and submissions need to be made by both parties in relation to
that involvement and in relation to risk on return, taking into account any
background evidence to be relied upon."

2. The resumed appeal came before me for hearing on 25 April 2016 when it
was adjourned to 14 September 2016, in order for the Appellant to find new
representatives, owing to a dispute about the differing signatures on the
Appellant's witness statements of 1 April 2014 and 29 June 2015 prepared by
his previous solicitors, which raised a potential conflict of interest.

Hearing

3. The Appellant was called to give evidence and he confirmed that the
contents of his witness statement of 8 September 2016 were true and
accurate. He stated that there was no-one from Social Services with him on
1 April 2014 but there was a duty social worker with him on 29 June 2015.
He denied that the signature upon the statement of 1 April 2014 was his,
whereas the signature on the statement of 29 June 2015 was his signature.
He stated that he had only realized that the signature on 1 April 2014 was
not his at the last hearing (25 April 2016) when it had been shown to him.

4. The Appellant was asked about family tracing and said that he had
provided all the information he knew about his parents and the distance of
his village from town. He said that he had last spoken to his mother with
the help of the agent when he was in Turkey; that he did not have her
telephone number but the agent had it and he has had no contact with her
since. He left the agent in Turkey.

5. The Appellant stated that he did not attend school in Iran and that he
could only read and write in English, having learned English at college in
the United Kingdom. He said he was unable to read and write in Farsi
although he spoke it a little and his mother tongue was Kurdish Sorani,
which he spoke with his parents but he could not read or write in that
language. He confirmed that he had an identity document in Iran, which
contained his name and his age but the agent had taken it and destroyed it
in Turkey. When asked about his father, the Appellant stated that he had
been arrested and that his mother told him this when he was in Turkey. She
did not say why he had been arrested but the Appellant knew that he was
helping PJAK by taking food to them.

6.  In cross-examination by Mr Kotas, the Appellant was again asked about
the signatures on his witness statements when he confirmed his previous
evidence in examination-in-chief. Discrepancies between the statements were
put to him viz in his statement of 29.6.15 at [10] he said he only found
out that his father had been arrested when he was in Turkey whereas in the
1.4.14 statement at [13] he said when he got home his mother told him his
father had been arrested. The Appellant stated that when he went back his
mother told him security forces were looking for his father. Questions 107-
111 of the interview record were put to him:
"Q107 do you remember when your father was arrested?
A. About 1 month before I left
Q.108 - where were you?
A. At my workplace
Q 109- in the mountains?
Yes
Q 110 - where was your father?
A. At home
Q111 - what time of day?
A.  I don't know - one day I returned home it was 5 o'clock and my mother
explained what had happened"

7. Mr Kotas put to the Appellant that it was very clear from this that his
mother explained that his father had been arrested, to which the Appellant
responded that he did not know he was arrested when he was in Iran and that
he only knew they were looking for him. He only found that out in Turkey.
Mr Kotas then stated that his understanding all along is that the Appellant
had resiled from his 2015 statement not his 2014 statement but today this
seemed to be the other way around. He sought to rely on the Home Office
Presenting Officer's notes of the First tier Tribunal hearing where only
the 2014 statement was relied upon. A fax from Duncan Lewis with attendance
notes from Sultan Lloyd dated 1.4.14 and 29.6.15 was also adduced in
evidence. The Appellant confirmed that his mother told him that his father
was arrested when he was in Turkey. The following extract from page 6 of
the attendance note in relation to 1 April 2014 was read to the Appellant:

 "when did you find out he had been arrested?
When I came home that day my mum told me I told you not to see these people
and not to do that job. Your dad arrested today. Two big problems one is
smuggling and one is seeing PJAK. My mother told me like that."

The Appellant, when asked to comment, stated that his mother was not sure
his father had been arrested but thought he would be for the reasons she
gave. He found out exactly when he was in Turkey.

8. The Appellant confirmed that he had told the interviewing officer that
he was a shepherd and at Question 38 of the AIR he said he did this from
the age of 7 or 8 until leaving Iran. Mr Kotas put to the Appellant that he
was unable in interview to say how long a sheep is pregnant for before
giving birth, to which he responded that this was his mother's job not his
and he just looked after the sheep: "We would take them home to the garden
when they were pregnant." He stated that he did not know what breed of
sheep they had: "there are no breeds of sheep - a sheep is a sheep." He
stated that he did not know what type of vaccinations they had. When Mr
Kotas put it to the Appellant that he was never a sheep farmer he insisted
that what he said was true.

9. Mr Kotas asked the Appellant whether there was an arrest warrant out for
his arrest in Iran [D34 of Respondent's bundle at question 154] which he
confirmed, stating that his mother told him whilst he was in Turkey. He
said that they sent that arrest warrant for his father and when asked if
his mother told him that there was an arrest warrant for him he stated that
he was very young and did not remember. He said that he did not have a copy
of the arrest warrant.

10. The Appellant confirmed that he had not spoken to his mother for about
three years and that, whilst there was a landline in the family house in
Iran, he did not take the landline number when he fled because he was so
worried about his life at that time he did not think of anything. He
confirmed that the agent he left Iran with was the same agent he had in
Turkey and that he had telephoned his mother when he was in Turkey, with
the help of the agent; that his mother had given her number to the agent,
not him and he did not think to ask the agent for the number. He said he
did not expect to come over here and never see her again or call her again.


11. The Appellant confirmed that alcohol is illegal in Iran and that his
father smuggled alcohol despite severe penalties for so doing, in order to
give the family an income. He did not know how often or how his father
crossed into Iraq. The Appellant stated that the authorities did look for
him when they arrested his father and that he did not know why the
authorities did not go to the mountain to look for him; they knew he was
helping as well but that time they came to arrest his father. [15] of the
Appellant's statement of 1.4.14 was put to him "when I was hiding at this
house my mother told me the authorities were looking for me" and he was
asked whether his mother came to that house to tell him and why had his
mother hidden him in the house to which he replied that she expected the
authorities to arrest him as well, because she knew he was the son of his
father who had been was arrested and this is why she wanted to send him out
to safety, because she was afraid for his life.

12. There was no re-examination.

13. In his submissions, Mr Kotas adopted the contents of the refusal letter
of 23 March 2015. He submitted that the Appellant is not a credible witness
and that, even giving credit to his age, immaturity and lack of education,
he claims to be a rural person and shepherd but knows nothing about sheep;
it was put to him in interview and he was unable to answer. He sought to
rely on discrepancies between the 2014 and 2015 statements and submitted
that the Appellant has, in effect, changed his evidence depending on who he
last spoke to. He sought to rely on the note of Sally Coles (the Presenting
Officer at the FtT hearing) where the focus was only on the asylum
interview record and the 2014 statement. At the current hearing the
Appellant has sought to resile from his 2014 statement and rely on the 2015
statement. The
attendance note from his previous solicitors directs contradicts when he
found out his father had been arrested and goes to very heart of his claim.
The 2014 statement and Asylum Interview Record do accord and what simply
happened is that he changed his instructions and his evidence. In terms of
the arrest warrant there is no evidence of this. The Appellant failed to co-
operate with tracing. He would lead the Upper Tribunal to believe that the
agent was given his mother's number but did not think to take her number
when he came to the UK, despite spending $15,000 getting to the UK. Mr
Kotas submitted that the Appellant is an economic migrant seeking to do
better in the UK. Even if his account is true, which he did not accept, the
Appellant provided very low level support for the peshmergas and would not
be at risk as a failed asylum seeker cf. SSH & HR (illegal exit failed
asylum seeker) 2016 UKUT 308 (IAC).

14. In his submissions, Mr Chohan reminded me that the finding by the FtTJ
that the Appellant is Iranian had been preserved. He submitted that the
Appellant is somebody who would be drawn to the attention of the
authorities in Iran because of his own involvement or his father's
activities assisting the Peshmerga. His account is overall consistent with
his instructions to his solicitors and his Screening Interview. Even with
the confusion over the statements it is the case that he did not attend his
solicitors on 1.4.14 and Social Services have confirmed that they did not
go with him, as is confirmed in the attendance note from his former
solicitors. Mr Chohan submitted that this was not a huge discrepancy and
the core of the claim is the same. He submitted that the law does not
operate exactly like the UK and the Iranian authorities can bundle him off
on suspicion because alcohol smuggling is in itself is a criminal offence.
His association with the Peshmerga, who are Kurds acting in defiance of the
authorities, are always looking for new sources of support for their
guerilla army and who better to support them but local people. The supply
chain is not traceable. His mother confirmed that his father had been
arrested when he spoke to her in Turkey.
In terms of co-operating with tracing, the Appellant has given an address,
nearby city and his mother's name and age and has given all the essential
information. It is not clear whether the Red Cross or IOM have a presence
in that part of Iran. He submitted that there is a reasonable likelihood of
persecution on account of the Appellant's association with the peshmerga
because his family's involvement is known to the authorities and the fact
he is Kurdish and speaks Sorani would put him at risk. Authorities would
make enquiries because they would want to know how he exited Iran without a
passport. He submitted that the appeal should be allowed on the basis of
danger to the Appellant's life and risk on return.

The Law

15. In order to qualify for protection as a refugee, the Appellant is
required to meet the provisions of the Refugee or Person in Need of
International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 and the
provisions set out in the Immigration Rules, both of which implement
Council Directive 2004/38/EC. Paragraph 339L of the Rules provides:

"339L. It is the duty of the person to substantiate the asylum claim or
establish that they are a person eligible for humanitarian protection or
substantiate their human rights claim. Where aspects of the person's
statements are not supported by documentary or other evidence, those
aspects will not need confirmation when all of the following conditions are
met:
    .             (i) the person has made a genuine effort to substantiate
      their asylum claim or establish that they are a person eligible for
      humanitarian protection or substantiate their human rights claim;
    .             (ii) all material factors at the person's disposal have
      been submitted, and a satisfactory explanation regarding any lack of
      other relevant material has been given;
    .             (iii) the person's statements are found to be coherent and
      plausible and do not run counter to available specific and general
      information relevant to the person's case;
    .             (iv) the person has made an asylum claim or sought to
      establish that they are a person eligible for humanitarian protection
      or made a human rights claim at the earliest possible time, unless the
      person can demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and
      (v) the general credibility of the person has been established."

16. The appropriate standard of proof is that of a "real risk" or "serious
possibility" or "a reasonable degree of likelihood", which is a lower
standard than the balance of probabilities cf. Karanakaran [2000} EWCA Civ
11.

17. In order to show that he would be at risk of torture, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR, the
Appellant must establish to the same low standard that there is a real risk
of this occurring upon return to Iran.

18. Due to the Appellant's age at the time of events, there should be a
liberal application of the benefit of the doubt. Paragraph 351 of the Rules
provides:

"351. A person of any age may qualify for refugee status under the
Convention and the criteria in paragraph 334 apply to all cases. However,
account should be taken of the applicant's maturity and in assessing the
claim of a child more weight should be given to objective indications of
risk than to the child's state of mind and understanding of their
situation. An asylum application made on behalf of a child should not be
refused solely because the child is too young to understand their situation
or to have formed a well founded fear of persecution. Close attention
should be given to the welfare of the child at all times."

In KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552 (IAC) at [99] and [100] the
Upper Tribunal held: "we would concur at least that a child-sensitive
application of the lower standard of proof may still need to be given to
persons if they are recounting relevant events that took place at a time
when they were minors or were even younger minors."

100. It is also necessary to keep in mind that there is not necessarily a
"bright-line" for assessment of evidence in the context of asylum between
the stage at which a person is a minor and the stage at which he is an
adult: see e.g. KA (Afghanistan) and others v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 at [18]".

Decision

19. The scope of the appeal was narrowed by virtue of [18] of the error of
law decision by DUTJ Hall to focus upon the involvement of the Appellant
and his father with PJAK and risk on return, taking into account any
background evidence to be relied upon. The Appellant has been found to be
an Iranian national, of Kurdish ethnicity. Whilst it was accepted at [28]
of the decision of the FtTJ that he has co-operated with the authorities
regarding tracing his family it was found that this does not weigh heavily
in his favour.

20. Whilst Mr Kotas challenged the credibility of the Appellant's account,
his focus was on the underlying basis of claim ie that he worked as a
shepherd. Mr Kotas also identified discrepancies between the accounts the
Appellant has given at different times ie his asylum interview and his
statements of 1 April 2014 and 29 June 2015. One of these discrepancies in
particular is potentially material and that is when the Appellant was
informed by his mother that his father had been arrested. In his statement
of 1 April 2014 the Appellant stated: "[13] Around one month before I left
Iran I returned from the mountains like normal, at around 5pm, and my
mother told me my father had been arrested. She said that the authorities
had come to the house and taken him away. She said he was in big trouble
because of seeing the PJAK peshmergas and because of his smuggling." This
is consistent with the Appellant's account in his asylum interview at Q & A
107-117. However, in his statement of 29 June 2015 the Appellant stated:
"[9] I confirm that my mother was very worried as my father did not return
home my mother had a bad feeling that something bad was going to happen.
The following day the Iranian authorities come to the house and searched
from my father. After this my mother put me in a house and then arranged to
send me out of the country. 10. I only found out that my father had
actually been arrested when I was in Turkey. 11. I did not know what had
happened to my father and just knew that he was missing until my mother
told me after I arrived in Turkey that he had actually been arrested." In
his most recent statement to his current solicitors dated 8 September 2016,
the Appellant stated: "[15] Around one month before I left Iran I had
returned home fro work as normal. On this occasions, my mother told me that
the authorities had come to the house and had been looking for my father. I
knew that my father had been helping the PJAK and that he had also been
bringing alcohol from Iraq into Iran so I knew that this would be dangerous
for him. My mother said that someone must have involved the authorities
about what my father has involvement with these things. For that reason the
government is looking for my father." In his evidence before me, the
Appellant stated that his mother was not sure his father had been arrested
but thought he would be for the reasons she gave. He found out exactly when
he was in Turkey. He also denied signing the statement of 1 April 2014.

21. So there are two slightly varying accounts given at six different
times: 1 April 2014 (SEF statement) and 7 April 2014 (AIR) and 17 July 2015
(hearing before the FtT at [7](version 1) and 29 June 2015 (statement) and
9 September 2016 (statement) and 14 September 2016 (hearing before the
Upper Tribunal)(version 2). The discrepancy between the two versions was
not identified at the hearing before the FtT or by the Appellant's former
solicitors. A copy of the attendance note taken by the Appellant's former
solicitors on 1 April 2014 has been served. Whilst no social worker was
present, it appears from the interpreter's invoice that the attendance note
was prepared at a home visit with the Appellant and, from the attendance
note, that the statement was prepared at the same time: "statement was
completed and read back to client. Client happy with statement and signed
the same." There is also an attendance note that 29 June 2015 which states
that a rebuttal statement was done with the client and read through and
signed by him. The signature that appears on the statement of 1.4.14 [at C5
of the Respondent's bundle] is not identical to either the signature that
appears on the Appellant's subsequent statement of 29 June 2015 nor his
statement of 9 September 2016, taken by his current solicitors shortly
before the hearing. However, given the Appellant's young age and the fact
that he was illiterate prior to arriving in the UK, I do not place a great
deal of weight on the differing signatures, given that signatures by young
people can evolve over time. I find that, despite his disavowal of the
signature on the statement of 1.4.14 that the Appellant is the signatory of
all three statements. What the discrepancy comes down to, in essence, is
whether one month before he left Iran his mother told the Appellant that
the authorities had been to the family home and his father had been
arrested or whether she told him that the authorities had been to look for
his father and she feared he would be arrested, because of alcohol
smuggling and suspected support for PJAK. When he reached Turkey and was
able to contact his mother she confirmed that his father had been arrested.


22. I have concluded that the discrepancy between the two accounts is not
so material as to fundamentally undermine the Appellant's asylum claim,
bearing in mind the Appellant's age at the time of events and the
requirement to apply a child sensitive application of the lower standard of
proof and the fact that he was a minor at the time he applied for asylum,
provided his first statement and was interviewed by the Home Office;
provided his second statement and gave evidence before the FtT. I also bear
in mind that, prior to his arrival in the UK he had received no education
and at all material times the Appellant was providing his account through a
Kurdish Sorani interpreter and there is a serious possibility that there
was misinterpretation and/or a misunderstanding as to the chronology of
events.

23. Mr Kotas also sought to rely on the fact that the Appellant did not
take or obtain his mother's telephone number from the agent. Whilst I have
some difficulties accepting that the Appellant's mother would give her
telephone number to the agent but not to the Appellant himself, I do not
consider that this fundamentally undermines the credibility of the
Appellant' asylum claim as there may be good reasons as to why she acted in
such a manner eg to protect herself and/or her son if he were to be
detained by the Iranian authorities. I also place little weight on the fact
that the Appellant was unable to state the breed of sheep the family owned
or answer questions as to the gestation of sheep. This is because I very
much doubt that there is much variety in sheep breeds in the mountains of
north west Iran and because, as a child, the Appellant was assisting his
parents in caring for the sheep and it was his evidence, which I accept,
that when the sheep were pregnant they were brought to the family's garden
for his mother to care for.

24. In light of the fact that the Appellant was a minor at all material
times and bearing in mind that he has never attended school or received an
education prior to arriving in the United Kingdom, I apply the lower
standard of proof and accept the basis of his claim ie that his father was
involved in smuggling alcohol from Iraq to Iran and was a support of PJAK,
including proving PJAK peshmerga with food, a task that the Appellant also
carried out. In so finding, I bear in mind that the Danish Immigration
Service/Danish Refugee Council with regard to Iranian Kurds dated 30.9.13
report provides inter alia at 209 of the Appellant's bundle: "Regarding
illegal transport of goods and people across the border between Iran and
KRI, Yadgar A. Faraj, Erbil Residence Director, KRG confirmed that the
volume of illegal traffic of goods and people is high and a large number of
Iranian Kurds, including Iranian Kurdish political party activists, are
using the illegal paths to come to KRI or go back to Iran." I further find
that, in light of the background evidence, there is a serious possibility
that, if the Iranian authorities became aware of his father's activities -
both smuggling and assisting PJAK peshmerga - he would be at risk of
arrest. Therefore, I find that the Appellant's father was arrested as
claimed by the Iranian authorities.

25. The question is whether the Appellant would now be at risk on return to
Iran, after an absence of 3 years, on account of either his own and/or his
father's activities. The Appellant is from the village of Marughan or
Marzan, in Sardasht, Iran. The background evidence indicates that this is
in the West Azerbaijan area of Iran close to the border with Iraq and is
also in the general area of the Qandil mountains, which is where the
headquarters of PJAK is based. The report from the Austrian Federal
Ministry of the Interior concerning the Kurds, dated 17.11.15 provides at
83-84 of the Appellant's bundle: "The party itself claims it operates only
in the Kurdish region of Iran ... according to estimations PJAK has about
3000 fighters ... The PJAK can today be seen as the most active political
party inside Iran, although it is considered a terrorist organisation by
the Iranian government and therefore banned." The Joint report from the
Danish Immigration Service, Norwegian Landinfo and Danish Refugee Council
of 26.2.13 provides at 130 of the Appellant's bundle: "one hears more and
more of ordinary persons being pursued by the authorities because of family
members being members of PJAK, Komala or KDPI." And at 131: "It was
considered by the sources that PJAK is the most active organisation. PJAK
has entered into a ceasefire agreement with the Iranian government and
there had been no clear armed clashes recently. However, many cases have
been reported regarding imprisonment, torture, terrible prison conditions
and executions in Iran or PJAK members and supporters. It was further added
that an individual does not need to be a member of PJAK in order to be
pursued and that others somehow affiliated could face risks. Families of
PJAK members can also be at risk and face arrest and interrogations by the
authorities."

26. The Appellant's evidence is that he has been told that an arrest
warrant has been issued for him although there is no evidence in support of
this contention, which I do not find to be proved. In SSH & HR (illegal
exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC) the Upper
Tribunal considered the issue of risk on return to two Iranian Kurds on
account of illegal exit, being a failed asylum seeker and being
undocumented. Whilst the two appeals were dismissed, it is clear that this
was on the basis that they were not of adverse interest to the Iranian
authorities. The Upper Tribunal found at [34] that "being Kurdish was
relevant to how a returnee would be treated by the authorities" and "might
be an exacerbating factor for a returnee otherwise of interest." This
Appellant is undocumented and would have to apply to the Iranian Consulate
for a "barge obour"- a form of laissez passer in order to be re-admitted to
Iran. The Upper Tribunal accepted that a person returned on such a document
would be questioned [9] and that "if there are any particular concerns
arising from their previous activities either in Iran or in the United
Kingdom ... then there would be a risk of further questioning, detention
and potential ill-treatment." [23]. Applying the lower standard of proof, I
find that there is a real risk that the Appellant would be questioned on
his return to Iran, identified as a Kurd by virtue of his language and
place of birth and former residence and that he would then be identified as
the son of a man arrested for illegal smuggling and perceived support for
PJAK. Whether or not the Appellant admits to his own role in providing food
for the PJAK peshmergas, I find in light of the background evidence there
is a real risk that the Appellant would be subjected to ill-treatment which
would amount to persecution on the basis of perceived political
opinion/membership of a family perceived as supporting PJAK and/or
treatment in breach of Article 3 of ECHR.

27. The appeal is allowed on the basis that removal of the Appellant to
Iran would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under the
Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                      5 December 2016
