
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/08301/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2018                           |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     KSM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant arrived in Britain in February 2011  on  a  student  visa
    and thereafter received extensions of stay until  March  2016,  however
    her leave was curtailed in April  2014.   In  November  that  year  she
    applied for asylum and her application was refused on 13 May 2015.  The
    appellant  appealed.   Her  appeal  was  heard  in  June  2016,  but  a
    successful application was made  for  permission  to  appeal  and  that
    decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in a decision  promulgated
    on 20 December  2016.   The  appeal  was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and was heard on 3 January 2018 and dismissed.  Permission was
    again granted to appeal further to the Upper Tribunal and in a decision
    promulgated on 1 November 2018 I set aside that decision.  My  decision
    is annexed to this decision.

2.   I preserved two findings: that the appellant had been  an  attorney  in
    Sri Lanka, and that she had represented applicants in  applications  to
    the courts on human rights issues.  I directed  that,  save  for  those
    findings, the appeal be heard afresh in the Upper Tribunal.   In  these
    circumstances the appeal came before me on 13 December 2018.

3.   The appellant qualified as an attorney in 2007.  She  stated  that  she
    represented applicants in approximately twenty human rights claims  and
    named a number of those whom she had represented.  She stated that  she
    received anonymous, threatening phone calls telling her that she should
    not get involved in human rights work and should not represent  Tamils.
    The Secretary of State was unable to trace  court  proceedings  against
    the first person she said she represented, but could trace  proceedings
    against others whom she said she had represented, but  noted  that  two
    had still been detained in March 2013 and the third had  been  released
    in that month.  It was after representing those  three  that  she  said
    that unknown people had come to her office and pointed  a  gun  at  her
    head and threatened that she would be killed.

4.   She also referred to unknown people coming to the house where  she  was
    boarding and said that she had been "jumped on" and her room  "trashed"
    and her documents, including cases which she had brought home from  the
    office, set on fire.  She said  that  she  had  reported  this  to  the
    police,  but  she  did  not  believe  they  had  continued  with  their
    investigations.

5.   She said that in 2009 she had returned to her home village as  she  had
    been given notice to vacate her office premises.  She had continued  to
    commute to Colombo but had not taken on other new  clients  apart  from
    that relating to a Lasantha Wickamathunga who had published stories  in
    his paper about the cases where she had represented and she felt  under
    obligation to take on his case.  She said that unknown people had  come
    to her home when she had taken on the case.  The Secretary of State, in
    the letter of refusal, pointed out that, as her work was not  mentioned
    in his writings, there was no indication that  she  had  been  involved
    with Mr Wickamathunga.

6.   The appellant had gone on to say  that  in  April  2010  plain  clothes
    officers from the CID had come to her family home and told  her  family
    that she should hand herself over. They  had  threatened  to  rape  her
    sisters if they did not do so.  They had fired shots in the  house  and
    left.  The appellant then stayed with a friend in another town  and  at
    her senior lawyer's house until she left Sri Lanka  in  February  2011.
    The family had moved during this time but  the  authorities  found  out
    where they were.  She said that she had remained in Sri Lanka  for  ten
    months without being detected by the authorities.

7.   The appellant also claimed that since  she  had  been  in  Britain  her
    sister had  been  threatened  that  if  she  wanted  to  carry  on  her
    university studies the appellant must return to Sri Lanka and also that
    somebody had attempted to kidnap the appellant's sister.  She said that
    in January 2015 her brother had been taken away for questioning by  the
    authorities and had not been returned.

8.   The Secretary  of  State  did  not  consider  that  the  appellant  was
    credible and therefore refused the application.  It  is  of  note  that
    when interviewed the appellant said that she had never been arrested or
    charged, and asked if she had been subject to  an  arrest  warrant  she
    said she did not know, but it was  highly  likely  that  there  was  an
    arrest warrant because the authorities  had  been  searching  for  her.
    However, before the first hearing of her appeal  the  appellant  stated
    that she had discovered that a case had been filed against her  in  the
    Magistrates' Court in Colombo and a  warrant  issued  for  her  arrest.
    Certain documents relating to  that  were  produced,  the  first  being
    described by the First-tier Judge as a report to the Magistrates' Court
    in Colombo made by a Senior Inspector of the TID on 9 June 2012,  under
    reference number  B6214/12,  referring  to  the  appellant's  suspected
    activities in support of the LTTE.  The report appeared to  request  an
    arrest warrant and  a  request  for  an  order  to  the  Controller  of
    Immigration and Immigration to arrest her if she  tried  to  enter  the
    country.

9.   A letter from an attorney in Sri Lanka  was  also  produced.   He  said
    that he had been instructed by the appellant's father in  January  2015
    after the disappearance of her brother and that he had found  that  the
    authorities had filed an action against the appellant and that  he  had
    obtained certified copies of her case in the Magistrates' Court.  These
    documents  led  to  the  appeal  being  adjourned  briefly  while   the
    respondent obtained a document verification report which showed that on
    9 February 2016 a written request was faxed to the Director of the TID,
    the apparent  complainant,  to  ask  whether  a  court  case  with  the
    reference B6214/12 had been filed by the TID.  The reply was that  that
    reference did not relate to the TID and that no case had been filed  by
    them.

10.  The first First-tier Judge did not find the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    credible and in part relied  on  the  verification  report.   When  the
    appeal first went to the Upper Tribunal to a panel comprising the  then
    President,  Mr  Justice  McCloskey,  and  The  Honourable  Mrs  Justice
    Whipple, sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, the Tribunal focused
    on the issue of whether or not it was appropriate that  the  respondent
    should have  contacted  the  complainant  in  the  action  against  the
    appellant, but concluded that in any  event  the  judge  had  not  made
    sufficiently clear findings of fact.  The appeal was then  remitted  to
    the First-tier and it was the judgment of that second First-tier  Judge
    which I set aside.

11.  At the hearing of the appeal before me the appellant  relied  on  three
    witness statements, the first being dated 10 November 2015, the  second
    being dated 21 December 2017, and a further statement which was dated 6
    November 2018.  The first bundle of documents  produced  contained  the
    report to the Magistrate from  a  Senior  Inspector  of  the  Terrorist
    Investigation Division (TID) which gave considerable information  about
    the assertion that the appellant had been involved in  activities  with
    "Sinhala Koti" which it was asserted was the Sinhala counterpart of the
    LTTE.  The report argued that the appellant had misused her position as
    a lawyer in obtaining the release of LTTE suspects and that she had had
    connections with the LTTE since 2007.  The report is detailed and  ends
    with a request that an arrest warrant be issued.  There is a copy of  a
    letter from the Magistrate stating that he  had  issued  a  warrant  of
    arrest and asked the Immigration Controller to arrest  the  accused  if
    she tried to re-enter the country.   There was also  a  report  by  the
    appellant's father, dated April 2010, about the harassment which he and
    his family had suffered. A further report, dated 4 June 2016 related to
    damage  at  the  appellant's  parents'  house.   There  was  a  further
    affidavit from the appellant's mother relating to the harassment  which
    the family had suffered and about  the  abduction  of  the  appellant's
    brother.

12.  In the second bundle there is a letter from an attorney in  Delgoda  in
    Sri Lanka who said that she had gone  to  the  Magistrates'  Court  and
    spoken to the Chief Registrar who said  that  he  had  not  passed  any
    information to the High Commission and went on  to  say  that  she  had
    found that the document provided was a true and accurate  copy  of  the
    documents in the file of the court case number B/6214/12.   The  letter
    went on to say that the document verification report which alleged that
    the file B6214/12 had been filed for a "marriage-related  offence"  was
    completely wrong.  Marriage-related offences would not carry the letter
    B.  The document stated that the document verification report therefore
    could not be true.  Further documents related to the human rights cases
    with which it was alleged the appellant had been involved.

13.  The third bundle related to a further report  from  another  lawyer  in
    Sri Lanka setting out his visit  to  the  Colombo  Magistrates'  Court,
    which again confirmed that the report had been filed by  the  TID.  His
    report gave reasons why the document  verification  report  might  have
    said that that file related to a marriage-related offence, pointing out
    that there could have been a case number 6214 of  2012  relating  to  a
    claim for maintenance which was not  related  to  the  claim  B/6214/12
    which related to the report made by the TID.  A copy of the warrant  of
    arrest was also produced as well  as  a  report  to  the  Human  Rights
    Commission regarding the abduction of the appellant's brother.

14.  In cross-examination the appellant was asked by Ms Everett if  she  was
    instructing a lawyer in Sri Lanka about the charges against  her.   The
    appellant confirmed that she was, but that she was not  aware  that  he
    had told the court specifically that she was in  Britain.   She  stated
    that the fact that her home had been searched must have related to  the
    court case and that she  had  therefore  instructed  the  lawyer.   She
    explained that she had not been aware of the  original  arrest  warrant
    when she had made the  claim  for  asylum  because  she  had  not  been
    informed about it, and she had not instructed a lawyer then as she  did
    not have any clear evidence as the notice of summons had not been  sent
    to her, nor had anyone received it on her behalf.  She had  only  found
    out later through the lawyer that the warrant existed.

15.  She said that she had been in hiding and so the  police  had  not  been
    able to arrest her  before  she  left  Sri  Lanka.  She  described  the
    circumstances in which she had given up the human rights work  she  was
    doing, although she stated that she had felt under moral obligation  to
    carry on working on the case of Lasantha  Wickrematunga  after  he  was
    assassinated - because of the support that he had given to her she felt
    that she should support  his  editorial  staff  and  his  family.   She
    accepted that she was not mentioned in any of  his  articles  but  said
    there was no reason why she should have been.  No-one had as  yet  been
    convicted of his killing.

16.  She was then asked about her marriage  and  why  her  husband  had  not
    given evidence - her reason was that he had  cancer,  and  although  he
    knew of her work, he would not know about individual cases.   When  she
    was in hiding in Sri Lanka he had known where she was, but she had  not
    thought it necessary that he should give evidence regarding that period
    of her life.  She stated there was a lawyer involved in trying to  find
    what had happened to her brother but that no attempts had been made  to
    publicise the disappearance because of her mother's poor  health.   The
    last time that the authorities had come looking for  her  had  been  in
    January 2015.

17.  In summing up Ms Everett relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter  save
    for the preserved findings. She argued  that  the  appellant  had  been
    vague about her situation stating  that  it  was  surprising  that  the
    lawyer she instructed had not thought of informing the authorities that
    she was in Britain.  While  she  accepted  that  there  had  been  many
    disappearances in Sri Lanka, this appellant had the added advantage  of
    being Sinhalese and she suggested there was  no  real  evidence  of  an
    arrest warrant in 2014.  The country guidance case  of  GJ  and  others
    (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)
    referred  to  the   Sri   Lankan   authorities   having   sophisticated
    intelligence and therefore they should have known that she had left the
    country.  She also asked me to place weight on the fact the appellant's
    husband had not given evidence.  The fact  that  the  appellant  was  a
    lawyer did not mean that she would be at risk.

18.  In reply Mr Martin relied on his skeleton  argument  and  asked  me  to
    find that the respondent's verification reports were plainly deficient.
     He argued that there were clear reasons why it should be accepted that
    the appellant had a well-founded fear of persecution in Sri  Lanka  and
    that there was no reason why the TID should be trusted to give truthful
    evidence in respect of enquiries regarding arrest warrants  for  wanted
    individuals.  He pointed out moreover, that there was evidence that the
    appellant had visited detainees and that she had assisted the Legal Aid
    Foundation and the Human Rights Centre of the Bar  Association  of  Sri
    Lanka.

19.  He referred to the risk categories in GJ and  set  out  a  considerable
    amount of case law regarding the  approach  to  documents  produced  in
    immigration appeals.  He argued there was clear  evidence  that  should
    the appellant be detained on return she would suffer persecution for  a
    Convention reason.

Discussion

20.  The burden of proof lies on the appellant to show that there is a  real
    risk that she would suffer persecution on return to Sri Lanka.  I apply
    the detailed guidance set out by the Court of Appeal in the judgment in
    Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] INLR 122.

21.  In considering this case the first question before me is what  was  the
    nature of the appellant's work in Sri Lanka and, secondly, was there  a
    reasonable likelihood that that work could have led to  the  harassment
    she suffered before she left Sri  Lanka.    Thirdly,  I  must  consider
    whether or not the documentary evidence produced showed that there  was
    an attempt to obtain an arrest warrant against her and to put her on  a
    stop list should she re-enter Sri Lanka, and fourthly, whether  or  not
    there is a real risk that she would face persecution on return.

22.  I note the submissions of Ms Everett,  but  the  reality  is  that  the
    authorities  would  have  known  that  the  appellant  was  abroad  and
    therefore I consider there was no particular reason why the appellant's
    attorney should have informed them of  that,  and  secondly,  that  the
    appellant's husband did not give evidence.  The  reason  given  by  the
    appellant is that he has cancer and that that would  be  stressful  for
    him and he would not be able  to  state  anything  further.   There  is
    considerable evidence in the papers regarding the treatment which he is
    receiving, and I can therefore understand why she would not wish him to
    have the stress of giving evidence.  Even  so,  I  consider  that  that
    might have assisted her case.  I note Ms Everett did  not  stress  that
    the appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka on her  own  passport  and  I
    consider that she was right to do so.

23.  I have preserved the  findings  that  the  appellant  qualified  as  an
    attorney in Sri Lanka and that  she  dealt  with  human  rights  cases.
    There is considerable documentary evidence in the  papers  relating  to
    the work which she undertook and moreover the respondent was  aware  of
    the arrests of some of those whom she said she represented, and  indeed
    the death of Mr Wickrematunga.  Indeed,  I  accept,  having  heard  her
    evidence about her reasons for continuing with this case when  she  had
    effectively given up her other work. I can find no reason why her  work
    should have been mentioned by him as he  was  dealing  with  the  facts
    relating to the individuals who had been detained.

24.  When considering whether or not she would face  persecution  on  return
    harassment  I  take  into  account  the  guidance  given  in  GJ  which
    specifically states that:-

         "... (7)(b)   Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either   case,   have
                  criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its
                  human  rights  record,  or   who   are   associated   with
                  publications critical of the Sri Lankan government"

    are at real risk of persecution.

25.  I note moreover those whose names appear on a computerised "stop  list"
    accessible at the airport would be  stopped  and  handed  over  to  the
    appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities.   It  is  also  clear  from  that
    decision that those who are detained do suffer persecution, and  indeed
    also that disappearances "still continue and that the behaviour of  the
    Sri Lankan authorities when they search for individuals of interest  to
    them can be brutal".

26.  I now consider the events which took place after the appellant came  to
    Britain.  These relate both to visits to her home  by  the  authorities
    and also to the abduction of  her  brother.   I  note  the  documentary
    evidence produced relating to the latter event, and in  particular  the
    police reports made by the appellant's father and the affidavit of  her
    mother.  I consider that these, to  an  extent,  provide  corroborative
    evidence of what happened.  In considering that  evidence,  however,  I
    must consider the issue of whether the TID applied  for  a  warrant  to
    arrest the appellant or to put her on a stop  list.   When  considering
    the documentary evidence I apply the  principles  set  out  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed.  There is considerable evidence relating to the  credibility  of
    the TID report and the documents flowing therefrom, indeed, not only is
    the TID report before me, but also of course the document  verification
    report.  The document verification report asserts that the  TID  report
    is not genuine, placing weight on the court number of the document  and
    the assertions of the TID themselves that they  had  not  made  such  a
    report.  The reality is of course that the TID would have many  reasons
    to deny that such a report was made and to assert that the  report  put
    forward was not genuine.

27.  When I consider the issue surrounding the case number of the  report  I
    note the affidavits from the two attorneys instructed by the appellant.
     They refer to visits to the Magistrates' Court and I have to  consider
    whether or not the letters from the attorneys are dishonest, in  effect
    that they are lying about the procedure followed and  their  assertions
    of what they were told by the court or, of  course,  that  the  letters
    themselves  are  a  complete  fabrication  and  are  not  genuine.   In
    considering those documents I have to consider the very large number of
    documents which there are relating to the TID report  and  other  court
    documents which were produced.  I note the appropriate low standard  of
    proof. I find, having viewed  the documents in the round,  and   taking
    into account all the documentary evidence and the appellant's evidence,
    as well as the background documentation relating to  the  human  rights
    situation in Sri Lanka and the letters from the attorneys instructed by
    the appellant, and  having considered the very detailed report and  the
    comments of the TID thereon -and I would emphasise  that  it  is  clear
    from the TID  report  that  the  complaint  was  not  merely  that  the
    appellant was acting for LTTE supporters,  but  that  she  herself  was
    involved in some way over and above her professional  involvement  with
    their cases, (although the TID  report  does  not  go  into  particular
    details of that)-   I can  only  conclude  that  ,   on  balance,   the
    application  for  the  arrest  warrant  by  the   TID   including   the
    application for the "stop order", is genuine and therefore  that  there
    is an arrest warrant outstanding for the appellant and that  she  would
    be picked up on a return and then handed over  to  the  authorities.  I
    would add that taking  that  finding  into  account,  and  taking  into
    account the statements of the appellant's parents,  I  also  find  that
    there is a reasonable likelihood that her brother was picked up by  the
    authorities.  For or the above reasons, having set aside  the  decision
    of the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal I remake the decision and allow
    this appeal.



   Notice of Decision

    The decision of the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal, having  been  set
    side, I remake the decision and allow this appeal.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: [pic] Date: 31 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


                                   Annex:

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of Deputy
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A A Wilson, who in a determination
promulgated on 11 January 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a
decision of the Secretary of State made on 13 May 2015 to refuse her
application for asylum.

2.   It was accepted that the appellant was an attorney in Sri Lanka,
representing people making human rights claims against the Sri Lankan
government.  The judge referred to the relevant country guidance case of GJ
and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC)
and correctly stated that applications made by those who had worked as
lawyers in human rights claims required anxious scrutiny.

3.   The judge dealt at some length on the issue of whether or not an
attempt made by the respondent to verify a court document on which the
appellant relied by approaching a court in Sri Lanka was appropriate and it
appears that he placed weight on the fact that the verification report
indicated that the court document was not genuine and disregarded the
evidence of the appellant and members of her family, which had claimed that
harassment of members of the appellant's family and damage to the
appellant's property had taken place after she had come to Britain in 2011.

4.   The determination contains a very large number of what can most kindly
be described as typographical errors which means that it is difficult to
understand what the judge is finding or to what he is referring.  The
incoherence of those various points is concerning.  However, when the judge
writes in paragraph 12:

"Overall I am satisfied that the appellant as a junior lawyer did assist
and did take part in acting for persons accused of terrorist activities.  I
am satisfied however that this work the nature or confidence that places
her now at a real risk on return."

Simply, that sentence is unclear and appears to contradict the other
findings of the judge.

5.   It is trite law that in a determination a judge should deal with all
the evidence before him and should give reasons for his decision which can
be understood by an appellant.  That is clearly not the case here.  While
there are the typographical errors to which I have referred and indeed the
fact that the judge does not appear to give reasons for disregarding the
supporting evidence put forward by the appellant, what he writes in
paragraph 12 simply does not make sense.  Mr Tufan agreed that in these
circumstances it was appropriate that the decision of the First-tier Judge
should be set aside.

6.   I therefore now, having found this error of law in the determination,
set aside the judge's decision.  Given that this appeal has already been
considered once in the Upper Tribunal and remitted, it is appropriate that
the appeal remain in the Upper Tribunal for further determination.

Directions

(1)  The decision of the judge in the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
The appeal will remain in the Upper Tribunal for a hearing afresh on all
issues save that it is accepted that the appellant was an attorney in Sri
Lanka who represented applicants in applications to the courts on human
rights issues.

(2)  The appellant's Counsel must prepare a bundle of documents including
any affidavit evidence on which the appellant wishes to rely as well as a
skeleton argument setting out the appellant's case.  The bundle and the
skeleton argument must be served on the Tribunal and on the appellant's
representatives fourteen days before the resumed hearing of this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: [pic] Date: 26 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

