
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/11468/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|under rule 34 (P)                    |On 17 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     X V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 06  August  2015
    to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

2.   After some  considerable  delay  in  the  appeal  process  relating  to
    attempts to obtain permission to call witnesses remotely from  Albania,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in
    a decision promulgated on 03 October 2019.

3.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to apply relevant country guidance.

     ii) The First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account  material
         considerations and evidence and failed to make findings in  respect
         of material issues.

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  its
         findings.

     iv) The First-tier Tribunal  was  procedurally  unfair  in  relying  on
         points that were not put to the appellant to answer at the hearing.



      v) The lengthy delay in promulgating the decision cast  doubt  on  the
         safety of the credibility findings.

4.   The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal in an  order  dated  12
    December 2019. The hearing listed on 01 April 2020 was adjourned due to
    the Covid-19 pandemic. The Upper Tribunal reviewed the  file  and  sent
    directions to the parties on 04 June 2020. Further directions were sent
    on 03 August 2020 because there was no record of a  response  from  the
    respondent.

5.   The respondent responded to the  directions  on  21  August  2020.  The
    respondent accepted that there were material errors of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal decision in the following terms:

         "2.  Having perused the determination, the grounds of appeal to the
             First  and  Upper  tier  (sic)  tribunals  and  the  documents
             provided by Messrs Birnberg Peirce Solicitors the SSHD accepts
             that there are errors  in  the  FTTJ's  determination.  It  is
             apparent  that  the  report  from  Operazione  Columba   which
             according to the grounds of appeal were  relied  upon  by  the
             appellant was not considered. The  FTTJ  has  found  that  the
             appellant would not be at risk in his home area, there  is  no
             alternative finding in relation to whether the  appellant  can
             internally relocate. It is not clear what material  difference
             it would have made but it is also apparent that the  FTTJ  has
             not considered the evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  wife
             apart from a short sentence at [57]. It is also accepted  that
             the FTTJ has  only  cursorily  considered  the  Dr  Kabashis's
             report at [71]. Finally, it is accepted  that  there  is  some
             merit in the argument that the  FTTJ  inordinately  took  long
             (sic) to promulgate his decision taking more than 3 months."

6.   Although the respondent did not concede that the lack of  consideration
    of other evidence relating to the best interests of  the  children  was
    likely to have made any material difference  to  the  assessment  under
    Article 8, it was accepted that the consideration of the  evidence  was
    inadequate and that the decision was sufficiently flawed for it  to  be
    set aside. The respondent did not  consider  it  necessary  to  hold  a
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal and submitted that  the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

7.   In response to this concession the  appellant's  representatives  wrote
    to the Upper Tribunal on 24 August 2020 in the following terms:

         "We are instructed by the above-named and are  in  receipt  of  the
         Response to Directions from the HOPOU in which they agree that  the
         case be remitted to the FTT at Taylor House for a hearing de  novo.
         Therefore if the UT are minded to accept this there is no need  for
         an oral hearing and we only request that the case  be  remitted  to
         the FTT at Taylor House for a hearing de novo."

8.   In light of the respondent's concession  I  am  satisfied  that  I  can
    determine the question of whether there is an error of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal without a hearing. For the reasons given in  the  grounds
    of appeal and the respondent's concession, the  decision  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. While most of the grounds  go  to
    the heart  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  relating  to  the
    protection claim, it appears  that  the  respondent  accepts  that  the
    evidence relating to the Article 8 claim  might  not  have  been  given
    adequate consideration albeit she does not concede  that  the  evidence
    would have made out a claim. For this reason, the whole decision is set
    aside.

9.   Given that  the  errors  go  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account, it will be necessary for the case to be heard afresh. Although
    the normal course of action would be for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake
    the decision, in such circumstances, a wholesale fact finding  exercise
    will need to be carried out. On this  occasion  both  parties  consider
    that it is appropriate to remit the case for a  fresh  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   M. Canavan        Date 16 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email




