
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: DA/00450/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 18 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Domenico Persico
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Ali, instructed by Knightsbridge Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Given orally on 23 November 2018)

Introduction

I refer herein to Mr Persico as the claimant, the appeal before the Upper
Tribunal having been brought by the Secretary of State for the Home
Department.

The claimant is an Italian national, born 2 December 1966. He came to the
United Kingdom, it appears, in or around 1985 and subsequently amassed
convictions for 24 offences between 5 November 1985 and 27 January 2016.
The First-tier Tribunal summarises these offences thus, at [3]:

"...thefts, attempt/obtaining property by deception, failing to surrender
to bail, possessing controlled drugs of Class A (Heroin), indecent assault,
motoring offences, send offences/indecent/obscene menacing messages by
means of public electronic communications."

It records the claimant's sentences for these offences as including periods
of imprisonment, fines, payment of compensation, conditional discharges,
community orders with work requirements and motoring penalties.

On 21 January 2016 the claimant was sentenced to fifteen months'
imprisonment, having been convicted of production of Class B controlled
drugs (Cannabis).

By way a decision served on 2 September 2016, the Secretary of State
decided to make a Deportation Order against the claimant pursuant to
section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971. The Secretary of State's
consideration of whether to deport the claimant took place within the
confines of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and,
in particular, regulations 19 and 21 thereof.

The claimant's appeal against such decision was allowed by the First-tier
Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 31 October 2017. Upper Tribunal Judge
Keki? subsequently granted permission to appeal on the 5 March 2018, in the
following terms:

         "The grounds focus on the issue of whether the [claimant] had
         demonstrated that he was resident in the UK. The [claimant's] poor
         credibility is highlighted (at paragraphs 64-69 of the
         determination) and it is argued that in that context and given the
         absence of documentary evidence, the judge had failed to give
         adequate reasons for her finding that the appellant had been
         resident throughout the disputed period in excess of two years
         during that time."

Discussion and Decision

The Secretary of State's grounds of challenge focus on the First-tier
Tribunal's finding that the claimant was entitled to protection as a
permanent resident in the UK, the consequence of this being that the
Secretary of State was required to demonstrate that there are serious
grounds of public policy or public security for deporting the claimant.

It is said that the First-tier Tribunal's finding on this issue lacks a
lawful adequacy of reasoning, given the claimant's general lack of
credibility and the lack of evidence to support a conclusion that he had
not left the UK for a continuous period in excess of 2 years since he
acquired permanent residence (the effect of which would be that the
claimant loses his permanent residence).

Although the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant had acquired
permanent residence by 1994 [81] and did not go on to consider whether such
permanent residence had been lost, even if this could be said to amount to
error of law in its decision - and this is by no means clear - such error
is not one capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. This is so
because the First-tier Tribunal went on to consider the claimant's case in
the alternative, i.e. on the basis that he was not a permanent resident in
the UK and thus considered it on the basis that the Secretary of State had
to demonstrate that deportation could be justified on the lower threshold
of public policy or public security grounds. Having done so the First-tier
Tribunal found in the claimant's favour on this issue [82-93].

The key finding in this regard is found at [91] and [92] of the First-tier
Tribunal's decision:

"91. Taking into account the evidence, I find that there is no evidence
before me to suggest that the appellant has a propensity to re-offend.

92.  Having considered all the evidence in the round including the risk of
re-offending, I find that there is insufficient evidence to suggest that
the appellant represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
affecting any of the fundamental interests of society",

The Secretary of State also brings challenge to these findings, for two
reasons. First, it is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
failing to give adequate reasons for its conclusion. It is further asserted
that the aforementioned conclusions are irrational.

At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills properly accepted that if the
Secretary of State could not get over the hurdle of demonstrating that the
First-tier Tribunal erred in its conclusions at [91] and [92] that would
dispose of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

Turning then to this challenge.  In order to analyse whether the First-tier
Tribunal's decision is properly reasoned it is necessary to identify the
reasons it gave for its decision, which were as follows:

          i)  At [84] the First-tier Tribunal, having previously summarised
             the claimant's offending pattern, concluded that there had
             been an escalation in the seriousness of the offences, as
             indicated by the sentences imposed. It is clear, therefore,
             that the First-tier Tribunal was aware and took account of the
             claimant's offending pattern and the nature of the specific
             offences;

         ii) At [85] the First-tier Tribunal referred to the Secretary of
             State's submissions on this issue and, in particular, the
             assertion that in the absence of any evidence that there had
             been an improvement in the claimant's personal circumstances
             since his conviction, or that he had successfully addressed
             the issues that prompted him to offend, it is reasonable to
             conclude that there remained a risk of him re-offending and
             continuing to pose a risk of harm to the public;

In the following five paragraphs, the First-tier Tribunal carefully engage
with both limbs of the Secretary of State's submission, i.e. by considering
whether there had been any improvement in the claimant's personal
circumstances and whether he had done anything to address the issues that
prompted him to re-offend;

        iii) In [86] the First-tier Tribunal identifies, and accepts, that
             the claimant has undergone "rehabilitation programmes in
             prison with alcohol and drug-related problems" and that he has
             provided evidence that he is remorseful and wants to better
             himself so as not to be separated from his child;

         iv) At [87] to First-tier Tribunal accepts that the claimant "is
             currently undergoing the 12 steps programme with Narcotics
             Anonymous which he attends three times a week" and that he has
             a sponsor for that programme with whom he keeps in touch;

          v) The First-tier Tribunal then at [88] - [90] directly
             addresses, and rejects with reasons, the Secretary of State's
             submission that the claimant had been unable to demonstrate
             that he would be able to financially support himself upon
             release from prison and that he would have fixed
             accommodation.  The First-tier Tribunal thought it to be of
             significance, that:

                  "While the appellant has not submitted further documentary
                  evidence, I accept that he is in business with Davante
                  James as I had the opportunity of observing the appellant
                  while he gave evidence and I find that he spoke with
                  authority when describing the business and his commitment
                  to it."

In my conclusion, the First-tier Tribunal fully engaged with the case put
by the Secretary of State and came to conclusions of fact which are not
individually challenged and which, in any event, were entirely open to it
on the available evidence. The First-tier Tribunal also undertook its
consideration in the proper context of the claimant's history of criminal
offending, including identifying that such behaviour had escalated in more
recent times.

Given these findings I am in no doubt that the First-tier Tribunal was
entitled to conclude that the Secretary of State has not demonstrated that
the claimant represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat
to the fundamental interests of society. It's reasons for coming to such
conclusion are not unlawfully inadequate. That is not to say that every
judge would have come to the same conclusion, but that is not the issue I
must consider. For all these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's
grounds drawn in this regard.

That being so, as accepted by Mr Mills, I need not make any finding on the
lawfulness of the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of whether the
claimant had permanent residence in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor           Date 9 January 2019
