

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
DA/00588/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2017                          |  On 07 July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ANGELO LUCA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    The respondent appeared in person and was not
represented
Interpreter:  Ms Giulia Castagno attended to interpret the Italian and
                    English languages
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I see no need for and do not make any order  restricting  application  of
the details of this appeal.

2. This is a case brought by the appellant, hereinafter  "the  Secretary  of
State", with the permission of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  challenging  the
decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rodger)
allowing an appeal by the respondent, hereinafter "the  claimant",  against
the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  make  him  the  subject  of  a
deportation order in accordance with Regulation 19(3)(b) and Regulation  21
of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

3. The claimant is a convicted criminal.  At  the  Crown  Court  sitting  at
Kingston-upon-Thames on 3 February  2016  he  was  sent  to  prison  having
pleaded guilty to seven counts on an indictment representing his part in  a
scheme to defraud Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs.

4. The details of  his  criminal  acts  are  understandably  vague  but  the
essence seems to be that he abused his position as an  account's  clerk  to
gather information that enabled him  to  raise  false  documents  with  the
intention of obtaining  money  from  the  Revenue  dishonestly  by  way  of
payments from VAT or income tax.  If everything had gone according to  plan
he would have realised something in the order of �86,000.   As  it  was  he
realised something in the order of �31,084.40.

5. He was sentenced to a total of twenty months' imprisonment.

6. The claimant is also an EEA national and therefore  questions  concerning
his deportation are regulated not by the ordinary Immigration Rules but  by
the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.  These  were
brought into British law under the provisions of the  European  Communities
Act 1972.

7. I begin by considering  the  structure  and  content  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision.

8. The judge gave the history of events leading up to the appeal  and  noted
in summary the claimant's case.  The claimant said that he  was  remorseful
and had already paid �11,486.54 and had agreed  with  the  Crown  Court  to
repay a further sum of �16,458.73 within the next three years.

9. He said that he had lived in the United Kingdom for over  ten  years  and
had acquired a permanent right of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
claimed that he had exercised treaty rights in the United Kingdom for  over
ten years and relied on his  national  insurance  contributions  record  to
confirm that claim.  He said that he wanted to settle in the United Kingdom
and supported that claim with reference to a mortgage  agreement  and  said
that he had successfully passed the British citizenship test.  He was a man
of previous good character who had committed the offences  to  support  his
elderly mother who was unwell and had financial problems.   There  were  no
security questions arising from his criminal behaviour and the  presentence
report showed a 14% risk of reoffending within one and two years.

10. This summary does not set out all the points he made but  is  a  summary
of the ones that I consider important.

11. It was the Secretary of State's  case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
that the Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the  claimant  had  been
resident in the United Kingdom in accordance with the EEA Regulations for a
continuous period of five years.  The Secretary of State said the  claimant
had not served any pay slips showing that he had been exercising continuous
treaty rights in the United Kingdom for five years and, obscurely, did  not
accept that he was a British citizen which is clearly was not.  Neither did
the Secretary of State accept  that  the  claimant  had  been  continuously
resident in the United Kingdom for ten years.

12. The Secretary  of  State  noted  that  the  claimant  had  not  produced
evidence, such as attending an "Enhanced Thinking Skills" course that would
confirm his resolve about his future behaviour.

13. The Secretary of State also maintained that even  if  the  claimant  had
resided in the United Kingdom for ten years there were serious  grounds  of
public policy that justified his being deported  and  the  deportation  was
proportionate including in the context of an Article 8 balancing exercise.

14. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  evidence  before  her
including the oral evidence of the claimant and,  although  the  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the  nature  of  the   claimant's
criminality, found him to be "a credible and honest witness".

15. The judge was particularly impressed with the evidence in the form of  a
schedule of national insurance contributions from HMRC.  This  showed  that
there was no break in his contributions between the tax years 2001 to  2002
through to the tax year 2011 to 2012.  The claimant said he had started his
own business in 2011 and not kept any of his P45 or P60 documents  relating
to previous employment.

16. The judge was satisfied that the claimant  genuinely  thought  that  his
national insurance record was sufficient to prove his period of  residence.
At paragraph 39(c) of her decision the judge said:

  "I have had sight of the HMRC letter dated 05/07/16.  It  sets  out  [the
  claimant's] national insurance contributions paid between 2011 and  2015.
  The [claimant] explained the  absence  of  payments  from  2012  to  2013
  onwards was due to him working exclusively as a self-employed person from
  that date and not  paying  himself  enough  to  make  national  insurance
  deductions.  This is consistent with the contents of the  first  page  of
  the aforesaid letter which states that the  HMRC  records  show  that  he
  currently had fourteen qualifying years up to 5 April 2016.   If  he  was
  simply absent and not resident in the UK from 2012 onwards, hence the nil
  NI contributions, then the qualifying period it is unlikely to amount  to
  fourteen years and is credibly explained by his continued presence in the
  UK and registration as a self-employed person.  This is  also  consistent
  with the screenshots of the first page of his tax returns for  the  years
  06/04/12 to 05/04/16, which shows that he was  self-employed  during  the
  latter period."

17. At paragraph 39(b) of her decision the judge sets out a summary  of  the
evidence from the tax authorities.  At paragraph 39(d) she found  that  the
appellant's evidence had satisfied her that he was present and resident  in
the United Kingdom from 2001 onwards, that  he  had  been  resident  for  a
continuous period save for short visits  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  his
family and one visit of six weeks' duration in 2004  when  his  mother  was
ill.  The judge had seen national insurance records which  showed  payments
which she found to be wholly consistent with his  claim  to  have  been  in
work.

18. In short, the judge found that the  claimant  had  been  in  the  United
Kingdom exercising treaty rights since 2001.  This evidence was  reinforced
by evidence from the Italian authorities showing that for the  purposes  of
passport renewal he had identified himself as  a  person  resident  in  the
United Kingdom.

19. On this evidence the judge was satisfied that the appellant had  accrued
ten years' lawful residence  and  could  only  be  removed  if  there  were
"imperative grounds of public security".  Consistent with this finding  the
judge said at paragraph 43 of her decision that she was "satisfied that the
[claimant] has also proved that he has  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
residency under Regulation 15".

20. The judge was satisfied that the claimant's  deportation  could  not  be
justified on serious grounds of public policy.  Perhaps most  significantly
the judge was not persuaded that the claimant "represents a present  threat
affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".

21. It is a requirement of Regulation 21(5)(c)  that  where  a  decision  is
taken on grounds of public policy or public security "the personal  conduct
of the person concerned must represent a genuine, present and  sufficiently
serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society".

22. These words mean what they  say  and  in  particular  there  must  be  a
"present" threat.  The judge was not satisfied that  there  was  a  present
threat.  She gave considerable weight to  the  report  from  the  Probation
Service that there was a risk of reoffending at "14%" which she regarded as
a low figure.  She was satisfied that the claimant was remorseful  and  had
evidenced that by paying back at least  some  of  the  money  that  he  had
defrauded and she was "satisfied that  the  [claimant]  is  an  intelligent
young man who is keen to  turn  his  life  around  and  start  contributing
positively to UK society".

23. Cynicism comes easily and  any  person  who  has  been  convicted  of  a
criminal offence can express a desire to behave properly in the future  but
the claimant was entitled to a fair assessment  of  his  evidence.   Unlike
those who may be quick to criticise,  the  judge  heard  the  claimant  and
formed a view.  The judge's view was consistent with the offending being an
isolated outburst of criminality by a man of previous good character rather
than something that had been shown to have gone on throughout his life  and
with the opinion of the probation officer who made the prediction about the
risk of future offending.

24. In cases involving the deportation of people who are not  EEA  nationals
their  protestations  about  future  behaviour  are  rarely  of  more  than
peripheral relevance.  Deportation of foreign criminals  who  are  not  EEA
nationals invokes different considerations.  It is beyond argument that  an
EEA national cannot be deported unless  there  is  a  present  sufficiently
serious threat.  The judge was clearly of the view that there was  no  such
threat in this case and I find no basis whatsoever for  going  behind  that
decision.

25. Neither the Secretary of State's grounds nor the submissions  before  me
engaged adequately with this finding.  The  grounds  pontificate  that  the
view was inconsistent with the sophistication of the offences that  led  to
the claimant's imprisonment.  They fail to explain why the finding that  he
was not a present threat was inconsistent with that.  It is  almost  always
the case that it is impossible to make unquestionable  findings  about  the
possibility of future events.  There is  no  way  of  knowing  whether  the
claimant will offend again.  The judge has mixed her own observations  with
the opinion of the probation officer and has concluded  that  there  is  no
sufficiently serious present threat. That is not  an  error.  That  is  the
judge doing her job. Neither the grounds nor the submissions show a  proper
basis for going behind that decision.

26. Neither is  there  any  basis  for  challenging  the  finding  that  the
claimant had established a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
evidence that he had worked for at least five years was, I find, completely
unimpeachable.

27. This is sufficient to dispose of the appeal.

28. However there is a point of importance that needs to be considered.

29. The initial challenge in the grounds was to  the  judge's  finding  that
the claimant had accrued ten years' relevant residence.

30. It must be remembered that the decision challenged is the decision  made
on 24 November 2016 and the claimant was sent to prison on 3 February 2016.
 The claimant clearly had  not  accrued  ten  years'  continuous  residence
immediately before the decision complained of because the period  had  been
interrupted by a prison sentence.  The interpretation  of  this  Regulation
was the subject of a decision  of  the  European  Court  of  Justice  in  a
decision of  SSHD  v  MG  [2014]  EUECJ  C-400/12.   Paragraph  38  was  in
particularly clear terms.  The court said:

  "In the light of the foregoing, the answer to Questions 1 and 4  is  that
  Article 28(3)(a) of Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted as meaning that
  a period of imprisonment is, in principle, capable both  of  interrupting
  the continuity of the period  of  residence  for  the  purposes  of  that
  provision and of affecting  the  decision  regarding  the  grant  of  the
  enhanced protection  provided  for  thereunder,  even  where  the  person
  concerned resided in the host Member State for  the  10  years  prior  to
  imprisonment.  However, the fact that that person  resided  in  the  host
  Member State for the 10 years prior to imprisonment  may  be  taken  into
  consideration as part of the overall  assessment  required  in  order  to
  determine whether the integrating links previously forged with  the  host
  Member State have been broken."

31. The judge's starting point should have been to have recognised that  the
claimant had not established a continuous period  of  at  least  ten  years
prior to the relevant decision.

32. However the judge should then have gone on to  decide  if  the  claimant
was sufficiently integrated to be worthy of that high degree of protection.
 The fact that the claimant had been involved in criminal activity  in  the
United Kingdom is telling evidence that he is not integrated  there  or  at
least not integrated into the parts of society that need to be  encouraged.
The judge did not grapple with this.

33. Notwithstanding that the claimant has established a significant  private
and family life in the United Kingdom, the only points referred to  in  the
evidence were the kind of links that could be expected in  the  case  of  a
person who had established himself in the United  Kingdom.   There  are  no
particularly compelling personal relationships such as with a life  partner
or a minor child and  no  indication  of  a  special  contribution  to  the
community that would indicate he had  established  himself  in  the  United
Kingdom in a way that outweighs the harm done by his criminality.

34. In my judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  approach  the
question properly and if she had approached the question  properly  on  the
evidence she would have decided that the claimant was not entitled  to  the
enhanced protection that comes with ten years' continuous residence.

35. However this is not a material error.  Neither the criminal offence  nor
the period of imprisonment undoes the five years' lawful residence that has
been established  when  the  claimant  was  exercising  treaty  rights  and
therefore the  claimant's  right  to  permanent  residence  in  the  United
Kingdom.

36. Importantly, the error  does  not  in  any  way  undermine  the  judge's
finding that the claimant is not a present risk.

37. It follows therefore that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
decision and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 July 2017                    |

