
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/01393/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2019                           |On 15 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            Mr Adedire Aliu Badru
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. His date of birth is 12
September 1982.

2.   The Appellant made an application on 8 November 2017 for a permanent
residence card under the European Economic Area (EEA) Regulations 2016 on
the basis that he had a retained right of residence following his divorce
from an EEA national, [NC], and that he qualified for permanent residence
pursuant to Regulation 15(1)(f) of the 2016 Regulations.  His application
was refused by the Secretary of State on 18 January 2018.  The Appellant
appealed against that decision. His appeal was dismissed by First-tier
Tribunal (FTT) Judge Richards-Clarke following a hearing on 28 June 2018 in
a decision that was promulgated on 9 July 2018.

3.   The Appellant was issued with a residence card under the 2006
Regulations on 11 October 2013 on the basis that he was in a durable
relationship with Ms [C]. The Respondent decided that there was no evidence
that the Appellant was married as claimed. His marriage by way of proxy in
Nigeria had never been accepted by the Home Office. The Respondent decided
that the Appellant was not a family member of an EEA national and did not
qualify for permanent residence.

4.   The Appellant gave evidence before the FTT adopting his witness
statement as evidence-in-chief.  The Appellant's evidence was that he
married Ms [C] in January 2009 by way of a proxy marriage in Nigeria. They
remarried on 27 March 2012 again by way of a proxy marriage in Nigeria. The
second marriage took place because the Respondent did not accept the
validity of the first marriage in 2009.  There was, as I understand, some
evidence before the FTT that the 2012 marriage had taken place; however,
the Appellant did not produce a certificate relating to the 2009 marriage.
I was told by Mr Burrett that the Appellant has now obtained the original
certificate, which, he asserts, was before the Family Court South West
Divorce Unit.  The thrust of the Appellant's case was that it had been
accepted by the family court that the marriage in 2009 was valid because on
15 March 2017 it issued a decree absolute dissolving that marriage. This
document was before the FTT.

The Decision of the FTT

5.   The FTT made findings recorded at paragraphs 20 to 26 of the decision.
 The judge was not satisfied that the decree absolute issued by the family
court established that the marriage in 2009 was in accordance with the laws
of Nigeria.  The Appellant did not produce his marriage certificate or
indeed, as noted by the judge, any expert evidence to show that the 2009
marriage was in accordance with the laws of Nigeria.  There was no
reference to any evidence, from the Nigerian High Commission regarding the
requirements to be met for a proxy marriage to be accepted as valid in
Nigeria.

6.   The judge concluded that he was not satisfied that the Appellant had
discharged the burden of proof that the 2009 proxy marriage was in
accordance with the laws of Nigeria. The Appellant was not a family member
under regulation 7 and not able to qualify for a retained right of
residence pursuant to regulation 10 (or permanent right of residence
pursuant to Regulation 15).

The grounds of appeal

7.   The grounds relied on by Mr Burrett assert that the decree absolute
was evidence that the Appellant was legally married because the family
court must have been satisfied that there was a valid marriage before
issuing a decree absolute.



Conclusions

8.   Permission was granted by UTJ Grubb. He decided that on the material
before him the ground was arguable.  However, he went on to state:

"However, I enter these caveats: (1) the UT will no doubt be assisted by
any material to support the contention that the English court's decision is
predicated on a conclusion that the marriage was valid in Nigeria; and (2)
even if the marriage is ultimately accepted, the judge did not resolve the
issue of whether the Appellant's spouse was exercising treaty rights at the
relevant time and which will have to be proved if he is to succeed in his
appeal."

9.   The Appellant did not rely on any material as contemplated by UTJ
Grubb in the grant of permission.  There was no evidence that there has
ever been a judicial finding that the marriage in 2009 was valid in
accordance with the laws in Nigeria.  A decree absolute is capable of
supporting a marriage being in accordance with Nigerian law, but the weight
to attach to it is a matter for the judge. The judge was entitled to
conclude that the decree absolute was not sufficient to discharge the
burden of proof in this case. There was no evidence before the FTT of the
material before the family court.  There was no evidence that the family
court made findings of fact. There was no reason for the family court to go
behind the agreement of the petitioner and respondent (to the divorce
petition) that the marriage was valid. It was not an issue in the divorce
proceedings.

10.  Moreover, the decree absolute dissolved the 2009 marriage.  It is not
clear from the evidence that was before the FTT the status of the 2012
marriage and whether this was a matter brought to the attention of the
family court. There was no evidence of the impact of this on the 2009
marriage and or the decree absolute.

11.  The decision is lawful and sustainable.  The weight to attach to the
decree absolute was a matter for the judge. His findings are grounded in
the evidence and adequately reasoned.  The judge did not go on to make a
finding about whether the EEA national   was exercising treaty rights at
the relevant time.  However, the appeal, as the judge found, could not
succeed because the Appellant was unable to establish that the marriage was
in accordance with the laws in Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the FTT to dismiss the  Appellant's
appeal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 13 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

