
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/04978/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                HASEEB USMAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Abbas Counsel, instructed by Imperium Group
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
dismissing on the papers an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
State refusing the applicant a residence  card  as  the  wife  of  a  Polish
national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

The appellant's  core  case  is  extremely  simple.   He  is  a  citizen  of
Pakistan; his wife is  a  citizen  of  Poland;  his  wife,  he  says,  is  a
photographer who is trying to establish herself in the  United  Kingdom  and
earning a modest income which he has evidenced in the required way and  does
not really understand why his application has been refused.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge has  clearly  modelled  her  decision  on  the
decision of the Secretary of State.  There is nothing wrong with  that;  the
Secretary of State is capable of making perfectly good  decisions  and  very
often does and there is no reason for a judge to take a  different  approach
just to prove that she can. However Mr  Abbas  says  that  the  judge  erred
because she did not seem to appreciate that core elements of the  case  were
proved in the way they were because that is  what  the  Secretary  of  State
asks people to do.

In particular the proof of self-employment was done by producing the  unique
tax reference number which ought to have been  enough,  in  accordance  with
policy, to show that the person was indeed registered with the  Revenue  and
the incomes produced were, if I may say so  respectfully,  modest  but  more
than the minimum requirement when it  was  remembered  that  it  represented
some months' trading but not a complete twelve-months' trading.

Now there are other points that concerned the judge  and  the  Secretary  of
State  and  they  are  that  there  was  little  evidence   about   business
development and so on.  Mr Abbas, in his submissions to me, used the  phrase
"considering it in the round" and it is very important  that  that  approach
is adopted in EU cases where EEA nationals  are  exercising  treaty  rights.
It is not in any way inherently  unbelievable  that  a  person  with  modest
earning capacity at least at this stage in their career  as  a  photographer
chooses to do that in the United Kingdom  The  evidence  is  that  a  modest
income is being earned but it is sufficient income  to  satisfy  the  Rules.
Unless there was some reason to suspect dishonest, which  is  not  the  case
here, the absence of other strands of evidence should not matter  very  much
when the points required by a policy are covered.

I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not give proper  weight  to
items of evidence which satisfied the policy requirements and did  not  look
at the case in the round in the way that is appropriate for  an  application
of this kind.  I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.

I want to add a rider on this.  At paragraph 22  of  her  determination  the
First-tier Tribunal judge was  clearly  looking  to  the  future  and  being
critical of the appellant  making  that  application  just  to  satisfy  the
requirements of the Rules.  It may well be the case that the  appellant  and
his wife have every intention of leaving the United Kingdom  and  exercising
their treaty rights elsewhere in the European Union.  That is no  reason  at
all to disbelieve their evidence.  I therefore have made the  decision  that
I have.

Decision

The First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  and
substitute a decision allowing the appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 January 2017                |

