

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  EA/06920/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at George House, Edinburgh              |Decision & Reasons           |
|by Skype for Business                         |Promulgated                  |
|On 9 December 2020                            |On 30 December 2020          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              ARTUR KULASINSKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Poland, born on 13 September 1976.

 2. On 4 September 2019, at Edinburgh airport, the respondent  refused  the
    appellant admission to the UK under regulation 27  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2016, based on his criminal convictions in Poland.

 3. The decision stated that the appellant could appeal only  from  outside
    the UK.

 4. The appellant sought judicial review of directions for his removal, and
    those were cancelled.  Under cover of a letter dated 13 December  2019,
    from solicitors then acting for him, he filed an  appeal  to  the  FtT.
    Parties and the FtT accepted that there was jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal.

 5. FtT Judge Farrelly dismissed the appeal by a decision promulgated on  3
    April 2020.

 6. The FtT refused permission to appeal to the UT.

 7. The appellant  applied  to  the  UT,  on  differently  framed  grounds,
    alleging 4 errors, in summary as follows:

      (1) Failure to apply the principle of proportionality as  required  by
      regulation 27(5)(a); A & Ors v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1272 is cited.

      (2) Failure  to  take  the  correct  approach  to  proportionality;  R
      (Lumsdon) v Legal Services Board [2015] UKSC 41 and Goroalczyk v  SSHD
      [2018] SLT 1183 are cited.

      (3) Error in considering the risk  of  re-offending,  or  in  applying
      regulation 27(5)(d).

      (4) Failure to take account of all relevant considerations,  specified
      as (a) - (j).

 8. On 3 September 2020 UT Judge Finch granted permission, on the view that
    the  FtT  arguably  failed  to  apply  the  necessary   proportionality
    assessment, and arguably erred in assessing current risk, the appellant
    never having offended in the UK over a significant period.

 9. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  The technology enabled an effective hearing.

10. The main points which I noted from the submissions of Mr Ndubuisi  were
    these:

      i) the judge erred by deciding on the risk of re-offending alone;

     ii)  the  judge  did  not  base  his  decision  on  any  assessment  of
         proportionality;

    iii) the judge made an assessment which was contrary  to  regulation  27
         (5) (d) and (e);

     iv) the judge irrationally found there to be a  risk  of  re-offending,
         when he could only have found to the contrary;

      v) the finding at [33] of "no in depth integration" flew in  the  face
         of the evidence, when the appellant has been employed  in  his  own
         business, there was evidence of his family life with a partner  and
         her child, and he gave his evidence (as Mr  Ndubuisi  recalled)  in
         English, and did not have a "poor command" of the language;

     vi) in finding no evidence of rehabilitation, the judge overlooked that
         the latest official assessment by a probation officer in Poland was
         that his conduct was satisfactory, his suspended sentence was to be
         revoked, and there was agreement to his living abroad;

    vii) for an accumulation of errors, the decision should be set aside;

   viii) on the evidence, the UT should substitute a decision, allowing  the
         appeal, as originally brought to the FtT.

11. The main points which I noted from the submissions  of  Mr  Avery  were
    these:

      i) the judge set  out  regulation  27  in  full,  then  systematically
         applied it;

     ii) the appellant misrepresented the meaning of regulation 27  (5)  (d)
         and (e);

    iii) the conclusion drawn from the appellant's  previous  offending  was
         carefully explained at [18] - [23];

     iv) the question was rightly identified  as  whether  re-offending  was
         likely in the UK;

      v) the statement at [35] of the "ultimate issue" as being "whether the
         appellant presents as a genuine serious and present threat  to  the
         interests of society" was perhaps an error of expression,  but  the
         decision as a whole showed that  was  taken  as  only  one  of  the
         principles to be applied;

     vi) the judge went on immediately, and crucially, at  [36]  to  explain
         his decision in terms of proportionality;

    vii) the judge was entitled at [33] to  find  only  a  small  degree  of
         integration, when the appellant's interactions  were  primarily  in
         the Polish expatriate community;

   viii) the judge applied the law to the facts, without any error of  legal
         approach, and reached a decision within his rational scope;

     ix) the grounds, in substance, were only disagreement;

      x) the decision should stand.

12. In reply, Mr Ndubuisi said that at [35] there was not only an error  of
    expression, but a demonstration that the judge based  his  decision  on
    the prior offending and on nothing else.

13. I reserved my decision.

14. The high point of the appellant's challenge is the judge's use at  [35]
    of the term "the ultimate issue".   The  respondent  acknowledged  that
    this expression is problematic.   Whether  the  appellant  presented  a
    threat in terms of regulation 27 (5) (c) was a decisive issue  ("must")
    but it was one among several principles, including (a)  proportionality
    (also a "must"); and it was to be applied along with regulation 27 (6),
    requiring consideration of matters such as  age,  family  and  economic
    situation, length of residence, integration, and links with the country
    of origin.

15. The decision as a whole cannot sensibly  be  read  as  turning  on  the
    threat posed by the appellant, or on risk of re-offending, alone.   The
    judge directed himself on the full effect of the regulations,  set  out
    at the beginning, and he went on to  deal  specifically  with  all  the
    matters  mentioned  in  the  previous  paragraph.   His  conclusion  is
    summarised not at [35] only, but  by  reading  on  to  [36],  which  is
    expressed in terms of proportionality.

16. The appellant's grounds and submissions tend to overstate his position,
    both on the law and on the facts.

17. Regulation  27  (5)  (d)  provides  that  "matters  isolated  from  the
    particulars of the case or which relate to  considerations  of  general
    prevention" do not justify a decision.  Neither the respondent nor  the
    tribunal made any suggestion that this  is  a  case  which  depends  on
    anything but its own particulars, or on any  consideration  of  general
    prevention.

18. Regulation 27 (5) (e) provides that previous  convictions  do  not  "in
    themselves" justify a decision.  Mr Ndubuisi  sought  to  convert  that
    into the notion that previous convictions do not count at all, which is
    contrary to the scheme of the regulations.

19. There is nothing in the decision to the  effect  that  the  convictions
    alone led to the failure of the appeal.

20. The submissions on  the  appellant's  degree  of  integration  raise  a
    curious matter, although it is a minor one. Mr Ndubuisi said that, from
    his recollection, the appellant gave evidence in English.   However,  I
    note while considering this decision  that  Mr  Ndubuisi  was  not  the
    representative in the FtT.  The respondent's decision  of  4  September
    2019 records that it was explained to the  appellant  in  Polish.   The
    appellant says on his appeal form that he requires an interpreter.  The
    file is endorsed for one to be provided. The FtT's  decision  does  not
    state whether the appellant gave his evidence in English or Polish, but
    the grounds do not specify a challenge to [33], where  he  is  said  to
    have "a poor command of English".

21. The appellant did not counter the submission that his life in the UK is
    rooted within the expatriate Polish community.   He may  disagree,  but
    the finding that he has not demonstrated any in-depth integration  into
    life in the UK is not shown to have involved the making of any error on
    a point of law.

22. The appellant had been in the UK without offending  for  over  3  years
    from the time of the hearing, as was stressed on his  behalf,  but  the
    proposition that his crimes were "economic" and that his  circumstances
    in the UK proved that there was no risk of repetition is glib, and goes
    too far.  There was nothing to show a  combination  of  the  nature  of
    previous offending, and of present circumstances, such  that  offending
    could never happen again.  The FtT noted the time which  had  gone  by,
    but at [18 - 23] it also noted the seriousness  of  the  offences;  the
    appellant's repeated failure to  acknowledge  any  responsibility;  and
    commission of offences when the appellant was already not  a  juvenile,
    but a man with family commitments.

23. The  appellant  in  the  UT  said  that  evidence  from  Poland  showed
    rehabilitation, but that is selective.  The judge at  [23]  noted  that
    the letter from the probation officer was based on limited contact.

24. The grounds at [12] and at [15 i] contend that there can be no risk  of
    re-offending in the UK because previous offending did  not  take  place
    here.  That is incorrect.  The regulations aim at the  risk  of  future
    offences being committed  in  the  UK,  regardless  of  where  previous
    offending took place.

25. The conclusion that the appellant did pose a threat of re-offending was
    within the judge's rational scope.  No error  has  been  shown  in  the
    reasons given.

26. The  judge  at  [24  -  32]  found  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    relationships in the UK unsatisfactory and weak, giving clear  reasons,
    in which no error has been alleged.

27. Grounds 1, 2 and 4 are overlapping ways of making much the same  points
    on proportionality.  They do not fairly represent the  decision.   They
    do not show that the judge failed to  consider  all  relevant  factors,
    that he had regard to  anything  which  was  irrelevant,  or  that  his
    decision was perverse.  They disagree, but show no error on a point  of
    law, which might justify interference.

28. Ground 3 shows no error on risk of re-offending.

29. This was a case which might rationally have gone  either  way,  perhaps
    even a finely balanced one; but the grounds and  submissions  have  not
    shown that the outcome should be disturbed for any error on a point  of
    law.

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

31. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      11 December 2020
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




