

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06179/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 24 November 2017                           |On 14 December 2017          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            AMIT HASAN CHOWDHURY

                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen       (Senior Home Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from a decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") whereupon it
allowed his appeal against the entry clearance officer's decision of
4 May 2016 refusing an EEA family permit.

2.    There had been an earlier unsuccessful application for an EEA family
permit.  Indeed the claimant had appealed the unfavourable (from his
perspective) decision and that had resulted in the dismissal of his appeal
for reasons set out in a written determination which had been sent to the
parties on 7 September 2015.  I shall say a little more about that below.

3.    As to the application which has ultimately led to this appeal before
the Upper Tribunal, the basis for it was the claimant's claimed dependence
upon his UK based sponsor. The application had been considered under
regulation 8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
but had been refused because the entry clearance officer was not satisfied
that the claimant was wholly or mainly financially dependent upon the
sponsor.

4.    The claimant appealed and his appeal was heard on 20 July 2017.  At
the hearing the claimant (who is resident in Bangladesh and could not
therefore be in attendance) was represented by Counsel.  His sponsor
provided oral evidence.  The entry clearance officer was not represented.

5.    The tribunal allowed the claimant's appeal.  The principal reasoning
behind that was that it had found the sponsor to be a credible witness and
it concluded that the claimant was his extended family member.  It found
(uncontroversially) that the sponsor is a Spanish national exercising
treaty rights in the UK.  It accepted that the claimant is dependent upon
his UK based sponsor.  The tribunal's written decision was sent to the
parties on 1 August 2017.  There is no reference in the written reasons to
the previous unsuccessful application and appeal.

6.    The Secretary of State asked for permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal.  There were two grounds of appeal.  The first ground was to
the effect that, in fact, the claimant did not have a right of appeal to
the tribunal at all.  Reliance was placed upon the decision of the
Upper Tribunal in Sala (2016) UKUT 00411 (IAC).  The second ground was to
the effect that the tribunal had erred in failing to take, as its starting
point, the findings and conclusions which had been reached in the previous
tribunal decision which had resulted in the dismissal of the claimant's
appeal.

7.    Permission was granted and the granting judge said this:

      "It is arguable, as set out in the grounds, that the judge's approach
      to this appeal was flawed.  Arguably the starting point should have
      been the adverse findings of fact made by Judge Cope in the
      appellant's previous appeal - but there appears to be no reference to
      them in the decision.  All the grounds may be argued."

8.    There followed a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so
that it could be decided whether or not the tribunal had erred in law and,
if so, what should flow from that.  Directions made provision for any
necessary remaking of the decision to be undertaken, if appropriate, at the
same hearing.  Before me the sponsor represented the claimant (the claimant
no longer having legal representation) and Mrs Pettersen represented the
entry clearance officer.  I am grateful to each of them.

9.    As to the first ground of appeal Mrs Pettersen withdrew it.
Accordingly, I need say no more about it.  But Mrs Pettersen pursued the
second ground and, although this was unstated, she was essentially relying
upon the principles set out in the well-known decision in Devaseelan
(second appeals - ECHR - extra - territorial effect) Sri Lanka (2002) UKIAT
00702.  The sponsor argued that whilst there had perhaps been insufficient
evidence before the previous tribunal there had been enough evidence at the
most recent hearing.  He pointed out that the most recent decision of the
tribunal had been in relation to a fresh application.  The suggestion was,
I think, that since a fresh application had been made any previous
adjudication history ought not to be irrelevant.

10.   I decided to set aside the tribunal's decision.  I noted that the
tribunal had not been given a copy of the earlier appeal decision and that
that might, to some extent, be the fault of the Secretary of State who had
not fielded a presenting officer in order to take the point.  But the
previous decision was specifically referred to in the entry clearance
officer's decision notice. Given that that is perhaps the single most
important document in the appeal, it is reasonable to suppose that the
tribunal would have read it and been aware of it.  In those circumstances,
notwithstanding any failings on the part of the Secretary of State, it was
incumbent upon the tribunal to at least address the fact that there was in
existence a previous tribunal decision and, if it did not think it
appropriate to adjourn and direct its production, to have explained why
not.  It did not do that.  It did, therefore, err in law.

11.   Having set aside the tribunal's decision, and having informed the
parties that I was doing so, I invited views as to whether I should go on
to remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal or whether I should remit.
Mrs Pettersen took a neutral stance but the sponsor actively urged me to
proceed to remake the decision myself at the same hearing.  In those
circumstances I decided to do so.  I felt in a position to do so because I
had the documents which had been before the tribunal, I had the previous
appeal decision and I had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence from the
sponsor.

12.   Matters did, indeed, proceed to remaking and I heard evidence from
the sponsor and submissions from him and from Mrs Pettersen.  I shall refer
to what was said at the hearing, where necessary or appropriate, in
explaining the decision I have reached.

13.   First of all, it is necessary to return to Devaseelan.  Put simply,
following Devaseelan, the findings and conclusions of the earlier tribunal
will represent my starting point but not necessarily my end point.  As
already indicated the earlier tribunal decision (the one made by
Judge Cope) concerned the same appellant, the same sponsor and indeed the
same sort of application.  As to the question of whether or not the
appellant was dependent on the sponsor for the purposes of the
EEA Regulations, the tribunal said this:

      "     54.  I suppose as a minimum essential needs of a person in the
      country of origin would encompass food and accommodation; however
      certain levels or aspects of lifestyle may not fall within essential
      needs - although it may be something of a westernised concept, an
      example could be if the person not only has their principal home but
      also a holiday home.

            55.  It is clear from the jurisprudence that there must be a
      rigorous examination of the evidence relating to a claim to dependency
      for the purposes of inter alia r.8 (2) of the EEA Regulations - see
      for instance paragraph 38 of Moneke.

            56.  As such it is incumbent on him and the Sponsor to identify
      exactly what the essential needs of the Appellant actually are, and
      how it is that the Sponsor's financial remittances are meeting those
      needs.

            57.  There was quite simply no evidence supplied with the
      application for an EEA family permit to address this aspect of the
      case.  All that the Sponsor said in his letter was that he had been
      supporting the Appellant financially for his daily needs.  However no
      details were given as to what those needs were.

            58.  At paragraph 42 of their decision in Moneke the Tribunal
      underlined the need for documentary evidence at least in part in order
      that an appropriate assessment of dependency can be carried out.

            59.  Miss Bishop in her cross-examination asked the Sponsor
      what the Appellant used the money for.  He said that it was used for
      him to live and to buy food, for general expenses and paying bills,
      and that the Appellant pays rent.  However when she then asked the
      Sponsor who the Appellant paid rent to, he replied that it was their
      house and therefore he did not take any rent.  Miss Bishop asked him
      why he said that the Appellant had been paying rent, and he said again
      that he was not taking any money from him.

            60.  I note that there has been there was no explanation given
      by the Sponsor as to why he should have contradicted himself in this
      way in his oral evidence to me.  In my judgement this does raise
      significant questions about the credibility of what he has said about
      the Appellant's dependency upon him.

            61.  Related to this are the questions as to what the Appellant
      does in Bangladesh and why it is that he is dependent on the Sponsor.
      Whilst the case law makes it clear that there need be no reason for
      dependency and that it can be one of choice, the Upper Tribunal in
      Moneke made the point that there may need to be particular scrutiny of
      a claim to long-standing dependency made by someone who otherwise
      might be considered to be in a position to support themselves.

            62.  Here there has been no explanation put forward by the
      Appellant or by the Sponsor as to why it is that he is dependent on
      financial support, as opposed to whether he needs to be so dependent.

            63.  It does seem to me that the lack of an explanation as to
      why the Appellant is financially dependent on the Sponsor is a factor
      which goes to establishing whether or not in fact he is actually
      dependent upon him.

            64.  Furthermore the lack of satisfactory evidence about the
      financial and other situation of the Appellant in Bangladesh means
      that it is not actually possible to identify what his essential needs
      are, and thus assess whether he is dependent on the Sponsor to meet
      them.

            65.  This leads on to the question as to the amounts of money
      that the Sponsor has said that he sends to the Appellant in
      Bangladesh.

            66.  In his letter in support of the application for an EEA
      family permit the Sponsor had said that he had been supporting the
      Appellant financially for his daily needs.  Included in the documents
      sent with that application were a number of money transfer receipts.

            67.  The Sponsor in his witness statement dated 2nd June 2015
      said that he had maintained regular contact with the Appellant and
      that he regularly sent him money; he again referred to the money
      transfer receipts which had been submitted to the Respondent as
      showing that the Appellant was dependent upon him.

            68.  Leaving aside for the moment the money transfer receipts,
      it was only during the course of oral evidence that the Sponsor gave
      details as to the amounts that he was providing to the Appellant by
      way of financial support.  He said that sometimes he would send a big
      amount every few months or if it was a small amount then he would send
      it often.  When I asked him to clarify this statement, he said that
      �400 or �500 was a big amount whereas up to �100 was a small amount.

            69.  The Sponsor went on to say that the Appellant did not have
      any other financial support.  Although she was ill and his father had
      passed away, the Sponsor did not provide any financial support for the
      Appellant's mother because he could not afford it and someone else was
      supporting her.

            70.  I am bound to say that I find this situation very
      surprising indeed.  I am aware from having heard so many appeals from
      Bangladesh of the family structure and cultural and social obligations
      that there are upon the younger generation to support the older
      generation, particularly later in life.

            71.  The Sponsor has said that the Appellant's mother
      effectively brought him up after his own mother died when he was small
      - at paragraph 4 of his statement he described her as a motherly
      figure to him; he also said that the Appellant's father had died years
      ago, that the Appellant was an only child, and that they [the
      Appellant and his mother] were struggling financially.

            72.  Given this situation I simply do not find it credible that
      the Sponsor would not have been also providing financial support for
      the Appellant's mother even if it was in conjunction with someone else
      - all the more so when he explicitly linked his responsibility to
      support the Appellant with the fact that his aunty [the Appellant's
      mother] brought him up.

            73.  In addition there is a further significant difficulty with
      the evidence about the money that the Sponsor has sent to Bangladesh.



            74.  In her evidence-in-chief Miss Rasoul asked the Sponsor
      whether the money transfer receipts were all the money that he had
      sent to the Appellant.  Rather than answering this question directly,
      he said that some of it was for him and that he was trying to buy some
      land.

            75.  Perhaps not surprisingly Miss Bishop took up this point
      during the course of her cross-examination.  She went through various
      of the sums of money sent to the Appellant as shown in the money
      transfer receipts.  He said that he was buying some land for himself;
      when Miss Bishop asked the Sponsor whether the Appellant was
      purchasing land on his behalf he said that it was for [the Sponsor].
      Crucially he went on to say in answer to the question as to whether
      all the money was for the land he said that he thought so; when he
      paid the Appellant a big amount of money then he would tell him to
      take some for himself.

            76.  The problem then that there seems to me to be for the
      Appellant and the Sponsor is that there is simply not the evidence to
      show that the money that has been sent by from this country is
      actually for the Appellant himself as opposed to buying the Sponsor's
      land, let alone that it is to meet the Appellant's essential needs.

            77.  Whilst therefore I consider that it is possible that the
      Appellant is financially dependent upon the Sponsor to meet his
      essential needs in Bangladesh, because of the difficulties with the
      evidence in this case I am not satisfied that it has been shown to be
      more likely than not that this is so - and it is of course to this
      standard of proof that he has to establish his entitlement to an EEA
      family permit.

            78.  It appears that it is only the question of dependency
      which is at issue in the appeal before me, there being no suggestion
      that the Appellant is or has been a member of the Sponsor's household
      in Bangladesh.

            79.  In any event there is quite simply no evidence, apart from
      the rather confusing reference to the house in Bangladesh being 'our
      house' to show that the Sponsor does own property in Bangladesh; and
      of course he has not lived in that country since he went to Spain in
      1999 when he was only 16 - and it seems that the house at that stage
      in fact belonged to the Appellant's mother and father.

            80.  As such then I do not see how the Appellant could be a
      member of the Sponsor's household in Bangladesh.

            81.  The final matter that I do need to deal with is the issue
      of dependency not being confined simply to financial support.

            82.  However there is nothing before me to show that there are
      other forms of support provided by the Sponsor to the Appellant, such
      as social or psychological support.  I note that some telephone
      records been provided apparently showing regular communication by the
      Sponsor to the telephone number which is said to be that of the
      Appellant; however  the existence of telephone communication does not
      without more establish any kind of social or other support or
      dependency."

            83.  Looking at the evidence as a whole in this case I am not
      satisfied that the Appellant has shown that it is more likely than not
      that he is dependent upon the Sponsor whether wholly or in part to
      meet his essential needs in Bangladesh.

            84.  On this basis then the appeal must be dismissed."

14.   That represented a most careful and thorough analysis as to how
matters stood as at 2 September 2014 which was the date of the decision
then under appeal.

15.   It is clear from the above passage that Judge Cope had considerable
concerns regarding the credibility of the sponsor (see in particular
paragraph 60 and the passage from paragraph 70 to 72.  I can find nothing
in the material before me relating to the current application and appeal
and nothing in what the sponsor had to say which would suggest that those
carefully reasoned concerns no longer apply or that the tribunal was wrong.
 Despite the sponsor's vague reference to there now being sufficient
evidence, I cannot find any evidence capable of touching upon those
specific credibility concerns.  They are not properly addressed in the
sponsor's witness statement of 20 July 2017.

16.   Further, I found the sponsor's oral evidence before me to be
unreliable.  At one point he told me that the claimant had no siblings but
then said he does have a married sister.  He was vague as to the claimant's
previous education in Bangladesh despite claiming that it was he (the
sponsor) who had been financing it.  He was vague as to how the money was
spent which he claimed to be sending to the claimant.

17.   There was no evidence emanating from the claimant himself.  I
appreciate, of course, that he lives in Bangladesh.  But nevertheless,
although the claimant is no longer represented by UK based solicitors now,
he was so represented before the tribunal.  It is asserted that he is
dependent upon his sponsor and it would not have been difficult, perhaps
with the sponsor's assistance, for some form of statement of have been
obtained from him explaining, for example, how he comes to be dependent
upon his sponsor and how the money said to be sent for his benefit is used
to meet his needs.  Nothing of that sort has been provided.

18.   In the circumstances I would conclude that there is nothing before me
to suggest that my assessment as to the sponsor's credibility should be any
different from that of Judge Cope following Devaseelan principles.  But
even if it were not for that, I would not have found the evidence before
me, even if looking at it entirely afresh, as being persuasive.  It is
simply too vague.  The burden of proof does rest upon the claimant.  In my
judgment, with respect to the element of dependency, he has not fulfilled
it.

19.   In remaking the decision, therefore, my having set aside the
tribunal's decision, I dismiss the claimant's appeal against the entry
clearance officer's decision of 4 May 2016.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside.

In remaking the decision I dismiss the claimant's appeal against the entry
clearance officer's decision of 4 May 2016.

I make no anonymity direction.  None was sought and none has been made
before.


Signed:                           Date: 13 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                           Date: 13 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
