
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00550/2019
     HU/11632/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House via Teams                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 June 2021                               |On 21 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                             Kostyantyn Pereguda
                               Alina Pereguda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Collins, instructed by LS Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants appeal against decisions made on 20 December 2018 to refuse
them leave to remain and to reject their human rights claims.  Their
appeals against those decisions were allowed by the First-tier Tribunal for
reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 9 November 2019.  For the
reasons set out in my decision of 6 April 2021 (a copy of which is
attached) that decision was set aside.

The first appellant is the father of the second appellant.  Both are
citizens of Argentina.  The first appellant was originally a citizen of the
Ukraine and emigrated to Argentina with his then wife, and, once there, the
second appellant was born.  The relationship between the first appellant
and his wife broke down and she went to live in Spain.  That was in 2008.
It was later that the first appellant met his now wife, Caroline Neads.
They were married in the United Kingdom on 16 June 2012 and he was granted
entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and
settled here in 2012.  In the usual way that was for a period of 30 months
and was later extended by a further 30 months.

The second appellant had remained in Spain with her mother and visited the
first appellant and his new wife during the summer holidays, moving to join
them permanently on 17 July 2014.  By that point her mother had lost her
job and was unable to support them.

Since her arrival in the United Kingdom the second appellant has been
educated here and has developed a close relationship with Ms Neads, whom
she now sees as her mother.  Ms Neads sees the second appellant as her
daughter. The second appellant finished her A levels here and hopes to
attend university.

The first appellant is self-employed in construction; Ms Neads is in
receipt of state pension and also a pension from her former employer.  In
addition, she also wishes to return to working but has devoted much of her
time since 2012 to getting probate of her late mother's estate. Ms Neads
has osteoporosis and arthritis and her health continues to deteriorate.

The appellants' leave to remain expired on 19 May 2018.  They did not,
however, apply for further leave to remain until 31 July 2018.  This is
because owing to confusion over what was required and how they could
complete the necessary forms, applications were delayed, Mrs Neads being
unable to get the necessary documentation from Lambeth Council, who pay her
pension, evidence of her state pension and evidence of the first
appellant's earnings from self-employment.

The Secretary of State refused the applications on the basis that the
applications were made more than 28 days outside the permitted time and so
they did not meet the requirements of E-LTRP.2.2 in that they had
overstayed for a period greater than that permitted by paragraph 39E of the
Immigration Rules.  It was considered also that they did not meet the
financial eligibility requirements nor was EX.1 or EX.2 met in respect of
the first appellant.

The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the first appellant met the
requirements of EX.1 as although it was accepted that he had a genuine and
subsisting relationship with his partner but she was not satisfied that
there were insurmountable obstacles such that he or his partner would be
unable to continue their family life together outside the United Kingdom in
Argentina which they could not overcome or would entail very serious
hardship for him or his partner.

The respondent did not consider that either of the appellants met the
requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) nor that there were exceptional
circumstances having had regard to paragraph GEN.3.2 such that it would be
disproportionate to require them to leave the United Kingdom.

The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellants and Ms Neads.
It also heard submissions.  The judge found that the witnesses were
truthful in the circumstances which led to the application not been
submitted on time.  He said:-

"The first appellant and his partner made strong attempts to lodge the
application on time but they failed to do so because they claimed that they
did not have all the documents that were required.  The respondent does
have a discretion in circumstances where there are exceptional
circumstances.  I have considered the contents of the instruction of the
Directorate and I do not find that the reasons for the delay comes within
the terms of the instruction because the reason for the delay in this
instance was that they were awaiting documents from Pensions and HMRC and
this in my opinion could have been sorted in time and it was not
unforeseen.

13.  I consider that the appellant and his partner would not face
insurmountable obstacles under EX.1 even though that I accept that they
would face very difficult circumstances it would be difficult for the
appellant's partner to reside in Argentina and this would perhaps be a
strain on the relationship.  The appellant's partner gave evidence that she
would find it difficult to visit the appellants in Argentina.  I find that
EX.1 does not apply to the appellants for the reasons cited above."

The judge also found that the first appellant could not satisfy paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) as he would not face very significant obstacles but he did
find that the appellant was integrated into the culture of the United
Kingdom.  He also found that they had made bona fide attempts to contact
the respondents prior to the submission of the application and that its
late submission was unintentional.  He found Mrs Neads to be "a very
credible witness and she is taking twenty tablets a day".

The judge also found that the second appellant was residing with her father
and is dependent on him, indeed very dependent on him and that she could
not reside with her mother in Spain.

The Law

There is no need to set out the relevant provisions of the Immigration
Rules or section 117A and B of the 2002 Act. It is sufficiently clear that
the relevant provisions are set out in EX.1, EX.2 and 276ADE(1)(vi), and I
have applied them and section 117 in reaching my decision.

As did the First-tier Tribunal, I found the appellants to be credible
witnesses.  In reaching that conclusion I note Miss Isherwood's submission
that there were differences as to whether the family had discussed going
back to Argentina but I find that these are not in fact discrepancies.  The
point is that different discussions were had on a different basis.

I accept that the appellants have told me the truth about their
circumstances in the United Kingdom and now it was that they have ended up
in the United Kingdom.  I accept also that Ms Neads has also been truthful.

I accept that as there is a genuine and subsisting relationship between the
appellant and Ms Neads that there exists a family life between them.  I
accept also that a family life continues to exist between Ms Neads and the
second appellant and between the second appellant and her father.  In
reaching that conclusion I bear in mind that she came to the United Kingdom
to join her father and her stepmother when she was still a minor.  I accept
her evidence that this is the first time that she has had a stable house
and home in which to live and to develop, given that there were
difficulties when they lived in Argentina and again with her mother in
Spain as she always had to move houses due to the precarious situation.  I
accept also the evidence set out in the witness statements that Mrs Neads
has not had any children before and sees the second appellant as her
daughter, albeit one to which she is not related by blood.  I accept also
that the second appellant relies on and has emotional ties to her
stepmother.

I bear in mind that she is still an adult but equally she still lives in
the family home, is dependent financially on her father and stepmother and
maintains a close emotional relationship.  I am satisfied that in the
particular circumstances of this case the family life that normally exists
between a child and a parent has not ceased to exist just because the
appellant in this case had turned 18.

It therefore follows that the existence of this family unit is a starting
point for assessing the remainder of the application.

Miss Isherwood's submission that this is an "outside the Rules" appeal is
misplaced.  It is manifestly the case that the first appellant seeks to
rely on EX.1 and EX.2 and that the second appellant seeks to rely on
276ADE(1)(vi).  I accept, however, that if these are not met, then it would
be necessary to consider the applications through the prism of GEN.3.2.

I turn first to the consideration of EX.1 and EX.2.  While I note Miss
Isherwood's submission that the primary concern in this case appears to be
financial and in particular the financing of the second appellant's
education, that is because of the the questions she put in cross-
examination.

I accept on the basis of the medical evidence that Ms Neads suffers from
osteoporosis and this has caused difficulties.  It is not, I consider, of
much relevance that the medical evidence is based on two phone calls.  It
is difficult to see how, in current circumstances, any other form of
consultation could have taken place and it must be seen in the context of a
view of a medical professional who is aware of Ms Neads's underlying
illness and the fact that she is 75.  I accept that she now needs
assistance around the house because of the difficulties arising from
osteoporosis.

I accept the evidence that it was difficult for the first appellant to
obtain employment in Argentina when he first arrived, now over twenty years
ago.  He is 60 and I bear in mind that Argentina was a country to which he
emigrated.  It is not a country in which he has ties beyond living there
for a relatively short period there over ten years ago.  He does not have
family there, does not have a home there and whilst he has established a
successful business in the United Kingdom it does not necessarily follow
that he would be able to do so once again in Argentina although I do accept
the submission that if his fluency Spanish is a little bit lacking at
present, having learnt it in the past he could become more fluent
relatively easily.  I accept that it would be difficult for his wife to
relocate to Argentina, given her age and the fact that she has never lived
there.  It is likely that the financial position would be precarious
although I do bear in mind that there is no indication that she would not
if she relocated there be unable to rely on the pension income she derives
already.

Whilst it is submitted that she could continue her work there via Zoom as
she does at present, that is not something that was put to her properly by
Miss Isherwood.  Whilst I accept that meetings may be continued by Zoom and
similar electronic means, it does not necessarily follow that the work
would be given to somebody who has located outside the United Kingdom and
who might not, for example, be able to undertake, as an architect would be
expected to do, site visits or meetings in person.

I accept also that Ms Neads retains a close attachment to her brother, who
she feels she needs to support and that relocating to Argentina would be a
significant disruption.

Given the relatively short period that the first appellant lived in
Argentina, his separation from that for over a decade, it is difficult to
see how he would be able to assist his wife in adapting to life there.
Accordingly, I consider that whilst no-one of these factors taken in itself
will be insurmountable, I consider that viewed together it would be very
difficult, not necessarily impossible, for them to continue a family life
there in uncertain and precarious circumstances in a country with which the
first appellant is no longer familiar.

Accordingly, for these reasons I am satisfied that EX.1 and EX.2 are met
and that the first appellant's appeal falls to be allowed on that basis
alone.

I accept, however, that it would be very difficult for the second appellant
if returned to Argentina.  It is a country she had left at the age of 8 and
I accept that there is no indication that she would now be able to join her
mother again in Spain, given that she is now an adult and her mother is not
a Spanish citizen.  I accept that she would have difficulties in returning
into the education system, given that she has not been in it since the age
of 8 and I accept also that she may have financial difficulties.  That
said, she speaks Spanish, she has lived in that country and I do not
consider that either singly or cumulatively any of the factors identified
are sufficient such that she meets the requirements of paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi).

In assessing further the circumstances in this case, I bear in mind that it
is now argued that the appellants did at the date of application and
decision meet the financial requirements of Appendix FM-SE.  I am satisfied
that that is so from the P60s supplied to me in respect of Ms Neads'
pension from Lambeth and also from the figures regarding her entitlement to
the state retirement pension.  I find that, taken together, these show that
at all material times she had sufficient income to meet the financial
requirements of Appendix FM in respect of a family unit consisting of her,
and the first and second appellants.

I bear in mind that this is not a situation like that in Younas in that
there has been no indication of dishonesty in this case at all.  On the
contrary, the appellants have been open and candid with the respondent
about their position and it is owing to the misunderstandings of the
working of the Rules which resulted in an application not being made within
time or within 28 days of leave expiry.

In Younas at [90] The Upper Tribunal held:
         90.   Chikwamba pre-dates Part 5A  of  the  Nationality Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), which  was  inserted  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014. Section 117A(2) of the 2002 Act provides that
         a  court  or  tribunal,  when  considering  "the  public   interest
         question," must have regard to the considerations listed in section
         117B (and 117C in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals, which is not  relevant  to  this  appeal).  The  "public
         interest question" is  defined  as  "the  question  of  whether  an
         interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
         family life is justified under article 8(2)". There is no exception
         in Part 5A of the 2002 Act (or elsewhere) for  cases  in  which  an
         appellant, following removal, will succeed in  an  application  for
         entry clearance. Accordingly, an appellant in an  Article  8  human
         rights appeal who argues  that  there  is  no  public  interest  in
         removal because after leaving the UK he  or  she  will  be  granted
         entry  clearance  must,  in  all  cases,   address   the   relevant
         considerations in  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  including  section
         117B(1),  which  stipulates  that  "the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls  is  in  the  public  interest".  Reliance  on
         Chikwamba does not obviate the need to do this.
         92.   The first question to be addressed is whether  her temporary
         removal from the UK is a sufficient interference with her (and her
         family's) family life to even engage article 8(1). If article 8(1)
         is not engaged then the proportionality of removal  under  article
         8(2) - and therefore the Chikwamba principle - does not arise.
         ...
         94.   The second  question  is  whether  an  application  for entry
         clearance from abroad will be granted. If the appellant will not be
         granted entry clearance the Chikwamba principle is not relevant.  A
         tribunal must determine this  for  itself  based  on  the  evidence
         before it, the burden being on the appellant: see Chen at 39.
         95.   The third question is whether there is a public interest in
         the appellant being required to leave the UK in order to undertake
         the step of applying for entry clearance; and if so, how much
         weight should be attached to that public interest.
         96.   In some cases, the fact that a person will be able to re-
         enter the UK means that there will be no public interest at all in
         his or her removal. By way of example, in Parveen v The Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 932 the appellant
         had entered the country lawfully and genuinely on a spouse visa and
         had remained married to her husband and resident in the UK ever
         since but had not, thirteen years earlier, made an application for
         leave. Underhill LJ observed at para. 28:
             "It is hard to see how it could be  right  to  insist  on  the
             empty but disruptive formality of leaving the country in order
             to correct a venial administrative error made  thirteen  years
             previously".
          97.   If there is no public interest in a person's removal then it
         will be disproportionate for him  or  her  to  be  removed  and  no
         further analysis under Article 8 is required. On the other hand, if
         there is at least some degree of public interest in a person  being
         temporarily removed then it will be necessary to evaluate how  much
         weight is to be given to that public interest so that this  can  be
         factored into the proportionality assessment under article 8(2).
          ...
         99.    The fourth question is whether  the  interference  with  the
         appellant's (and her family's) right to respect for  their  private
         and family life arising from her being required to leave the UK for
         a temporary period is justified under article 8(2). This requires a
         proportionality evaluation  (i.e.  a  balance  of  public  interest
         factors)   where   consideration   is   given   to   all   material
         considerations  including  (in  particular)  those  enumerated   in
         section 117B of the 2002 Act.

The starting point for assessing the public interests in this case is
Section 117B.  The fact that the appellants speak English and are
financially independent are neutral but it is relevant to consider whether
they would meet the requirements of the Rules or not.  Two alternatives
fall to be considered: whether if the first appellant meets the
requirements of the Rules and whether, in the alternative, he does not.

On any view, if the first appellant did not meet the requirements of the
Rules, it is only by a narrow margin; and there is little doubt that he
would, in ordinary circumstances, be able to return to Argentina and apply
for Entry Clearance.

It has to be considered also that the public interest is not necessarily
fixed.  I accept that the decision in Chikwamba predates KO (Nigeria) but
nonetheless, the fact that the first appellant would be able relatively
easily to re-enter the United Kingdom is a factor to be taken into account.
 This is not a case where there is any hint of the appellant not being
granted entry clearance, given his good immigration history apart from a
relatively short period of overstaying.

The second appellant of course could not meet the requirements of the
Immigration Rules.  But the family life that exists between her, the first
appellant and his wife could only reasonably be expected to take place in
the United Kingdom.  There will be a significant interference in the family
life which exists.  The interference would be serious and would, in effect,
sever the ties as they currently exist between the second appellant and her
father and stepmother.

The effect of not permitting the second appellant to remain in the United
Kingdom would be to sever any meaningful way of the family life that exists
between her and her parents.  She would be required to go to live in a
country where she has not lived since the age of 8, no family and no
connections on which to depend.  She would in effect, although she speaks
the language, be isolated and whilst that might not amount to very
significant obstacles, I consider that the difficulties she would encounter
as well as the effective severing of any meaningful family ties are such as
to amount to very compelling circumstances such that GEN.3.2 is engaged.

For these reasons, I am satisfied applying the principles set out in TZ
(Pakistan), that the appeals ought to be allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and I set it aside.

I remake the appeals by allowing the appeals on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 12 July 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00550/2019
     HU/11632/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2021                              |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


                  mr Kostyantyn Pereguda (first Appellant)
                   miss Alina Pereguda (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr T Aitken, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese promulgated on 19 November 2019.
    The judge allowed the appeal of Mr Pereguda and his daughter Alina
    Pereguda against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse their
    human rights claims.

 1. I refer to Mr and Miss Pereguda as the appellants as they were for  the
    First-tier Tribunal for ease, rather than for any  other  reason.   The
    first appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2012 with a  spouse  visa
    valid until 2015.  He applied for further leave as a spouse on  7  July
    2015, which was granted until 19 May 2018.  The  second  appellant  was
    granted leave to enter as his dependant daughter in  2015  as  she  had
    previously been living in Spain with her mother who it is  said  is  no
    longer able to  support  her.   She  has  had  limited  time  spent  in
    Argentina, the country of her nationality.

 2. The appellants applied for further leave to remain but the applications
      were  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  firstly,  because   the
    application was made 28 days out of time and thus they were overstayers
    and second, on the basis that they  could  not  satisfy  the  financial
    eligibility grounds  on  the  information  supplied  as  regards  self-
    employment.  The Secretary of State also concluded that the  provisions
    of EX1 did not apply as insufficient evidence had been provided to show
    that there were insurmountable obstacles or that they would  face  very
    significant difficulties which could not be overcome.  The Secretary of
    State suggested also that the appellant and his partner could therefore
    return to Argentina.

 3. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  first  appellant  and  the  first
    appellant's partner.  He heard submissions from  both  parties  and  he
    allowed the appeal.  Importantly it has to be borne in  mind  that  the
    judge found at paragraph 13 that the appellant and  his  partner  would
    not face insurmountable obstacles under EX1. even  though  he  accepted
    they would face very difficult circumstances.  He also  considered  the
    first appellant could not satisfy the provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE
    again on the basis that the appellant would not face  very  significant
    obstacles because he had resided most of  his  life  in  Argentina  and
    would be able to integrate on his return.

 4. The judge then at paragraphs 15  to  16  found  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him that there were exceptional  circumstances  outside
    of the Rules such that removal  would  be  disproportionate.   He  also
    found that the decision would be disproportionate  in  respect  of  the
    second appellant as she had  been  living  in  this  country  with  her
    father, and was dependent on him even though she is now an  adult.   He
    concluded at [18] that the first and second appellant's  removal  would
    cause unjustifiably harsh consequences to the  appellants  and  to  the
    partner of the first appellant.  He also  noted  they  would  not  have
    found themselves in the situation if they had not missed  the  deadline
    in submitting the application.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  two  principle
    grounds.  First  that  the  judge  had  failed  having  concluded  that
    paragraph EX1 had not been made out, that on the same facts there  were
    nonetheless exceptional circumstances making  removal  disproportionate
    and  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  adequate  findings  while  the
    circumstances are not insurmountable would be exceptional.  The  second
    ground is that the judge failed properly to consider paragraphs  40  to
    60 of R (on the application of Agyarko) v  Secretary  of  State  [2017]
    UKSC 11, thus misdirecting himself in law.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Keeffe
    on 11 May 2020, the judge stating  that  it  was  arguable  that  Judge
    Abebrese had given insufficient reasons for finding that removal  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh circumstances,  adding  that  the  second
    appellant is an Argentinian national who was an adult at  the  date  of
    hearing, stating that the judge has not considered  whether  she  could
    return to Argentina, as submitted by the respondent it is arguable  the
    finding  that  the  decision  would  result  in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences is again inadequately reasoned.

 7. Subsequent to that the appellants have produced a response pursuant  to
    Rule 24 which in summary argues that the  reasoning  by  the  judge  is
    sound on the basis of the findings of fact and the material before  him
    and submitting also that  Judge  O'Keeffe  erred  in  going  beyond  in
    granting permission on a ground  which  had  not  been  raised  by  the
    parties plus relying on Durueke [2019] UKUT 197.  I add at  this  point
    as an aside that I have no power to alter the terms  of  the  grant  of
    permission.  They must stand and I have no power to set  aside  either
    the whole or the part of the grant of Judge O'Keeffe.

 8. In considering the submissions made to me by both  parties  I  consider
    that the starting point must be the findings of Judge Abebrese set  out
    in his decision beginning at 13.  As the grounds submit it is difficult
    to see what would have been considered by the immigration in reaching a
    conclusion that neither EX.1 nor 276ADE were reached yet would fall  to
    be considered within the wider ambit of Article 8,  not  as  the  judge
    said outside the Rules entirely but I would have  thought  pursuant  to
    paragraph GEN3.2 in Appendix FM.

 9. Mr Aitken has very helpfully taken me to these matters which were taken
    into account which are that  the  appellant  has  integrated  into  the
    United Kingdom and has a settled life here  with  his  partner  who  is
    British.  But I note also that the judge said he gave little weight  to
    any private life being established in this  country.   The  judge  also
    took into account that there would be difficulties in  the  appellant's
    wife relocating to Argentina and that she would not visit  him  because
    of conditions there.  Looking at this in terms of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I conclude that  the  judge  has  not  explained  adequately  or
    properly why he concluded that factors he  took  into  account  as  not
    meeting the test applicable in EX.1 or 276 ADE (1) (vi) were such  that
    it would be disproportionate to  remove  the  appellants,  nor  has  he
    identified any factors that would not have been taken into  account  in
    assessing those tests which  nonetheless  tipped  the  balance  in  the
    appellants' favour, still less why that is so when  significant  weight
    has to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in  removal  when  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules are not met.

10. Having had regard to the decision of the Supreme Court  in  Agyarko  at
    paragraphs 40 to 60 I consider that in this  case  the  judge  has  not
    explained properly or identified what factors properly underpinned  the
    conclusion there were unjustifiably harsh consequences bearing in  mind
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules had not been met and for
    that reason I am satisfied that the decision involved the making of  an
    error of law.

11. In doing so I bear in mind that it should not be the  position  of  the
    Upper Tribunal to set aside decisions simply because  they  might  have
    reached  findings  different  from  those  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  But in this  case  I  consider  that  the  reasoning  is  so
    inadequate that the  judge  has  failed  properly  to  explain  why  by
    reference to the factors he did and  did  not  take  into  account  the
    public interest was outweighed in this case despite the fact  that  the
    Immigration Rules were not met.   The  only  factors  being  identified
    being the fact that the first appellant was present  and  settled  here
    and consequently that the second appellant who  was  dependent  on  him
    ought to be able to remain here.

12. The decision is defective for these reasons. I find therefore that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
    law and I set it aside.

13. The question then is whether this  should  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision.
    I conclude that as any further fact-finding will be limited, that it is
    appropriate for the decision to be remade in the Upper  Tribunal.  That
    remaking will involve the consideration of whether,  on  the  facts  as
    found, EX.1 and/or paragraph 276 (1)ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    met, and if not, whether the removal of the appellants would  still  be
    disproportionate.

    Notice of Decision & Directions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I direct that the decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to
    be fixed.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.

 4. Any party wishing to rely on any further material must serve it on  the
    other party and on the Upper Tribunal at least 10 working  days  before
    the next hearing.

 5. If the appellants wish to give further oral evidence,  then  they  must
    prepare and serve additional witness statements in line with  direction
    (4) above.


Signed                                  Date 6 April 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

