
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01726/2019 ('V')
                                                               HU/01733/2019
                                                               HU/01735/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th March 2021                   |On 01 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                           'JF' - First appellant
                           'NE' - second appellant
                           'AKF' - third appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
By virtue of the Third Appellant being a minor, unless and until a  Tribunal
or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family.    Failure to comply with this  direction  could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Both representatives, the lead appellant, JF, who gave evidence, and I
attended the hearing via Skype, while the hearing was also open to attend
at Field House.  The parties did not object to attending via Skype and I
was satisfied that the representatives and the lead appellant were able to
participate in the hearing.

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellants' appeal against the
respondent's refusal of their application for leave to remain outside the
Immigration Rules, on the basis of right to respect for their family and
private lives (the appellants are a family, being a husband, wife and
child, with the second and third appellants dependent on the lead
appellant's appeal).

The appellants, citizens of Sri Lanka, sought leave to remain in the UK
based on their human rights.  As recorded in the error of law decision
annexed to these reasons, Upper Tribunal Dawson had noted at �2, the lead
appellant had entered the UK on 15th October 2009 with leave as a Tier 4
student and had been granted further periods of leave to remain until 9th
May 2017, when he made a human rights claim based on right to respect for
his private life.  The respondent refused the lead appellant's application
in a decision dated 13th January 2019, including on the basis that she was
satisfied that the lead appellant had submitted a certificate of
proficiency in English language, commonly referred to as a "TOEIC", which
he had obtained by deception, specifically having used a proxy test taker.
The application was therefore refused on grounds of suitability and because
the respondent did not accept that there would be very significant
obstacles to the appellants' integration into their country of origin, Sri
Lanka.

The appellants appealed against that refusal, including on the basis that
they had not been given the opportunity of an interview in which to address
any concerns that the respondent had about the lead applicant's alleged
participation in the TOEIC deception; that the respondent failed to
consider the third appellant's best interests as a child; and the
appellants had no longer any ties in Sri Lanka to help them integrate
there.

On 18th July 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan (the 'FtT') allowed the
appellants' appeals, concluding that the respondent had discharged the
initial evidential burden of proving deception in line with the authority
of  SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT
00229 (IAC) and SSHD v Shezad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615, but
concluded that the respondent had failed to establish, on the balance of
probabilities that the appellant's prima facie innocent explanation was to
be rejected.  The FtT indicated that it appeared the appropriate course
would be for the lead appellant to be granted a period of leave, perhaps 60
days in which to make a further application (see the authority of Ahsan v
SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.

The respondent appealed on the basis that the FtT's reason for concluding
that the respondent had not shown that the prima facie explanation should
be rejected be rejected was unclear and inadequately explained.

This Tribunal set aside the FtT's decision (UT Judge Dawson), allowing the
appeal, without any preserved findings of fact, in an appeal which is in
the Annex to this this decision.  This Tribunal regarded it as appropriate
to remake the decision.

Further developments in the remaking of the appeal

The remaking hearing was listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Blum and me on
19th February 2020, but adjourned because of difficulties in the
appellants' representatives preparation for, and limited attendance at,
that hearing, because of a bereavement.  We gave our reasons as follows:

"Reasons

We identified and agreed with the parties' representatives the issues in
the case.  It became apparent that the lead appellant had not adduced any
written witness evidence in relation to the wider article 8 issues, as Mr
Khan [the appellants' representative] had been instructed only a few days
earlier and the appellants had not appreciated the need to consider
evidence relating to article 8, as the appellants' representatives had been
under the impression that the case was analogous to Ahsan, and an appeal by
reference to human rights could be resolved by way of a grant if a 60-day
period to obtain an alternative CAS, which Mr Khan accepted was incorrect;
and because of the hope that the FtT's record of evidence would deal with
these issues, when that manuscript record was not one we could read and no
attempt had been made to agree a note of the evidence.  We had been minded
to refuse Mr Khan's adjournment application on the basis that the lead
appellant could give live oral witness evidence, but there was insufficient
time to do so as Mr Khan needed leave this Tribunal attend a funeral of a
close relative just over an hour after live evidence would start.  In the
circumstances, we regarded it as appropriate to adjourn the hearing."

Covid then intervened but a case management hearing took place on 10th
December 2020, to ensure that the remaking could now progress, at which
both parties confirmed that they had complied with relevant directions.

The issues in this appeal

The issues in remaking the FtT's decision, as identified and agreed between
the representatives at the hearing are:

      1. (1)  On the TOIEC issue, with the appellants accepting that the
         respondent has demonstrated a prima facie case, is whether the
         appellants have provided an innocent explanation meeting the
         minimum level of plausibility (see SM & Qadir)

      2. (2)  Still on the TOEIC issue, should I reject any innocent
         explanation by the appellants, to be satisfied that the respondent
         has shown the alleged deception?

      3. (3)  whether, on wider article 8 ECHR grounds outside the
         Immigration Rules, the appeal should be allowed.

In discussing and agreeing these issues with the representatives, I was
grateful for their pragmatic approach in narrowing down the issues.  Mr
Bellara did not now seek to rely, in the appeal before me, on a potential
new matter relating to claimed continuous lawful residence exceeding 10
years.  He was clear that the appellants did not resile from this
contention, but was not in a position to argue the matter today because of
the absence of relevant documentation.  Mr Melvin similarly agreed that
whilst the respondent regarded there as having been a break in continuous
lawful residence in 2012, he did not ask me to resolve that dispute today.
Both parties were content that when assessing the appellant's appeal by
reference to proportionality, I should not make any findings as to whether
there was continuous lawful residence and instead would proceed on the
basis that the lead appellant had merely been continuously present (the
status of which remained contested) since his entry to the UK on 13
February 2010.  Mr Bellara accepted on that basis that any private life
developed in the UK would necessarily be treated as precarious for the
purposes of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002.  Mr Bellara indicated that there was to be a separate application for
settlement which would seek to resolve the issue of claimed long residence,
once the issue of deception and associated suitability was resolved.

Mr Bellara similarly did not seek to rely on any argument that there were
very significant obstacles to the appellants' integration into Sri Lanka,
whether by reference to any health issues, or at all.  The sole basis on
which the appellants argued a lack of proportionality was as contained in
��17 and 18 of the lead appellant's second witness statement, dated 4th
March 2020, namely that he had become settled in the UK; had invested a
significant amount of time, money and energy in establishing himself and
had worked tirelessly to gain Tier 1 status; was without assets or savings
in Sri Lanka; his family and young daughter were settled here; and he was
unable to start from scratch again in Sri Lanka.

Documents

I also identified and agreed with the representatives the documents which I
was being asked to consider.  They comprised the original bundle before the
FtT; and two written witness statements of the appellant dated 12th July
2019 and 4th March 2020, which the lead appellant adopted and on which he
was cross-examined by Mr Melvin.  What was notable was that whilst there
appeared to be an extensive immigration history, including reference to a
previous First-tier Tribunal determination and a judicial review
application, but those documents were not provided, despite there being
previous directions that were there to be any documents which the parties'
regarded me as needing to consider as part of the appeal that they should
be produced before the Tribunal.  As it was, I was reliant upon elements of
the immigration history being agreed or least not disputed in making some
findings.

Witness evidence

The gist of the lead appellant's two witness statement are as follows.  He
had entered the UK on 13th February 2010 on a Tier 4 Student visa, with
valid leave to remain until 28th June 2012.  His wife, the second
appellant, arrived as his dependant and his daughter was born on 23rd April
2017 in the UK.

To gain his student visa, the lead appellant had relied upon his
qualifications from Sri Lanka. He had completed all his schooling there in
English and he relied upon that as part of his application.  He then went
on to study a BA (Hons) degree in gaming animation in the UK but
unfortunately the college concerned, CTM College, lost its licence six
months after he began the course in 2010.  Therefore, he later applied for,
and was granted, a Tier 1 Entrepreneur visa, with his successful
application dated 12nd December 2012 and the grant in 2014, valid until 9th
May 2017 (an earlier Tier 1 application in 2012 had been refused).  He
later applied for leave to remain on an alternative basis, namely not on a
Tier 1 basis but instead based on his private life in the UK, which was
refused in the decision where the issue of his alleged participation in a
TOEIC fraud was alleged.

The lead appellant asserted that he had genuinely taken the test and
recalled doing so at the New College of Finance. He had chosen that
location because of the availability of dates.  He had made an appointment
to go and visit the college to book the test and paid for it, in cash, in
person. He had studied for it with sample papers.  He recalled how he
travelled to the test centre, which he elaborated on in oral evidence and
he also remembered some of the topics, which he elaborated on in oral
evidence.  After taking the test, he recalled being telephoned by the
college a few weeks later, was told to come and collect the certificate,
which he did.

Upon learning of the claims made by the respondent that he had participated
in a TOEIC fraud, he contacted the college but it had closed.  He had
instructed solicitors to contact ETS and ask them to provide the voice
recording of the test, but nothing had been provided in response.  He added
that in the ETS records his passport number had been recorded wrongly.  His
passport number was an old passport number which was not valid at the time
of his test and he had used his valid passport when providing
identification for the test.  The records confirmed that he had also
repeated the test on 17th July 2012 to improve his marks.

In oral evidence, the lead appellant added that upon his degree course
ceasing because of the CTM's college closure in 2010 he had not then
enrolled on a new college course. The specialist nature of the course
(gaming animation) meant that he could not find another course anywhere
else in the UK.  He accepted that he did not have any documentary evidence
showing searches for alternative courses and he had given all of his
documents to his lawyer.  He decided instead to set up a photography
business, focussing on editorial fashion and "elopement-style"wedding
photographs.  He had chosen the New College of Finance at which to take the
TOEIC test because they were the only dates available which he wanted and
the test centre location was close to his home where he lived at the time
in Dagenham. He described a journey where he had walked ten minutes to a
station, caught an overground train from Goodmere to Stratford where he
changed and took the DLR to Canary Wharf and then onwards to the college.
He had paid in cash a fee of �150. The college had kept the receipt and
handed him back his passport, which he had provided as identification.  He
recalled the topics on which he had been tested which related to London
transport and the environment.

The lead appellant explained that he could not run his photography business
in Sri Lanka because of all the money he had already spent in the UK and
the fact that his camera equipment was in the UK.

He accepted that after his leave to remain as a Tier 1 entrepreneur had
expired he had not sought to renew it because of the lack of financial
documents that he had available which would be needed for such an
application.  Instead, he had applied for leave to remain outside the
Rules.

The lead appellant accepted that he did not have any documentation for the
degree course,  for which he had studied in 2010, because of the short
period in which he had been able to study (only a few months) before the
college had closed down.

He further accepted that after the college had closed, he did not alert the
respondent to the fact that he was no longer studying, and had waiting
until 2012 before applying for the Tier 1 visa.  He had not tried to obtain
a CAS from another college or asked for help from the respondent.  He had
also not returned to Sri Lanka.  He had instead wanted to develop his
career in the UK.

The lead appellant acknowledged that his first application for leave to
remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur in May 2012 had been rejected because he
had not provided an English language test qualification certificate.  He
accepted then that he had appealed; his statutory appeal was considered and
rejected by a First-tier Tribunal hearing in November 2012, which he had
not attended.  He applied for judicial review in July 2013 of a further
rejection of a second Tier 1 application, which had not provided a right of
appeal.  He was then granted leave to remain in May 2014.  His business
partner had been a Mr Pransiskuge and they had jointly applied for leave to
remain.  Both relied upon a considerable investment of �200,000 from Sri
Lanka which was a combination of money from both individuals' respective
families and friends in Sri Lanka.  However, Mr Pransiskuge himself had not
pursued a judicial review application and they had split up as business
partners in 2013.

The lead appellant added that he had qualifications in photography, having
studied both in Sri Lanka and in Singapore for two and a half years.  His
photography business was registered as a limited company, called Enchanters
Photography Limited.

The lead appellant reiterated that he had attempted to contact New College
of Finance after learning of the allegations of deception but it had
closed.  He similarly relied upon his solicitors to chase ETS.  It was
suggested to him that the respondent had attempted to contact him on two
occasions in 2015 and 2016 for the purposes of interviewing him in relation
to his English language proficiency, using the same email address that he
had used since 2009. He disputed having received such invitations.

The lead appellant confirmed that his family were all healthy and there
were no health issues which might prevent him from returning to Sri Lanka
but that in terms of return there and setting up another business, those
who had supported him previously now lived in different parts of the world.
 He explained that he had paid �2,500 for his course with CTM.  No-one had
ever suggested that his Tier 1 business was not genuine.

The respondent's closing submissions

Mr Melvin relied upon his three skeleton arguments and the refusal
decision.  I was invited to consider that the lead appellant was not a
credible witness and that his innocent explanation should not be accepted
and that I should find that he had been involved in the TOEIC deception as
claimed.  There was little by way of evidence to corroborate the lead
appellant's claims to have tried to contact both the college and ETS in
terms of any challenge to the deception allegations.  I should also
consider the lead appellant's background.  He had entered the UK in 2010,
but the sponsoring college had ceased the course six months later.  It was
a requirement of a student visa to continue to study and there had been no
attempt by the lead appellant to obtain an alternative CAS or contact the
respondent for alternative venues of study.

Instead, as the lead appellant candidly accepted, his main priority was to
remain in the UK.  There was no evidence of him attending the CTM College
nor of taking any exams.  I was invited to consider the gap in that
evidence and whether the lead appellant therefore had a motive in procuring
a proxy to take the TOEIC test.  The New College of Finance had apparently
continued to function until February 2020, according to the Home Office
website and the lead appellant had not adduced any evidence of having paid
for his test in cash as claimed.  Similarly, his claim to have booked that
particular college because of the need to arrange for specific dates was
undermined by his acceptance now that he was not studying and therefore
there was no time pressure to necessitate choosing that particular college,
because of the availability of dates.

In relation to the lead appellant's subsequent business itself, there was
little by way of documentation in terms of the business.  It also did not
make any sense that the partner had jointly invested �200,000 with the lead
appellant but had not pursued a judicial review application.

Mr Bellara himself had, in terms, accepted that there was nothing in terms
of exceptionality in the case beyond the family's evident desire to remain
in the UK.



The appellants' closing submissions

I was invited to consider by Mr Bellara that the lead appellant was a
candid witness.  He had answered all the questions without reservation or
hesitancy and he had expressed himself articulately and I should note the
fluidity of his English today.  He had qualifications from Sri Lanka, with
education in English and so had arrived in the UK and presumably obtained
his student visa because of his English language proficiency.  There was no
suggestion that he was complicit in the CTM College having its licence
revoked.  Moreover, I should also attach significant weight to the fact
that he was eventually able to obtain a Tier 1 Entrepreneur visa, given the
typically rigorous review of such visa applications by the respondent.  The
lead appellant had given specific evidence about an account about his
journey to, and taking, the test, and I should attach weight to that
recollection.  Critically, there was no reason he should cheat.  His
command of English today was of a high standard and it had been at the
time.  Even though Mr Bellara did not and could not give evidence before me
there was similarly no obligation to obtain voice recordings from ETS
although he was instructed that his solicitors had attempted to engage with
the ETS's lawyers.

Mr Bellara candidly accepted that he was not seeking to pursue what he
regarded as any claim of exceptionality or any argument around
proportionality with any 'bells and whistles', as he called it.  The
crucial focus here was the finding of deception but I was also asked to
consider the period in which the lead appellant had been in the UK even
though I was not being asked to find that there was continuous lawful
residence.

Findings and conclusions

In any assessment of credibility, this is a nuanced assessment based on a
variety of personal factors.  As I have already indicated, there was a lack
of documentary evidence which one normally might expect to be adduced, but
this was an omission on both sides and not simply by the lead appellant.
Although I am conscious that in giving evidence before me, this was many
years after the alleged participation in the TOEIC fraud, I was impressed
by his ease and fluency, lack of hesitancy or reservation in both the lead
appellant's oral English and his willingness and candidness in answering
questions.  He was articulate and willing to concede points that were not
necessarily in his favour, for example the fact that his CTM College had
closed within six months of his arrival, but he had not found alternative
studies and had nevertheless remained in the UK, because of his desire to
stay here.

Although the lead appellant's first Tier 1 application had been refused in
May 2012 because of the lack of an English language certificate and
therefore there might be some motive in seeking to obtain a proxy to take
the TOEIC, what was also clear was that the lead appellant had taken a
second set of tests on 17th July 2012, the month after the impugned tests
on 27th June 2012, to improve his scores, which is hardly consistent with
someone who did not wish to take the test in the first place.  Also, the
lead appellant's academic achievements prior to entering the UK in Sri
Lanka, whilst not the subject of corroborating evidence, were not disputed.
His education in both Sri Lanka and Singapore was in English and he had
conducted his photograph business in the UK in English.

The lead appellant's account of his travel to the June 2012 test was also
without hesitation and whilst Mr Melvin invited me to consider that there
was no time pressure necessitating choice of a particular college, I noted
that first that the college in question was nearby to his residence and
second, the fact he had recently had a Tier 1 application refused because
of the absence of an educational certificate made it plausible that he
would want to obtain an English language certificate without delay. I do
consider that there does not appear to be any documentary evidence that he
had chased ETS, but I am prepared to accept his evidence that he asked his
solicitors to do so, and Mr Bellara separately has a professional duty not
to mislead this Tribunal and has confirmed these instructions from his
solicitors.

I also consider the appellant's "look up" results (invalid for the June
results, 'questionable' for the July results) and that for the test centre
in question, namely New College of Finance, there was a high level of
invalid results and none were deemed as reliable.  Weighed against that, I
conclude that the lead appellant's explanation was compelling. The
explanation included his prior education in English; his fluency and ease
in oral English before me, his ease in describing the day of his test,
which was not challenged; the plausibility of why he chose that test
centre; his desire to retake the TOEIC test on a second occasion, to
improve his score, shortly after the first attempt; the scrutiny that would
most likely have been applied to his Tier 1 application shortly afterwards,
which was eventually granted; and his willingness to concede points not
necessarily in his favour.  I did not draw significant adverse inferences
from the absence of documentary evidence, including relating to chasing ETS
about the TOEIC recording, particularly where both parties referred to
documents which were not before me.

In summary, I conclude that the respondent has not shown that the lead
appellant engaged in deception when he took the TOEIC tests on 27th June
2012.

However, that is not an end of the matter in relation to the appellants'
human rights appeal.  Considering that appeal through the lens of the
Immigration Rules, the lead appellant's application, which was refused, was
for leave to remain based on his private life.  I have been asked not to
make a finding on whether he has continuous lawful residence in the UK.
The appellants accept that there are not very significant obstacles to
their integration in their country of origin, Sri Lanka.  Considering the
appellants' private lives in the UK (including the third appellant's best
interests as a minor), the first appellant did not re-apply for leave to
remain based on his business, based on the lack of documentation about that
business.  While there was an historic investment in that business, he has
provided limited further detail about it, whether in terms of goodwill
developed (in a financial sense) or the level of business in the past.  In
the absence of such detail or evidence, I place limited weight on the past
development of that business, which would otherwise be lost in the event of
a return to Sri Lanka, and I find that there is no reason that the
appellant could not develop such a business on his return to Sri Lanka (nor
is there any reason for substantial further investment needed in a small,
single-person business).

The family has no health issues. The third appellant was born on 24th April
2017, is a Sri Lankan citizen and at such a young age, will have has her
focus, her parents, with whom she can return to Sri Lanka as part of a
family unit.  The only claimed harsh consequences of refusal of leave to
remain are the family's evident desire to remain in the UK.  Considering
the relevant factors set out in sections 117A and B of the 2002 Act, while
I have found that the lead appellant has not engaged in deception, this is
not a sufficient reason to apply little weight to the  appellants' private
life developed in the UK, when the rejected application was only ever on
the basis of private life; and while the family have good English and
appear financially independent (both being neutral factors), there remains
the public interest in immigration control, which, I conclude, outweighs
the private life developed in the UK.  Put simply, absent continuous lawful
residence (which I have been asked not to consider), the respondent's
refusal of the appellants' applications for leave to remain is
proportionate.  Therefore the appellants' appeals fail and are dismissed.

Decision

The appellants' appeals on human rights grounds are dismissed.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   25th March  2021






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeals have failed and so there can be no fee award.




Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   25th March 2021



                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01726/2019
                                                               HU/01733/2019
                                                               HU/01735/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2019                           |                              |
|Decision given orally                         |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JEF - first respondent
                           NE - second respondent
                           AKF - third respondent
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan, who  for  reasons  given  in  his
         decision dated 18 July 2019, allowed the appeals by the respondents
         (a family being husband, wife and child) who are  citizens  of  Sri
         Lanka, against refusal of their human rights claims as explained in
         a decision letter by the Secretary of State dated 13 January  2019.



      2. The first respondent had entered the United Kingdom on  15  October
         2009.with leave as a Tier 4  Student,  and  had  been  successfully
         granted further periods of leave to remain until 9 May  2017,  when
         he made a human rights claim based  on  his  private  life  in  the
         United Kingdom.

      3. The Secretary of State considered, by way  of  response,  that  the
         first  respondent  had  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  with   an
         application dated 12 December 2012 which he was satisfied had  been
         fraudulently obtained using a proxy test taker and thus  the  first
         respondent had used deception in that application.  The application
         was therefore refused under paragraph S-LTR.4.2 of the  Immigration
         Rules with reference to the suitability requirements  of  S-LTR  of
         paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) having regard to a failure to meet  the
         requirements of S-LTR.4.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.



      4. Furthermore, the Secretary of State considered that having lived in
         the United Kingdom for eight years the first respondent had  failed
         to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), (iv), (v)  or
         (vi).  In respect of (vi), it was not accepted that the respondents
         had lost all social and cultural ties with their home  country  and
         it was not accepted that there would be very significant  obstacles
         to their reintegration.  It was  not  considered  that  there  were
         exceptional circumstances that would assist the  respondents  in  a
         consideration of the case on Article 8 grounds.

      5. The judge summarised his decision in paragraph 8 as follows:

         "8.  In summary I find  that  the  [Secretary  of  State]  has  not
             demonstrated to the requisite standard that the [respondent's]
             English  language  test  certificate,  relied  upon   in   the
             application student leave which was refused by the  [Secretary
             of State], was fraudulently obtained by the use of proxy  test
             taker.  It appears in light of the jurisprudence of the  Court
             of Appeal in Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009,  per  paragraph  120,
             that given that the [Secretary of State]  has  not  discharged
             the legal burden, that the appropriate course would be for the
             [respondent] to be granted a period of leave, perhaps 60 days,
             in which to enable  him  to  make  a  further  application  or
             alternatively to leave the country lawfully."

      6. The challenge by the Secretary of State is that the judge failed to
         give adequate reasons for his decision, which  refers  in  part  to
         paragraph 7 of the judge's decision, for which his reasoning is  in
         these terms:

         "7.  The difficulty for the [Secretary of State] is that  whilst  I
             have found that the [Secretary of State]  has  discharged  the
             evidential burden I find in line with SM, that the  [Secretary
             of  State]  has  failed  to  establish,  on  the  balance   of
             probabilities, that the [respondent's]  prima  facie  innocent
             explanation is to be rejected.  The jurisprudence of SM  noted
             the multiple frailties with which  the  generic  evidence  was
             considered to suffer and I note in particular, in relation  to
             the generic evidence of Professor French who confirmed at  3.2
             of his report that the approach used is  extremely  likely  to
             produce some false positives.  In conclusion I find the  legal
             burden of proof falling on the [Secretary of  State]  has  not
             been discharged."

      7. However, earlier in the decision the judge explained  in  paragraph
         [5]:

         "5.  In line with the decision  of  SM,  see  above,  and  the  ETS
             evidence specific to  the  [respondent]  confirming  that  the
             speaking test score for the test taken by the [respondent]  on
             27 June was invalid, I find that the [Secretary of State]  has
             discharged  the  evidential  burden  of   proving   that   the
             [respondent's]  TOEIC  certificate  had   been   procured   by
             dishonesty  (emphasis  added).   In  line  with   the   course
             advocated by the Court of Appeal in Shezad, see paragraph  22,
             I accept that it is incumbent on the [respondent]  to  provide
             evidence in response raising  an  innocent  explanation.   The
             [respondent's] evidence, set out  from  paragraph  11  of  his
             witness statement and reiterated in his oral evidence, is that
             he did not use a proxy test taker but sat  the  test  himself.
             He gave detailed evidence about why he chose the test  centre,
             how he travelled to the centre and what  happened  during  the
             exam at the test centre.  The [respondent] further states that
             he would not have needed to use a proxy test taker  given  his
             mastery of English.  The [respondent] explained that  when  he
             first entered the United Kingdom as a student he had  not  had
             to provide a TOEIC certificate because he  had  been  able  to
             rely on his graduate level qualifications from Sri Lanka which
             he had completed in English.  He had been unable  to  complete
             his BA honours degree in Gaming and Animation  in  the  United
             Kingdom because his college has lost its licence which is  why
             he switched to the tier 1 category.  It appears that for  this
             category  he  could   not   rely   on   his   graduate   level
             qualifications in Sri  Lanka  and  as  a  consequence  had  to
             provide an English language certificate.  His tier 1 leave was
             granted on the basis of his  photography  business  which  the
             [respondent] is still pursuing in the United Kingdom.   It  is
             not clear why his solicitors  did  not  apply  for  indefinite
             leave to remain following the [respondent's] completion  of  5
             years on the tier 1 programme given that the business  appears
             to have continued."

         I am not persuaded that a negative is missing from  that  paragraph
         with reference to the text of  paragraph  7,  which  I  have  cited
         above, referring to the Secretary of State  having  discharged  the
         evidential burden in line with SM.

      8. I am grateful to the parties for their submissions before me today.
          The grounds of challenge by the Secretary of State are that  there
         had been a failure to give adequate reasoning.  I am persuaded that
         that ground is made out in  respect  of  the  judge's  decision  in
         relation  to  the  issue  of  dishonesty  and  I  reach  a  similar
         conclusion in respect of the judge's treatment of Article 8.  As to
         the former, the judge's decision is unclear and contradictory.   In
         respect of the second ground,  Mr  Bellara  candidly  accepted  the
         deficiencies in the judge's decision.

      9. During  his  submissions  Mr  Bellara  argued  that  the  grant  of
         permission could be construed  as  limited  to  the  second  ground
         relating to Article 8.  I am not persuaded that is so.  There is no
         restriction in the grant of permission in the  heading  or  in  the
         text of the grant and detail that follows  limiting  grant  to  the
         Article 8 issue.

     10. I conclude that the errors identified in the grounds  are  material
         and require the decision to be set  aside.   In  the  light  of  my
         concern over the absence of adequate reasoning by the  judge  I  am
         unable  to  preserve  any  of  the  findings   of   the   decision.
         Nevertheless, the judge's  decision  stands  as  a  record  of  the
         respondent's evidence.  That being so I do not consider that it  is
         necessary for the case to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
         It can remain in the Upper Tribunal for re-making.


Signed                                  Date 23 December 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

