
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02838/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 April 2019                      |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                             mr Sherif Kolgjini
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan, counsel instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Albania born on 15th January 1993.   The
    history of his claim is that he arrived in December 2000  and  made  an
    asylum claim on the basis that  he  was  an  unaccompanied  minor  from
    Kosovo, with the name Sherif Kolegjini and with the date of birth of 15
    January 1995.  This application for asylum was refused but he was given
    leave to remain on 27 March 2001 until January 2003 as an unaccompanied
    minor. A further application for leave  to  remain  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated  21  September  2004  and  the  Appellant  was  then  an
    overstayer until he made further submissions on 23  April  2010.  These
    were refused in a decision dated  27  November  2012  but  following  a
    reconsideration on 10 June 2014,  the  Appellant  was  granted  limited
    leave to remain until December 2016.  The Appellant  also  submitted  a
    travel document application, which was approved.

 2. On 20 October 2015 the Appellant made a transfer of conditions of leave
    to remain request to the Respondent, asking for his name to be  amended
    to Sherif Kolgjini with a date of birth of  15  January  1993  and  his
    nationality from Kosovan to Albanian and  that  he  had  been  born  in
    Albania.  The Secretary of State acceded to that request and  made  the
    transfer with the effect that  his  leave  continued  in  his  rightful
    identity.

 3. The Appellant then applied to further extend his leave on 15th November
    2016.   In  a  decision  and  reasons  dated  1st  February  2017,  the
    Respondent refused that application noting at [8]:

              "8. .........it was considered that the ELR you gained  on  27
             March 2001 was  obtained  by  deception.   Furthermore  it  is
             considered that by giving the Home Office a false identity you
             have also frustrated the removal process in removing you  from
             the UK.

              9. You were also granted discretionary leave to remain in  the
             UK on 10 June 2014 until 10 December 2016 under paragraph 353B
             on the basis of  a  number  of  factors  which  included  your
             character, compliance and length of  time  spent  in  the  UK.
             However, as it is considered that you obtained this  leave  by
             deception, as you entered the UK using a false  identification
             claiming to be Sherif Kolegjini a  Kosovan  national  born  in
             Gjakoye, Kosovo on 15 January 1985, and failed to  inform  the
             Home Office of your true identity until 20 October 2015 it  is
             considered that the conditions of the previous grant of  leave
             no longer prevail.  It  is  considered  that  your  length  of
             residence has  been  accrued  due  to  giving  correct  person
             information to the  Home  Office  which  has  frustrated  your
             removal process and this is considered that obtaining leave by
             deception weighs heavily against your character,  conduct  and
             associations."

 4. The application was therefore refused with reference to the suitability
    requirements: S-LTR 2.2 and 4.2. of Appendix FM of the  Rules.  It  was
    considered that removal of the Appellant would be appropriate in  light
    of the fact  he  had  obtained  leave  by  deception  previously.   The
    Appellant appealed against this decision and  his  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ian Howard for hearing on 20  November
    2018.

 5. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 11  January  2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal.  Having set out the history of the case the judge
    found that removal of the Appellant would be proportionate.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred in failing to engage with the  submissions  relating  to  the
    grant of discretionary leave made by the Respondent on  10  June  2014,
    that had been based on an internal file  minute  at  Annex  H5  of  the
    Respondent's bundle which showed that  the  grant  of  leave  was  made
    outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of the Appellant's length of
    residence in the UK and that the Respondent, upon being notified by the
    Appellant of his true identity and when he sought  a  transfer  of  the
    conditions of his leave, did not seek to curtail that leave. There  was
    no material change in circumstances to warrant a removal and  that  the
    Respondent's extant decision was  inconsistent  with  the  position  he
    previously took.  It was further submitted that the judge erred in  his
    assessment of the Razgar questions on  the  particular  facts  of  this
    case.

 7. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Woodcraft in a decision dated 7 March 2019 on the basis inter alia:

         "The judge dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  to
         grant leave to remain finding no compelling circumstances to  allow
         the appeal outside the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's argument
         turned on a grant of discretionary leave to him in 2014 outside the
         Rules, but since there had been no change  in  circumstances  since
         2014 the Respondent was bound to renew the Appellant's leave.   The
         Respondent had referred to earlier matters  (the  use  of  a  false
         identity) which had occurred several years prior to the 2014  grant
         to justify why further leave was now being refused. The Appellant's
         argument is in effect a 'legitimate expectation'  one,  albeit  not
         expressed as such.  That raises issues not necessarily  appropriate
         for appellate proceedings but rather for judicial review.

         The issue before the judge was whether  the  Respondent's  decision
         was proportionate given the length of time the Appellant  had  been
         in the United Kingdom and how he had used the leave granted to him.
          As the judge put it, the  Appellant  had  become  'an  industrious
         member of society.  He has acquired other skills and qualifications
         principal amongst those are his skills in construction.'   On  that
         basis it is arguable that a more detailed  analysis  of  Article  8
         outside the Rules needed to be carried out.   All  grounds  may  be
         argued".

     Hearing

 8. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Nathan submitted that this
    was not a legitimate expectation case but one concerned with issues  of
    fairness and consistency.  He sought to rely on the  decision  in  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex parte  Ramanathan  [1995]
    EWHC 8 (Admin) per Mr Justice Collins at page 6 with reference  to  the
    concession made in the case of Ex parte  Mowla.   Mr  Nathan  submitted
    that the Home Office had not in their Rule  24  response  or  otherwise
    disputed the chronology or the factual matrix in the case.   Mr  Nathan
    sought to rely on the fact the finding by the judge at page 7 where  he
    stated "the Respondent by his actions in not  seeking  to  curtail  his
    leave when he sought to amend the conditions of it has in  my  judgment
    precluded himself from arguing it was unlawful."

 9. The judge then went on to find that the Appellant's status has  at  all
    times been precarious in light of the fact  that  his  leave  had  been
    predicated on the basis of false representations.  Mr Nathan relied  on
    the fact that the Secretary of State had not previously  curtailed  the
    Appellant's leave but had rather  transferred  the  conditions  to  his
    correct identity.  The Respondent was fully aware of the  circumstances
    of the case, so that by the time the Appellant  sought  to  extend  his
    leave the decision to refuse that request was unfair and  inconsistent.
    He submitted that neither the  Respondent  nor  the  Tribunal  properly
    engaged with the fact  that  the  grant  of  leave  was  predicated  on
    extraneous matters that were irrelevant to any past  deception  on  the
    part of the Appellant and in any event were relevant to  the  balancing
    exercise.

10. He submitted that the judge failed to refer to the  key  document  upon
    which the submissions were  founded  i.e.  the  minute  at  H5  of  the
    Respondent's bundle which gives the reasoning  by  the  Respondent  for
    granting discretionary leave  on  10  June  2014.   Mr  Nathan  further
    submitted that the judge's approach to the questions set out in  Razgar
    [2007] UKHL 11 were odd in that he appears  to  have  carried  out  the
    balancing exercise in respect of the fourth question and the judge  had
    made a number of factual errors which  undermined  the  safety  of  his
    decision.

11. In her submissions, Ms Everett submitted that the Appellant's claim was
    distinguishable from that in Ex parte  Ramanathan.   She  accepted  the
    Appellant had been granted discretionary leave outside the  Immigration
    Rules until December 2016  and  that  he  had  been  granted  a  travel
    document and that his conditions of leave had been transferred  to  his
    correct identity on 20 October 2015.  She submitted that  the  argument
    that because the  Respondent  had  previously  granted  leave  and  had
    exceeded to the application to transfer conditions that he was  somehow
    bound by that because nothing substantially had changed is not good  as
    an argument.  Whilst it is trite and  true  that  any  system  requires
    consistency and that she was unable to shed light on why the Respondent
    exceeded to the request to transfer conditions of leave, it  was  leave
    granted outside the Immigration Rules on an exceptional basis.

12. Ms Everett submitted that  this  was  clearly  the  case,  because  any
    Article 8 consideration is focussed upon the Appellant's  private  life
    due to the fact his wife and child live in Albania.  She submitted that
    the judge had  given  the  case  adequate  consideration  and  provided
    adequate reasons for his finding.  Ms Everett  submitted  it  is  clear
    from the terms of the refusal decision that the  Respondent  had  given
    full and sustainable reasons for refusing to grant the Appellant  leave
    these were not vexatious or erroneous and just because the Secretary of
    State has overlooked the issue of deception in the past previously does
    not mean that the decision to refuse  further  leave  is  flawed.   She
    submitted there were no particular errors in the  decision  that  would
    merit setting it aside.

13. In reply Mr Nathan submitted that the Secretary of State had been aware
    of the Appellant's case for some time.  The Respondent by  his  actions
    in not seeking to curtail his leave previously cannot now  do  it.   He
    submitted that even if the grant of leave was a consequence of  inertia
    by the Secretary of State he failed to engage with  the  facts  he  had
    previously  seen  fit  to  grant  the  Appellant  leave  as   part   of
    consideration of the further leave application.   Mr  Nathan  submitted
    the appropriate course of action would be to set aside the decision and
    remake it on consideration of the paper.  Bearing in mind the  critical
    finding of fact at page 7 it had not been challenged by  the  Secretary
    of State i.e. that "the Respondent by his actions  in  not  seeking  to
    curtail his leave when he sought to amend the conditions of it  has  in
    my judgment precluded himself from arguing it was unlawful."



     Findings and Reasons

14. I find no material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  As a matter  of  public  policy,  the  fact  that  the
    Respondent previously granted the Appellant leave to  remain  was  made
    before he was aware of the Appellant's true identity.  This is apparent
    from the terms  of  the  decision  of  10  June  2014,  at  H5  of  the
    Respondent's bundle, which is clearly  predicated  on  the  Appellant's
    former status as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child from Kosovo, who
    was 15 on arrival, whereas he was, in fact 17  in  his  true  identity.
    Whilst it is the case that upon applying to transfer the conditions  of
    leave to his correct identity the Secretary of State  did  not  curtail
    his leave at that point, presumably on the basis he did  not  apprehend
    that the basis underlying the request was as a result of deception, the
    Appellant cannot  reasonably  expect  that  as  a  consequence  of  his
    deception that he be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.

15. Upon making an application to extend his leave as he did on 15 November
    2016, the Respondent was, I find, entitled to fully take account of the
    Appellant's past use of deception and to rely on that, as indeed he  is
    obliged to  do  by  virtue  of  the  suitability  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the public interest statutory considerations  and
    to refuse to extend his leave.  I do not find, contrary to Mr  Nathan's
    submission, that the Respondent was in any way bound  by  his  previous
    inertia in failing to identify when the Appellant applied  to  transfer
    the conditions of his leave that in fact  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom and been granted leave on a false premise.

16. Mr Nathan sought to rely on the finding by the judge at page 7 where he
    held as follows:

         "In considering Part 117B I must first consider whether any of  his
time in the UK has         been while  his  immigration  status  was  either
unlawful or precarious. The respondent by        his actions in not  seeking
to curtail his leave when he sought to amend the  conditions  of          it
has, in my judgment, precluded  himself  from  arguing  it  was  unlawful...
There was         no(t) decision to declare it unlawful  by  virtue  of  the
deception effected  by  the  appellant.          However  the  fact  of  the
deception necessarily rendered his status precarious."

17. However it is clear from that passage, that that finding is made in the
    context of applying the section 117B considerations.  The  judge  found
    that it could not be argued the  Appellant  was  here  unlawfully  i.e.
    section 117B(4) but went on to find that section 117B(5)  applied  i.e.
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when a person's immigration status  is  precarious.   Thus  I
    find Mr Nathan is attempting to read far too much into that finding.

18. Having found the Appellant's leave was precarious, which was a  finding
    that was clearly open to the judge and indeed  incumbent  upon  him  to
    make in light of the terms of section 117B(5)  of  the  NIAA  2002  and
    having cited from the decision in Nasim and Others (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 00025 (IAC) the judge held as follows at page 8  of  the  decision
    and reasons:

         "With that reasoning in mind I return to the wider public  interest
as identified in Part      117B and ask myself against  maintaining  a  firm
and coherent system of immigration      control where does the wider  public
interest  lay  in  this  case.   In  terms  of  integration,        economic
wellbeing of the UK, the tax payer generally it  lays  with  the  Appellant.
         However the opportunity to establish himself in that way  was  born
of a deception.        There can be no doubt that he held himself out as  an
unaccompanied Kosovo minor in       order to secure status.  In that he  was
successful.  Further he maintained that pretence          for fifteen  years
and it was during those fifteen years  all  that  he  now  relies  upon  was
established.  The consequence of that in the context of his Article 8  claim
is that he has         rendered his status precarious for the whole of  that
time and as a consequence  the            weight  I  can  attach  to  it  is
reduced.  The case of Nasim also informs me that  the  matters        relied
upon by the Appellant in establishing the  fact  of  his  private  life  are
themselves of          limited traction."

19. The judge then went on to apply what he refers to as "the balance sheet
    methodology" and found that the matters relied upon by the Appellant do
    not  outweigh  the  public  interest  invested  in  the  Respondent  of
    maintaining effective immigration control and that the removal  of  the
    Appellant would be a proportionate interference. Whilst  I  accept  the
    submission on behalf of Mr Nathan that the manner in  which  the  judge
    applied the questions set out in Razgar [2007]  UKHL  11  was  slightly
    odd, ultimately the material ingredients are, I find,  clearly  present
    in [21] of the judge's decision.  That being the case there is  I  find
    no arguable basis to find the judge made material errors of law  and  I
    uphold his decision.  Contrary to the terms of the grant of  permission
    to appeal, the Judge's analysis of Article  8  outside  the  Rules  was
    sufficiently detailed, balanced and sustainable.

20. No anonymity order need be made.

     Decision

21.  I find no error of law in the decision of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
Howard, whose     decision and reasons is upheld.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 9 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



