
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/02211/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th August 2019                    |  On 6th September 2019               |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                         Mrs Olasunbo Abebi Oyekunle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie (instructed by Signature Law LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant against a Decision
and Reasons of Judge Anthony in the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 28th
May 2019.  The judgment followed a hearing at Taylor House on 16th April
2019 when the Appellant did not attend and was not represented.  In the
Decision and Reasons, the judge dismissed the appeal, which had been
brought on human rights grounds, on the basis of the Appellant's private
and family life in the UK.

The grounds upon which permission was sought and granted are three.
Firstly, criticising the Judge's finding that the Appellant was not
entitled to benefits because she was in the UK unlawfully.  In that regard,
the judge was in error in that, at the time the judge heard the case, by
the operation of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, the Appellant was
not unlawfully in the UK.  The relevance of that I will come to later.

The second ground, and the one most strenuously argued, was that the judge
was wrong to refuse to adjourn the case when the Appellant had not
attended.  The argument is that the Appellant through those advising her,
Hackney Migrant Centre, had made an application prior to the hearing so
that she could secure legal representation.  That application was initially
refused, and a further application not dealt with.  That notwithstanding,
the Appellant failed to attend.  The Appellant says she did not know she
ought to have attended.  I am afraid that is no argument.  There was a
clear notice of hearing requiring her to attend and she failed to do so.
The judge, in considering the adjournment application, noted the length of
time since the Decision was taken and found that there was no indication
that, had an adjournment been granted, she would have obtained legal
representation.  The judge reminded herself of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418
(IAC) and the considerations to be applied in an adjournment application
and on the basis of the evidence before her was entitled to refuse to
adjourn and to proceed to hear the case.

The third ground relied upon is the fact that the Appellant had submitted
evidence to the Secretary of State in relation to a number of certificates
confirming various courses, that she had undertaken and passed in the UK,
that the Secretary of State had not provided to the Tribunal and were
therefore not before the judge.  However, those certificates could not have
made any material difference to the case in front of the judge, which was
being presented on the basis of her private and family life.

Turning back to the question of her unlawful presence in the UK, although
she was lawfully present by the date of the hearing she had been illegally
in the UK from June 1999, when the visit visa that she entered upon
expired, through to 23rd May 2016 when she made a human rights application;
so for some seventeen years she had been unlawfully in the UK.  The basis
of the grant of human rights that she had previously, was on the basis that
she was the carer of her granddaughter.  That was patently not the case by
the time the matter came before Judge Anthony because by then she was
living with another daughter and another granddaughter.

There was no evidence before the judge whatsoever in relation to any family
life that she has in the UK or private life other than that which she would
have inevitably built up in the time she has been in the UK.  However, as
the judge also noted, she had spent a great deal of time illegally in the
UK and there was no evidence in front of the judge as to any insurmountable
obstacles to her integration into Nigeria, where she had lived for a great
many years before she came to the UK as a visitor.

I therefore find the grounds are not made out and there is no material
error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's judgment.  The appeal therefore
to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed [pic]                            Date 2 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed [pic]                            Date 2 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
