
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02991/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2020                               |On 27 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                      CATHERINE THABISILE LANGA-THEDORO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by Douglass Simon
                    Solicitors (Richmond)
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of South Africa born in 1952. She arrived in the
UK in March 2003 as a visitor. She was granted further leave to remain as a
student but subsequent applications of the same type were refused until she
was later granted four months leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.

She then made an application for indefinite leave to remain as the bereaved
partner of a British Citizen, FH, who died in February 2012. The
application was refused in a decision dated 26 February 2013 and her appeal
against that decision was dismissed. The appellant then made an application
on 14 September 2015 for indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long
residence. That application was also refused and her appeal similarly
dismissed in a decision promulgated on 29 June 2017.

Next, she made an application on 7 August 2017 for leave to remain on human
rights grounds in terms of family and private life and relying on her
relationship with a British citizen, DC. The application was refused in a
decision dated 18 September 2018. However, following judicial review
proceedings a fresh decision was made on 28 January 2019, again refusing
the application, that refusal being the subject of this appeal.

The application was refused because the respondent was not satisfied that
the appellant met the eligibility requirements of the Immigration Rules
("the Rules") in relation to either the genuineness of the relationship or
otherwise as to its duration within the terms of the Rules. Similarly, the
appellant did not meet the immigration status requirement because she was
an overstayer.

As regards her private life, the respondent was not satisfied that there
would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in South
Africa.

The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge L.K. Gibbs
("the FtJ") at a hearing on 17 July 2019 which resulted in the appeal being
dismissed. Permission to appeal the FtJ's decision was granted by a judge
of the First-tier Tribunal, on all grounds advanced.

In order to set my decision in context, it is necessary to refer in more
detail to the FtJ's decision and her findings.

The FtJ's decision

Before the FtJ it was conceded that the appellant was unable to meet the
relationship requirements of the Rules, R-LTRP.

The FtJ referred to the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 with
reference to the two earlier appeals, the first having been in 2013 and in
which the judge was not satisfied that the appellant was DC's fiancï¿½e. The
judge in that case also found that the appellant had two adult daughters in
South Africa, one of whom she stayed with when she visited in 2009.

As regards the second appeal in 2017, the judge in that case had found that
the appellant was "an inconsistent and unreliable witness lacking in
credibility". He also found that the evidence that one of her daughters in
South Africa had died was contradicted by the evidence given in the earlier
appeal, and noted that in that appeal the judge found that the appellant's
daughter was not deceased. The judge in that appeal was similarly not
persuaded that the appellant did not have contact with her other daughter,
T, in South Africa.

The FtJ concluded that despite the appellant being aware of the findings in
the previous appeal, she had failed to provide documentary evidence "to
corroborate" her ongoing assertion that one of her children had died in
South Africa in 2009. She also found that she had given inconsistent
evidence regarding whether or not she had a death certificate.

She found that the appellant's credibility was significantly undermined by
DC's failure to refer to one of her daughters being deceased and his
evidence that he had spoken to "them" on the phone, although he later said
that he had only spoken to one of them, T. Further, she found DC's and the
appellant's evidence inconsistent in terms of contact with T, concluding
that DC's evidence was the more reliable in relation to contact having
taken place in 2019, and not 2009 as the appellant had claimed. The FtJ
concluded that the evidence of the appellant's other witnesses did not
assist her with regard to the contact the appellant claimed to have with
her children.

She further found that in travelling to the UK in 2003, the appellant never
intended to return to South Africa.

As regards her relationship with DC, she said that she had doubts about the
appellant's true feelings for him, stating that she appears to use him as
she chooses at her appeal hearings. She also noted that the appellant
admitted to being in a relationship with FH whilst in a relationship with
DC, and had previously applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis
of her relationship with FH.

Nevertheless, the FtJ found that DC and the other witnesses called on
behalf of the appellant appeared credible and their evidence was not
challenged on behalf of the respondent. She concluded, therefore, that the
appellant had moved in with DC in September 2017 and that they live
together as a couple.

As regards paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, she concluded that the appellant
would have family members to whom she could turn for support on return to
South Africa. She also found, giving reasons, that there would not be very
significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in South Africa. She
said that she was "wholly unpersuaded" that the appellant would not be able
to find employment in South Africa and DC would be able to continue to
support her there on her return.

In terms of her relationship with DC, she concluded that there was family
life between them. The length of time that she had lived and worked in the
UK illegally was a relevant factor in the public interest in her removal,
and her financial independence and ability to speak English were neutral
factors.

Notwithstanding that DC is a British citizen who does not want to move to
South Africa, the FtJ found that that was his choice. He had entered into a
relationship with the appellant when her immigration status was precarious
at best and for much of the time was unlawful.

She found that given she and DC have their own funds, that could be used to
establish a home in South Africa with either of them seeking employment if
they chose. Although DC was a "homebody" and has family in the UK, he could
maintain his relationship with his relatives through visits and other means
of communication. Whilst DC preferred to remain in the UK, if he wanted to
maintain his relationship with the appellant he would have to consider
adjusting this preference.

She thus concluded that the appellant's removal was proportionate.

    Grounds and Submissions

In Ground 1 it is argued that the FtJ failed to give weight to the
requirements of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
("the 2002 Act") which were favourable to the appellant, gave excessive
weight to those matters which were unfavourable to her, and erred in her
consideration of "compelling circumstances".

It is further argued that the FtJ misdirected herself when assessing
whether there would be "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for her and DC in
the refusal of leave to remain by failing to consider all the relevant
factors.

Ground 2 contends that the FtJ erred in not considering paragraphs EX.1 and
EX.2 of the Rules, and there was no consideration at all of Appendix FM.

Ground 3 relates to the FtJ's consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and
contends that various factual matters were not considered by the FtJ and
there were, otherwise, errors in the factual assessment.

In his submissions, to varying degrees Mr Slatter relied on the grounds of
appeal. I was referred to TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v Secretary of State
for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, in particular at [30]-[34] in
relation to consideration of the insurmountable obstacles test within the
Rules and its application to consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

It was conceded that what is said in the grounds at paragraph 3.2 in terms
of financial independence and the ability to speak English is unarguable in
the light of AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) (and see also
Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58). The
factors relevant to insurmountable obstacles were set out in the
appellant's skeleton argument, for example DC's life in the UK in terms of
family, employment and social and domestic ties and his age (65).

Although there was a concession before the FtJ as recorded at [8] of her
decision, that only related to the issue as to the length of their
relationship and the 'two year rule'. The FtJ still needed to consider EX.1
and EX.2 in terms of insurmountable obstacles and the various factors
referred to in the skeleton argument that was before the FtJ.

It was wrong for the FtJ to have considered adverse to the appellant the
fact that she had lived illegally in the UK in circumstances where her
length of residence ought to have been a factor in her favour.

Although the FtJ had referred at [28] to the fact that DC is a British
citizen, she did not take into account his rights as such.

Although the FtJ referred to the appellant having money from the sale of
her house in South Africa, the sterling equivalent is only ï¿½800 which would
not be sufficient to re-establish herself as the FtJ suggested.

In his submissions Mr Tufan relied on Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free
standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) in terms of the application of paragraphs
EX.1 and 2. At the date of the application for leave to remain the
appellant had not been in a relationship for two years. Accordingly, the
appellant could not get to paragraph EX.1. Furthermore, although the FtJ
found that the appellant and DC were in a genuine and subsisting
relationship, she made a series of negative findings.

Even if the FtJ ought to have considered EX.1, in the light of Agyarko v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 440 at [25],
which was not overruled by the Supreme Court, there could not be said to be
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in South Africa in this
case. The FtJ had taken into account the fact that DC is a British citizen
but also the fact that the appellant's stay had always been precarious.
There would need to be exceptional circumstances not to require the
appellant to apply for entry clearance from South Africa.

In his reply, Mr Slatter submitted that there did need to have been a
consideration of EX.1 in the context of Article 8 outside the Rules. That
was a material error on the part of the FtJ.

Assessment and Conclusions

I deal with the grounds and submissions in the order which appear to me to
be the most logical, starting with those in relation to the FtJ's
assessment of the appeal under the Rules, firstly in terms of private life,
then family life, and lastly in relation to the outside of the Rules
consideration.

In relation to the relevant private life requirements of the Rules,
paragraph 276ADE states:

           "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are
           that at the date of application, the applicant:
           (i) does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
           Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5.  in
           Appendix FM; and
           (ii) has made a valid application for leave  to  remain  on  the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in
           the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           applicant to leave the UK; or
           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has  spent
           at least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18  years  or  above,
           has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK."

GEN.1.2. provides that in Appendix FM, materially for the present purposes,
partner means:

           "(i)...(iii); or

           a person who has been living together with the applicant in a
           relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership for at least
           two years prior to the date of application."

EX.1. provides as follows, again so far as is material:

                "This paragraph applies if...

                (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
                with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
                settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
                humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
                obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
                outside the UK.

                EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
                obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which
                would be faced by the applicant or their partner in
                continuing their family life together outside the UK and
                which could not be overcome or would entail very serious
                hardship for the applicant or their partner."

In relation to a person who does not meet the requirements of the Rules
under Appendix FM, GEN. 3.2 states the following:

                "GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an
                application for entry clearance or leave to enter or remain
                made under this Appendix, or an application for leave to
                remain which has otherwise been considered under this
                Appendix, does not otherwise meet the requirements of this
                Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-maker must
                consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph (2)
                apply.

                (2)Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker
                must consider, on the basis of the information provided by
                the applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances
                which would render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to
                enter or remain, a breach of Article 8 of the European
                Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal would
                result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
                applicant, their partner, a relevant child or another family
                 member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that
                information would be affected by a decision to refuse the
                application."

S.117 of the 2002 Act, so far as relevant, states as follows:


           "PART 5A


           ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


           117A Application of this Part


           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and  family
           life under Article 8, and


           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
       Rights Act 1998.


           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section  117B,
       and


           (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to
           the considerations listed in section 117C.


           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).


           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases


           (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
       public interest.


           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


           (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or


           (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
           established by a person at a time when  the  person  is  in  the
           United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.


           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and


           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
       United Kingdom."

The FtJ's assessment of the private life requirements of the Rules in terms
of paragraph 276ADE is distilled in [22]-[24]. The grounds contend that
"the discrepant evidence" could not be conclusive as to very significant
obstacles to integration without reference to all other issues put forward
by the appellant, including her relationship with DC and her fear of
destitution on return to South Africa. However, it is clear from [23] of
the FtJ's decision that she did not consider that the appellant would be
destitute on return, referring to her ability to find employment and that
DC could continue to support her financially were she to return.

On the question of whether she would have access to the funds she realised
when she sold her house in South Africa before coming to the UK, the
grounds suggest that those funds would no longer be available because the
sale took place 15 years ago. However, at [20] the FtJ refers to the
appellant's evidence that she still has those funds in her bank account.
Admittedly, the fact that 15,000 Rand equates only to about ï¿½800 as the
grounds suggest, it is not a sum that is likely to go very far but that was
not the only, or indeed the main, reason for the FtJ's conclusion that
there would not be very significant obstacles to her integration. Apart
from her ability to find employment and that she would receive support from
her partner, the FtJ referred to the appellant's cultural and linguistic
ties to South Africa and that she lived for the majority of her life there.


It must also be remembered that the FtJ found at [22] that the appellant
would have family members to turn to for support on her return, namely her
daughters. She made a finding that she had not given credible evidence
about one of her daughters having died in 2009, but regardless of that, she
found that she has contact with her other daughter as well.

The FtJ undertook a comprehensive assessment of the issue of very
significant obstacles to integration and there is no error of law in her
decision in this respect.

In relation to family life, a central complaint is that there was no
consideration by the FtJ of paragraphs EX.1 and EX.2 (insurmountable
obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK). It is the case that
apart from in her summary of the respondent's decision, the FtJ did not
refer to those paragraphs of the Rules. Mr Tufan submitted that the
appellant does not have a route to consideration of EX.1 (and EX.2). That
is because she could not meet the requirements of the Rules (as at the date
of application) since DC was not a partner within the meaning of the Rules
because the relationship was short of two years' duration.

It may be that the FtJ did not consider that paragraph of the Rules because
it was conceded on behalf of the appellant that she could not meet the
relationship requirements of the Rules (R-LTRP), reflecting Mr Tufan's
submissions on the point.

However, Mr Slatter's reliance on TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) at [30]-[34]
is apposite in the sense that the FtJ did need to consider the issue of
insurmountable obstacles in order to evaluate under Article 8 the
proportionality of the decision to refuse leave to remain. It is difficult
to see how it could be said that the FtJ turned her mind to the question of
insurmountable obstacles in circumstances where there is no express
reference in her findings to that test. I am, therefore, satisfied that in
this respect the FtJ erred in law.

However, that error of law would not in this case be material if the FtJ's
findings reveal that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the couple's
family life continuing in South Africa, or indeed if otherwise the facts
could not meet the demanding test of insurmountable obstacles.

The FtJ found that the appellant had family in South Africa to whom she
could turn for support and that she could potentially find employment
there. She found, without legal error, that there would not be very
significant obstacles to the appellant's integration. Those findings are
all relevant to the couple's ability to sustain their relationship in South
Africa.

At [29] she said that both the appellant and DC have their own funds which
could be used to establish a home in South Africa with either of them being
able to seek employment. She referred to DC being a "homebody" who could
maintain relationships with his family in the UK through visits and modern
means of communication. She acknowledged that he would prefer to live in
the UK but said that he would have to adjust his preference if he wanted to
continue his relationship with the appellant.

The FtJ's use of the term "homebody" is criticised in the grounds of appeal
as minimising the facts in relation to DC's life in the UK. However, whilst
the FtJ does not set out in express detail all the matters relied on in
DC's witness statements and the other evidence,  and as summarised in the
appellant's skeleton argument at [37], it is evident from the FtJ's use of
that expression that she recognised that the evidence was that DC's life is
very home-centred.

It is apparent from the FtJ's findings that had she directed her mind to
the question of whether there would be insurmountable obstacles to family
life continuing in South Africa she would have answered the question in the
negative, regardless of the fact that she did not refer to DC's age or to
the fact that he is retired. It is clear from [28] and [29] of her decision
that she was of the firm view that his wish to remain in the UK was a
matter of choice, and it could not on the facts, therefore, be regarded as
a matter of insurmountable obstacles as defined in paragraph EX.2.

Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the error of law I have identified at
[46] above is one that is material to the outcome of the appeal.

I said at [47] above that the error of law would not be material if the
FtJ's findings reveal that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the
couple's family life continuing in South Africa, or if otherwise the facts
could not meet the demanding test of insurmountable obstacles. Even if it
could be said that the FtJ failed to have proper regard to the whole range
of matters that are relied on in support of the contention that there would
be insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in South Africa, the
facts do not in any event support such a conclusion.

I have considered very carefully the evidence in relation to DC's life in
the UK, including, for example, that apart from once he has not travelled
abroad, preferring to take holidays in the UK. He lives a very simple,
domesticated, quiet and home-centred life. He worked for the same employer
all his life and has lived in the same house all his life, is now retired
and is aged almost 66. He says, perhaps with some justification, that he
has limited skills in terms of marketability but he has nevertheless worked
as a greengrocer and as a gardener. He has close family in the UK with whom
he keeps in close contact. He says that it would be "unthinkable" for him
to move to South Africa.

Nevertheless, as has already been said, there are no very significant
obstacles to the appellant's integration in South Africa. DC's
circumstances do not reveal that there would be insurmountable obstacles to
family life continuing there. Quite apart from the FtJ's conclusion that
the appellant and DC would be able to find some employment, the fact is
that DC has pension income that would continue. The circumstances do, as
the FtJ found, reveal that it is a matter of choice for DC as to whether or
not he wishes to return to South Africa with the appellant. The fact of his
British citizenship does not on its own, or in combination with the other
circumstances, reveal that there would be insurmountable obstacles to their
continuing family life in South Africa.

However, the finding that there would be no insurmountable obstacles to
family life in South Africa is not the end of the Article 8 enquiry but it
is a significant part of it.

Although the FtJ did not refer to GEN 3.2, that paragraph of the Rules
reflects aspects of the wider Article 8, outside the Rules consideration,
that the FtJ assessed. Thus, at [28] she responded to the submission that
the appellant's removal would have "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for
the couple, including referring to DC's British citizenship.

The grounds cite AB (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2007] EWCA Civ 1302 at [19] and [20] in relation to the need for careful
and anxious scrutiny of the situation of a British citizen in terms of
their being expected to live abroad in order to keep the marriage intact.
The facts of that case were, of course, very different and there is now a
wealth of additional authority from which to draw in determining Article 8
issues that involve British citizenship.

It is plainly not the case, that the mere fact of the British citizenship
of a partner must lead to the conclusion that it would be disproportionate
to refuse leave to remain to that person's partner. Plainly, neither
domestic nor Strasbourg jurisprudence demands of such an answer. The FtJ in
this case did refer to the DC's British citizenship and can be taken to
have been aware of its significance, absent anything to indicate that she
minimised its import.

In addition, just as the appellant relies on TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India)
in relation to the issue of insurmountable obstacles, the analysis in that
decision is equally important in the following passages:

         "25.     The settled jurisprudence of the ECtHR is that it is
             likely to be only in an exceptional case that article 8 will
             necessitate a grant of leave to remain where a non-settled
             migrant has commenced family life in the UK at a time when his
             or her immigration status is precarious (see, for example
             Jeunesse v Netherlands (2016) 60 EHRR 17 at [100] and [114]).
             That general principle applies to any consideration of the
             Rules which involves engaging with a requirement or
             requirements that possess an article 8 element (often wrongly
             described as an article 8 consideration within the Rules) and
             to the consideration of article 8 outside the Rules.  Where
             precariousness exists it affects the weight to be attached to
             family life in the balancing exercise.   That is because
             article 8 does not guarantee a right to choose one's country
             of residence.  Both the unlawful overstayer and the temporary
             migrant have no right to remain in the UK simply because they
             enter into a relationship with a British citizen during their
             unlawful or temporary stay.  The principle was accepted in
             Agyarko at [49] to [54] leading to a statement of general
             principle at [57]:


                  "In general, in cases concerned with precarious family
                  life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to
                  outweigh the public interest in immigration control."


         26.  The effect upon the weight to be attached to family life will
             depend upon what the outcome of immigration control would
             otherwise be i.e. the weight of the public interest in
             removal.  Agyarko overtly recognised that precariousness
             includes both those who are in the UK unlawfully and those who
             are here temporarily (see [51] and [54]).  To that extent, the
             decision of this court to the same effect in Rhuppiah v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
             803, [2016] 1 WLR 4203 is binding.


         27.  Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002 is also relevant to the weight to be given to private and
             family life that are established by a person at a time when
             that person's immigration status is precarious.  In every
             consideration of any requirement of the Rules that possesses
             an article 8 element and of article 8 outside of the Rules, if
             the applicant's immigration status is precarious, then little
             weight is to be given to private life or to a relationship
             formed with a qualifying partner.  The same provision also
             identifies two factors that are to be taken into account in
             every article 8 consideration: whether the applicant can speak
             English and whether the applicant is financially independent.


         28.  The consideration of article 8 outside the Rules is a
             proportionality evaluation i.e. a balance of public interest
             factors.  Some factors are heavily weighted.  The most obvious
             example is the public policy in immigration control.  The
             weight depends on the legislative and factual context.
             Whether someone is in the UK unlawfully or temporarily and the
             reason for that circumstance will affect the weight to be
             given to the public interest in his or her removal and the
             weight to be given to family and/or private life (see the
             examples given in Agyarko at [51] and [52] which include the
             distinction between being in the UK unlawfully and
             temporarily). Decisions such as those in Chikwamba and EB
             (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]
             UKHL 41, [2009] AC 1159 describe examples of how the weight or
             cogency of the public interest is affected.   It is
             accordingly appropriate for the court to give weight when
             considering  the proportionality of interference with article
             8 outside of the Rules to factors that have been identified by
             the Strasbourg court, for example, the effect of protracted
             delay, the rights of a British partner who has always lived
             here and whether it can reasonably be expected that s/he will
             follow the removed person to keep their relationship intact:
             that is, by way of example, the circumstances identified in EB
             (Kosovo) or the circumstance described in Chikwamba where the
             removal of an appellant who is the spouse of a British citizen
             could be followed by a right of re-entry."


 As is clear from Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2017] UKSC 11, in cases such as the present, a very strong or compelling
claim is required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

As to some of the other criticisms of the FtJ's decision in the grounds, it
was conceded on behalf of the appellant before me that the grounds are
misconceived in the contention that the FtJ erred in her conclusion that
the appellant's ability to speak English and her financial independence
were neutral factors.

Although the FtJ referred to the appellant having worked illegally in the
UK, which is probably a legitimate observation, she said at [27] that the
length of time that the appellant had "lived and worked" illegally in the
UK was relevant to the public interest in removal, leading to the criticism
that she had attributed negative weight to the length of the appellant's
residence when she should have seen her length of residence as a positive
factor.

I can see some merit in that criticism, but it is not in fact the case that
the FtJ failed to consider the appellant's length of residence as a factor
in her favour. At [23] in the considering her private life, she clearly
identified it as a positive factor. Whilst what the FtJ said at [27] about
working and living illegally in the UK is open to criticism, I cannot see
that it is a matter that was material to the outcome.

In summary, whilst I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law as identified
at [46] above, I am not satisfied that that error of law is material,
either on the facts as found, or on the facts otherwise relied on. The
appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law, but its decision is not set aside and the decision to
dismiss the appeal stands.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 2/4/20


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email



