
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03874/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 6 November 2020               |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between
                                     AS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Berry, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Jordan,  appeals  with  permission
         against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thapar
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")  who  dismissed  his  human
         rights claim in a decision promulgated on the 5 September 2019.

      2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. The parties made no submissions in relation to this order and
         therefore for the purposes of this hearing I  continue  that  order
         (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules  2008).  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court   directs
         otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of  these
         proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
         direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.

      3. The background of the appeal is set out in the decision of the FtTJ
         and the papers.

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Jordan.  He  arrived  in  the  United
         Kingdom on 19 January 2014 as a student.  He  was  married  to  his
         former wife, A, on 11 November 2014. On 23 June 2015, the appellant
         made an application for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
         marriage. The application was successful,  and  leave  was  granted
         until 23 December 2017.

      5. His relationship with his wife broke down in January 2018 and  they
         separated on 20 January 2018. On 8 March 2018 he was issued with  a
         grant of leave to remain under D-LTRP1.1 for a period of 30  months
         valid until 10 September 2020. The appellant applied for indefinite
         leave to remain on 23 April 2018 as a victim of domestic  violence.
         The application was refused in a decision letter of the 8  February
         2019.

      6. The decision letter considered the requirements of Appendix  FM  in
         the light of  the  modernised  guidance  in  relation  to  domestic
         violence. The decision letter acknowledged the  evidence  that  had
         been provided in support of his  claim  however  having  considered
         that evidence the respondent reached the conclusion that he  failed
         to provide sufficient demonstrative evidence that he was a  genuine
         victim of domestic violence as claimed.  Therefore,  he  failed  to
         satisfy the requirements under the rules to  demonstrate  that  his
         relationship with his former spouse  scores  to  permanently  break
         down as a result of domestic violence.

      7. The appellant appealed that decision which came before the FtTJ  on
         30 July 2019. In a decision promulgated on  5  September  2019  the
         FtTJ dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds. The  FtTJ  heard
         evidence from the appellant, his solicitor and  two  friends.   The
         judge also had before him a large bundle of documentation including
         medical reports from Dr A and Dr C. The FtTJ set  out  his  reasons
         for reaching the conclusion  that  the  witness  evidence  was  not
         consistent (at paragraphs 23 - 24) and was not satisfied  that  the
         appellant had been injured by his former  wife.  He  placed  little
         weight, if any, on the medical evidence and whilst  he  found  that
         the appellant had suffered emotionally following the  breakdown  of
         his marriage, he made a finding that he did not accept the marriage
         itself was caused to break down due to  domestic  violence  (at[19]
         and [26]). The judge took into  account  his  private  life  having
         lived in the UK for five years but considered that he had remaining
         family in Jordan and worked there prior to his arrival in 2014. The
         judge found that there were no very significant  obstacles  to  his
         integration to Jordan and in relation to the medical evidence there
         was no reason why he could not receive treatment for his  condition
         in his country of origin. He also considered that  his  friendships
         with those in the UK could continue upon return. Whilst a return to
         Jordan would impact upon his business which had established in  the
         UK, the judge did not find  that  his  removal  would  lead  to  an
         "irreplaceable loss to the UK". Thus, he found that the decision of
         the respondent was a proportionate one.

      8. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and
         permission was granted on 9 January 2020 by FtTJ Keane.

      9. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     10. The hearing took place on 6 November 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant and his solicitors. There were  no  issues  regarding
         sound, and  no  substantial  technical  problems  were  encountered
         during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were  able  to
         make their respective cases by the chosen means.

     11. Mr Berry, Counsel on behalf  of  the  appellant,  relied  upon  the
         written grounds of appeal and his skeleton argument.

     12.  No Rule 24 response was filed on behalf of the respondent.

     13.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     14. Mr Berry began his submissions by relying on  the  written  grounds
         and his skeleton argument. I asked him to begin with grounds  2  -4
         which dealt with the substantive challenge to the FtTJ's  decision.
         At the conclusion of his oral submissions Mr Diwnycz addressed  the
         Tribunal and conceded that the decision of the  FtTJ  involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law and that as a result it should
         be set aside.

     15. Therefore the parties are in agreement that  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ cannot stand as a result of the errors of law that are set out
         in the appellant's grounds of challenge and that given  the  errors
         relate to the assessment of the evidence including the  credibility
         of the factual issues, both parties are also in agreement that  the
         appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

     16. In those circumstances, it is not necessary for me  to  give  great
         detail as to why the decision should be set aside. However, I shall
         set out in brief terms why I am in agreement with the  position  of
         the parties before the Tribunal.

     17. Dealing with ground 2, the submissions advanced on  behalf  of  the
         appellant make reference to the FtTJ's assessment of the  issue  of
         domestic abuse. This was a central part of the appellant's claim as
         set out in the decision letter of the respondent, and  it  was  not
         accepted  that  the   appellant   had   provided   evidence   which
         demonstrated that the  relationship  with  his  former  spouse  was
         caused to permanently break down as a result of domestic  violence.
         The respondent  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  may  well  have
         experienced  marital  difficulties  during  the  breakdown  of  the
         relationship but stated at page 5  of  the  decision  letter,  that
         whilst many might suffer from ongoing medical/psychological  issues
         arising the marital difficulties and/or divorce, that  is  not  the
         same as someone suffering from domestic abuse. There is a reference
         within the decision letter to  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant.

     18. The point made by Mr Berry is that whilst the FtTJ  addressed  some
         of the alleged incidents that related to physical harm,  there  was
         no assessment of the non-physical domestic abuse that  formed  part
         of the factual matrix. In his submissions, Mr  Berry  directed  the
         Tribunal to the supporting  evidence  which  was  set  out  in  the
         appellant's witness statement. The factual  account  given  by  the
         appellant as set out by the references in the grounds did not  only
         relate to physical abuse but also considered what has become  known
         now as "coercive and controlling behaviour."

     19.  In the appellant's bundle there was a  copy  of  the  respondent's
         policy "Victims  of  domestic  violence  and  abuse  "version  14.0
         published on 5/2 2018 (exhibited at A317 - A323. Within the  policy
         the definition of domestic violence and  abuse  is  given  at  A322
         which  includes  "any  incident  or   pattern   of   incidents   of
         controlling, coercive or threatening behaviour, violence  or  abuse
         between those aged 16 or over  who  are,  or  have  been,  intimate
         partners or family members regardless of gender or sexuality.  This
         can include, but it is not  limited  to,  the  following  types  of
         abuse: psychological, physical, sexual,  financial  and  emotional.
         The policy goes on to refer to "other forms of abuse which includes
         controlling behaviour which is defined as "a range of acts designed
         to make a person subordinate or dependent by; isolating  them  from
         sources of  support,  exploiting  their  resources  and  capacities
         personal gain, depriving them of the means needed for independence,
         resistance and escape, and  regulating  their  everyday  behaviour.
         Coercive behaviour is also defined as follows "an actual pattern of
         acts of assaults, threats, humiliation and intimidation  and  other
         abuse that is  used  to  harm,  punish  or  frighten  the  victim."
         Importantly, the policy recognises that  no  distinction  shall  be
         made between psychological abuse and physical abuse when  assessing
         if a person has been the victim of domestic violence or abuse.

     20.  As  Mr  Berry  submits  and  Mr  Diwnycz  accepts,  there  was  no
         consideration in the overall factual findings upon the other issues
         of coercive and controlling behaviour which had formed part of  the
         factual matrix. It would have  been  open  to  the  judge  to  have
         rejected that evidence provided he gave reasons  referable  to  the
         evidence but as the parties accept to not  consider  that  evidence
         was a material error.

     21. Ground 3 relates to the evidence that emanated  from  the  criminal
         proceedings that had taken place  in  the  Crown  Court  where  the
         appellant  was  the  defendant,  and  his  former  wife   was   the
         complainant. It is not necessary to set out the  history  of  those
         criminal proceedings but it is sufficient to state that before  the
         FtTJ, and most unusually, the solicitor who was  dealing  with  the
         criminal proceedings had given a  witness  statement  (see  A  454)
         which set out the events at the rehearing  of  the  criminal  trial
         which appears to have been  conducted  as  an  appeal  against  the
         conviction from the district judge. The solicitor  also  gave  oral
         evidence.  At paragraph 16 of that witness statement and also in  a
         further email which is found in the bundle, the solicitor  set  out
         the court's ruling. In particular, at paragraph 16 (at A456), it is
         recorded that the court had reached the  conclusion  after  hearing
         the evidence that the complainant was "not a  witness  who  can  be
         wholly relied upon". Conversely the same paragraph  refers  to  the
         appellant's evidence which was  described  as  "unshaken,  entirely
         credible, supported by emails and texts supported by his witness...
         We found him a convincing witness of fact."

     22. Mr Berry submitted that the FtTJ did not engage with that  evidence
         from the criminal proceedings and that what can be  seen  from  the
         witness statement of the solicitor was that the appellant  and  his
         wife were not in the same position as regards their evidence. Thus,
         he submits the analysis of that evidence  at  [13]  of  the  FtTJ's
         decision was inadequate  as  a  summary  of  the  evidence  in  the
         criminal proceedings when such  differing  conclusions  as  to  the
         credibility of each of the parties had been reached.

     23. Again, when looking at the decision of the FtTJ at [13] there is no
         reference to the substance of that hearing. Whilst I would  accept,
         as did Mr Berry that the judge noted that he was mindful  that  the
         appeal focused on whether an offence was committed by the appellant
         and was not concerned  with  determining  whether  the  appellant's
         marriage broke down due to domestic violence,  the  credibility  of
         each of the parties as set out in that  judgement  was  a  material
         consideration in the question of the credibility of  the  appellant
         in these proceedings. The only reference to that evidence  at  [13]
         was a submission made in the criminal proceedings  that  "no  doubt
         both of them are childish,  but  we  are  far  away  from  criminal
         conduct" (AB27). As the parties accept, that did  not  address  the
         differing outcomes of credibility as found by the  criminal  court.
         Thus, a material part of  that  evidence  was  not  placed  in  the
         balance when reaching an overall conclusion on the issue.

     24. The remaining  grounds  relate  to  the  medical  evidence  and  in
         particular the reports of Dr A and  Dr  C  (the  treating  GP).  In
         relation to the report  of  Dr  A,  who  was  a  psychiatrist,  the
         assessment of his evidence by the FtTJ is set out at [15 -  17]  of
         the decision. It is plain from reading this paragraph that the FtTJ
         was critical of the contents of the report (at [16]).  However,  as
         Mr Berry submitted there was no evidential basis for the  criticism
         made that the judge who stated that "I would have thought that even
         if therapeutic work commenced after the grant of  indefinite  leave
         the appellant would be in touch with painful past experiences". The
         FtTJ did not have any basis for substituting his clinical judgement
         for that of the expert and it is unclear what submissions were made
         on behalf of the respondent. Even if the FtTJ was entitled to reach
         that view,  there was no assessment of the suicide risk  which  had
         been referred to in the medical  report,  which  again  had  to  be
         viewed in the round and in the context of the  appellant's  factual
         claim.

     25. As to the evidence given by Dr C that was contained in  two  pieces
         of evidence firstly a letter dated 14/6/2019 (AB 146) and  a  later
         letter dated 27/7/2019. The FtTJ at  [20]  reached  the  conclusion
         that the contents of those  letters  were  inconsistent  with  each
         other and thus he attached little weight to the contents.  However,
         that assessment did not take into account the basis upon which each
         of those separate letters was made. The second letter was one  that
         added detail to the first letter and thus was not inconsistent with
         the first letter.

     26. As a result, the FtTJ did not  place  any  weight  on  the  medical
         evidence when  reaching  his  overall  assessment  and  Mr  Diwnycz
         accepts that without considering that evidence in context, that was
         a material error.

     27. In relation to Ground 1,  Mr  Berry  submitted  that  the  Tribunal
         failed to direct itself lawfully and apply Article  8   ECHR  in  a
         lawful manner and as regards the structured approach to an  Article
         8 ECHR assessment that ought to have been followed, in  Hesham  Ali
         (Iraq) v Secretary of State [2016] UKSC 60 and made no reference to
         the S117 public interest considerations.  Even if  that  submission
         was not the strongest ground, it being a submissions based on  form
         rather than substance,  in the light of the errors set  out  above,
         it is  accepted  by  the  parties  that  it  led  to  an  erroneous
         conclusion when applying Article 8, as set out in ground one.

     28. Drawing together those matters, I am satisfied that the  FtTJ  fell
         into error in his overall assessment for the reasons  that  I  have
         given and as accepted on behalf of the respondent.

     29. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

             "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:-

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

     30. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal  should
         be the FtT. I have considered their submissions in the light of the
         practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for  the
         appellant  to give  evidence  and   to  deal  with  the  evidential
         issues, further fact-finding will be necessary alongside and in the
         light of the relevant documentary evidence and in my judgement  the
         best course and consistent with the overriding objective is for  it
         to be remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. The Tribunal  will
         be seized of the task of undertaking a credibility  assessment  and
         will be required to do so on the basis of the evidence  as  at  the
         date of the hearing. Whether there is any need  for  the  anonymity
         direction  previously  made  by  the  FtT  to  continue  should  be
         addressed at the remitted hearing.

     31. For the avoidance of doubt, there are two bundles  already  in  the
         court file (and sent electronically). Any further evidence that  is
         to be filed can be added as a further bundle; it is  not  necessary
         to replicate the bundles again.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall be  set  aside
    and to  be  remitted  for  a  further  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated 6 November 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

