
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03425/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 23 June 2021 and further written       |On 16 August 2021             |
|replies dated 23 July 2021 from the respondent|                              |
|and 28 July 2021 from the appellant's         |                              |
|solicitors                                    |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

           MR KAUSHALYA SAMARAKOON BANDARA HALOYADDE MUDIYANSELAGE
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F. Allen, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. He first arrived  in  the
         UK on 4 March 2008 with his mother and sister; they  had  leave  as
         the dependents of the appellant's father, who was a student,  which
         was valid until 31 December 2008.

      2. On 29 December 2008, and in time application was made for leave  to
         remain in the same capacity which was granted until 30 April  2010.
         In February 2010, an application was lodged for leave to remain  as
         dependent of a PBS migrant. This was refused  with  an  in  country
         right of appeal. Contrary to the assertion initially  made  by  the
         respondent, the right of appeal  was  exercised  in  time  but  was
         dismissed on 11  October  2010  with  permission  to  appeal  being
         refused on 29 October 2010. By 10 November 2010, appeal rights were
         considered to have been exhausted.

      3. On 14 December 2010 the appellant's father  lodged  an  application
         for asylum with the appellant being named as 1 of  his  dependents.
         His father was granted temporary admission on that date, and it  is
         now accepted that the appellant was included in that grant.

      4. On 5 July 2013, the appellant was granted  temporary  admission  in
         his own right, as he had reached adulthood. Temporary admission was
         renewed regularly until 16  June  2015.  Originally,  his  father's
         asylum application was refused, and  the  decision  was  certified.
         However,  on  review,  whilst  the  refusal  was  maintained,   the
         certification was not, and the appellant's  father  was  granted  a
         right of  appeal  which  he  exercised  in  time.  His  appeal  was
         dismissed on 26 June 2013 but permission to appeal to  the  UT  was
         granted. However, the tribunal dismissed the appeal and  permission
         to appeal to the Court of Appeal was refused and once again  appeal
         rights were exhausted by 19 July 2013.

      5. On 25 March 2015 the appellant lodged a human  rights  application,
         and he was granted leave on 8 June 2015  which  is  valid  until  7
         December 2017. He made another in time application on  24  November
         2017, and leave was granted to 13 October 2020. His application  to
         extend that leave was outstanding at the date of the hearing.

      6. The application which gave rise to the appeal before the FtT (Judge
         Fisher)  was  made  on  6  February  2020.  The  appellant   sought
         indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  10  years  lawful
         residence. The respondent refused that application on  17  February
         2020.

      7. The appellant exercised his appeal rights, and it came before  FtTJ
         Fisher. It is common ground that the  issue  before  the  FtTJ  was
         whether the appellant's temporary admission could amount to  lawful
         residence and if so, by the date of the  hearing,  the  appellant's
         submission was that he had accrued 10  years  lawful  residence  if
         calculated from 14 December 2010 when the  asylum  application  was
         lodged and temporary  admission  was  granted,  regardless  of  the
         earlier periods of lawful leave.

      8. In his decision promulgated on 11 January 2021, the FtTJ considered
         this  issue  and  whether  the  appellant  had  achieved  10  years
         continuous lawful residence but for the  reasons  set  out  in  his
         decision, he reached the conclusion that the  appellant  could  not
         meet the 10 years continuous lawful residence requirement  and  was
         not entitled to indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 276B  of
         the Immigration Rules.

      9. In summary, the FtTJ considered the argument that from 14  December
         2010 the appellant had established continuous lawful residence  and
         that he had crossed the  10-year  threshold  by  the  date  of  the
         hearing. The judge referred to the guidance on long residence which
         provided the 10-year period "can  be  completed  whilst  appeal  is
         pending" (at  paragraph  12).  However  the  judge  found  that  by
         applying the decisions in SC (Jamaica) and CI (Nigeria),  that  the
         leave to enter or remain must be granted in the  same  capacity  as
         that initially sought. The grant in the appellant's case on 8  June
         2015 was discretionary outside the rules and as the family's asylum
         claim was refused an appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed,
         the judge found that his temporary  admission  did  not  constitute
         lawful residence.

     10. Th FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal. Permission  to  appeal  was
         sought and permission was granted by UTJ Martin on 7 April 2021.

     11. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

     12. The hearing took place on 23 June March 2021, by means of Microsoft
         teams which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face -to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended as  did  the
         appellant remotely via video.

     13. There were some technical problems encountered during  the  hearing
         which led to time being lost  and  there  were  also  a  number  of
         documents missing from the papers which had to be  emailed  to  the
         presenting officer and the tribunal and for the  parties  concerned
         to read the material. In the time remaining, the tribunal was  able
         to hear from Ms Allen on behalf of  the  appellant  but  there  was
         insufficient  time  to  hear  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent and there had been no rule 24 response. The  appeal  was
         therefore adjourned part heard and I gave directions for th further
         hearing which included the written submissions of the respondent to
         be filed.

     14. The submissions made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  set  out  the
         chronology that I have referred to above with particular  reference
         being made to 14 December 2010 when the appellant's father  claimed
         asylum with the appellant as his dependent. This  was  accepted  in
         the letter of 13 November 2020 and the  appellant  was  treated  as
         having temporary admission at that time. Thus  the  operative  date
         she relied upon was 14 December 2010 and therefore by 2020  if  the
         period of temporary admission had  been  taken  into  account,  the
         appellant would have accrued 10 years continuous lawful residence.

     15. Ms Allen, in her submissions referred to the chronology as set  out
         above  and  highlighted  that  whilst  the   appellant's   father's
         application for asylum was refused after 14  December  2010,  on  5
         July 2013 the appellant was granted temporary admission in his  own
         right as he had reached 18 years of age.  On  25th  of  March  2014
         further submissions were made and on 8 June 2015 the appellant  was
         granted limited leave to remain in the UK on a discretionary  basis
         outside the  rules  until  7  December  2017.  He  was  granted  an
         extension until 13 October 2020 and following a  further  extension
         the appellant currently had leave to remain until 26 August 2023.

     16.  It  was  therefore  submitted  that  the  issue  was  whether  the
         appellant's temporary admission amounted  to  lawful  residence  so
         that he was able to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B.  Ms
         Allen submitted that neither paragraph 276A nor the guidance stated
         that the grant of leave to remain must be on the same basis of  the
         application  upon  which  temporary  admission  was   granted.   In
         addition, the guidance provided relief be granted in order  for  an
         application under the long residence rule to be made by a person on
         temporary admission. The guidance set out  "applicants  in  the  UK
         with temporary admission- if an applicant with Temporary  admission
         meets all the other requirements of rule 276B,  discretion  can  be
         exercised by border force to grant them 6  months  code  1  outside
         immigration rules, so they can make an application in the UK. "

     17. Ms Allen submitted this concerned the regularisation of a  stay  in
         the UK to make an application under paragraph  276B  and  therefore
         temporary admission was seen as "lawful residence". By reference to
         the chronology  and  decision  making  in  this  case,  whilst  the
         appellant's initial temporary admission was on the  basis  that  he
         was dependent on his father's asylum claim, before that  claim  was
         concluded on 19 July 2013, the  respondent  had  granted  temporary
         admission to the appellant in his own right on 5  July  2013.  This
         grant of temporary admission was not in respect of any asylum claim
         that the appellant had made that could only have  been  granted  to
         ensure that having reached 18 years, the appellant did  not  remain
         in the UK unlawfully that he was permitted  lawfully,  pursuant  to
         temporary admission to remain in  the  UK.  In  essence,  Ms  Allen
         submitted that the situation was  analogous  to  the  situation  in
         guidance (which was before the  judge)  and  that  the  application
         giving rise to temporary  admission  did  not  have  to  have  been
         successful in order for any  previous  temporary  admission  to  be
         considered lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph 276B.

     18. In her submissions she  made  reference  to  the  decisions  of  SC
         (Jamaica) and CI(Nigeria) both of which were deportation  decisions
         considering rule 399A and section 117C (4) (a) and not specifically
         paragraph 276B. She relied upon the argument set out in the grounds
         and in the earlier skeleton argument provided  in  support  of  her
         overarching submission that the  particular  circumstances  of  the
         appellant demonstrated that he had been permitted by law to  remain
         in the UK under temporary  admission  and  that  this  was  "lawful
         residence" and that after the grant of temporary admission  he  was
         granted leave to remain.  He  therefore  met  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276B.

     19. At the  conclusion  of  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant, there was insufficient time to hear the  submissions  of
         the respondent and I gave directions for written submissions to  be
         submitted and for the appeal to be resumed.

     20. The tribunal has now received a reply on behalf of the Secretary of
         State dated 23 July (although received by me in an email sent on 26
         July 2021).

     21. It states as follows:

             "I am writing further to the adjourned hearing of 23 June 2021
             and the  subsequent  directions  sent  on  7  July  2021.  The
             Secretary of State apologises for  the  delay  in  responding,
             this was due to an IT failure.

             After considering the arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant the Secretary of State accepts  that  the  appellant
             has completed 10 years lawful residence and that therefore the
             First-Tier judge erred in dismissing his appeal.

             In the circumstances the tribunal is invited to set aside  the
             decision of the first tier and substitute a decision  allowing
             the appeal."

     22. Following  the  above  correspondence  I  sent  directions  to  the
         appellant's solicitors to confirm whether they  were  in  agreement
         with the above correspondence and disposal of the appeal. On the 28
         July 2021, an email was received indicating their agreement to  the
         above course on behalf of the appellant.

     23. In the light of the contents of the replies  received,  it  is  not
         necessary to reconvene the hearing and the  subsequent  delay  that
         such a course would take. I need not set out any further   analysis
         of the appeal because as set out above, it is accepted on behalf of
         the respondent that the decision of the FtTJ dismissing the  appeal
         involved the making of an error on a point of law and  that  it  is
         now accepted on behalf of the respondent  that  the  appellant  has
         completed  10  years  lawful  residence  and  therefore   met   the
         requirements to satisfy paragraph 276B.  Whilst  this  is  a  human
         rights appeal, applying the structured approach in TZ (Pakistan and
         PG India) v SSHD [2018] EWC Civ 1109,  and where an appellant meets
         the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  is  positively
         determinative of the  appeal  in  their  favour  (  at  [34]).  The
         respondent has accepted that the requirements under the Immigration
         Rules are met, and that the appeal should be allowed.  I  therefore
         make a decision in those terms.

Notice of Decision.

     24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision is set aside.
         The appeal is remade as follows: the appeal  is  allowed  on  human
         rights grounds.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 28 July 2021





NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

