
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04639/2019
                                                               HU/04644/2019
                                                               HU/04649/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th October 2020                 |On 22nd October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                               MD Mizanur [R]
                               FATIMTATUZ [Z]
                                     zr
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N O'Brien, instructed by MRKS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 4 April 1980.
    The Second and Third Appellants are his dependant wife and child (born
    on 12 September 2013). They appeal against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge T Lawrence, promulgated on 31 October 2019, dismissing
    their appeals against the refusal of leave to remain on human rights
    grounds.

2.   The Second and Third Appellants' appeals are dependant on the First
Appellant. I shall refer to the First Appellant as the Appellant in this
decision.

3.   The Appellant came to the UK on 3 March 2009 with leave to enter as a
student valid until 18 April 2010. He applied for leave to remain as a
student, which was granted until 30 March 2013 and further leave to remain
as a Tier 1 (post study) work migrant which was granted until 14 August
2014. On 14 August 2014, he applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 1
(entrepreneur) migrant which was refused in November 2014 and his appeal
dismissed on 15 August 2016. His subsequent applications for permission to
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal were refused and he
became appeal rights exhausted on 11 April 2017.

4.   On 13 April 2017, the Appellant applied for leave to remain on Article
8 grounds. He varied this application on 22 April 2018 to an application
for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. He varied this
application, on 13 February 2019, to an application for indefinite leave to
remain on grounds of long residence. His application for indefinite leave
to remain was refused on 5 March 2019 on the grounds that he could not
satisfy paragraph 276B(i)(a) or (v) of the Immigration Rules and his
removal to Bangladesh would be proportionate.

5.   The Second and Third Appellants came to the UK on 3 May 2014 as
dependants of the Appellant who held leave as a Tier 1 (post study) work
migrant. Their subsequent applications for leave to remain as dependants of
a Tier 1 (entrepreneur) were refused, in line the Appellant, and they
became appeal rights exhausted on 11 April 2017. Their subsequent
applications for leave to remain were as dependants of the Appellant. These
were rendered void by their applications for leave to remain on Article 8
grounds on 11 October 2018. These applications were refused on 26 February
2019.

6.   The Appellants' appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence
on 27 September 2019. The judge found that he was bound by the decisions of
Juned Ahmed [2019] UKUT 00010 (IAC) and Masum Ahmed [2019] EWCA Civ 1070
and rejected the Appellant's argument that he was temporarily exempt from
immigration control. The judge concluded that the Appellant could not
satisfy paragraph 276B. The Appellants could not satisfy the Immigration
Rules and the judge went on to consider Article 8 and the best interests of
the Third Appellant. He concluded the Appellants' removal was justified in
the public interest.

7.   At paragraph 45.5, the judge rejected the Appellant's argument that he
should be treated as having lawful residence until his application for
indefinite leave to remain was decided and it was irrational and
disproportionate to treat the Appellant as otherwise lawfully resident.

8.   The grounds challenge this finding. The grounds did not advance the
point that Juned Ahmed and Masum Ahmed were wrongly decided. There was no
challenge to the judge's finding, at paragraph 34, that the Appellant was
not temporarily exempt from immigration control.

9.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 30 March
2020 for the following reasons: "It is arguable that the judge failed to
fully engage with the argument raised on behalf of the principal Appellant,
and his conclusions on proportionality were affected as a result. This is a
matter which is not determined in [Juned Ahmed and Masum Ahmed]."

Submissions

10.  Mr O'Brien accepted the Third Appellant was not a qualifying child and
the Appellants' leave expired on 11 April 2017. The subsequent application
for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds was made on 13 April 2017. This
was the first 'gap' in the Appellants' leave.

11.  Mr O'Brien submitted that, pursuant to section 3C (4) Immigration Act
1971, the Appellant was unable to make a new application before 11 April
2017 because his appeal was pending. He could not avoid becoming an
overstayer. Once the Appellant made an application he was permitted to
remain in the UK until it was decided. If he left the UK his application
would lapse and there was no 'out of country' right of appeal. He was
therefore encouraged to remain in the UK to maintain his application. The
Respondent's policy appears to favour remaining in the UK while an
application is outstanding and to pursue an appeal.

12.  Mr O'Brien submitted the public interest does not support the
departure or removal of the Appellant. This was a specific right conferred
by Parliament and public policy could not frustrate the exercise of it. It
therefore followed that the Appellant's presence in the UK could not be
categorised as unlawful. Even if the Appellant's residence was 'technically
unlawful' because of the application of law, he should be treated as if he
was lawfully present. He should not suffer the statutory disabilities of
being an overstayer and he should not be disadvantaged from obtaining
rights under the Immigration Rules.

13.  Mr O'Brien submitted there was a tension between section 3C 1971 Act
and the appeal rights under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2002
Act. The Respondent could use her rule making power or discretion to
overcome these shortcomings. The Rules should be interpreted in compliance
with Article 8. The Appellant should be treated as if he had leave to
remain. Paragraph 276B(v) provided for this by treating a period of
overstaying as a period of leave.

14.  Mr O'Brien submitted that the case of Masum Ahmed endorsed what was
said in Juned Ahmed. It did not 'bite' on this case. Masum Ahmed was
concerned with previous periods of overstaying and it was a permission
decision not a final appeal. It was persuasive but not binding. He
submitted the arguments were interconnected and he made an application for
permission to appeal on the ground that Juned Ahmed was wrongly decided.

15.  Mr O'Brien submitted there was no public interest in requiring the
Appellant to leave the UK when his application or subsequent appeal was
pending. It was wrong to treat him as unlawfully present during this time.
The Respondent should treat the Appellant as having lawful residence
throughout. There was a very short period between becoming appeal rights
exhausted and making a new application which was well within the 14 days
permitted. The Appellant was encouraged to remain to pursue his application
and the public interest did not require his removal. The judge should have
found that the Appellant's removal was disproportionate.

16.  Mr O'Brien submitted there was no public interest in treating the
Appellant as if he did not meet the Immigration Rules. The provisions
should be interpreted in accordance with Article 8. The Appellant's
overstaying should be disregarded and he should be treated as if he had
leave. This was not a vexatious application because the Appellant was
afforded a right of appeal on his human rights claim. It was not certified
as clearly unfounded.

17.  Mr O'Brien submitted the Immigration Rules should be interpreted so
that the 14 day 'overstaying provision' extended leave by 14 days.
Alternatively, the Appellant was caught by a wider interpretation of
exemption because he could not be removed while his appeal was pending. The
Respondent should have exercised her discretion in the Appellant's favour.
Juned Ahmed was wrong because the only proper interpretation of paragraph
276B is that leave continues. Paragraph 276A could be relied on to avoid
the situation where public policy did not favour the Appellants' removal
and the interference with his Article 8 rights was not justified or
proportionate. The matter should be reheard.

18.  Mr Tufan submitted the judge was obliged to follow the decision of
Juned Ahmed which was endorsed by the Court of Appeal. There was no error
of law in following those cases. The Appellant should not be permitted to
challenge this finding because permission to appeal was not granted on this
basis.

19.  Mr Tufan submitted the Appellant was trying to introduce words into
the Immigration Rules which were not there. The fact that an application is
tolerated did not mean the Appellant should be treated as having leave to
remain. The Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276B(i) because he did
not have 10 years' continuous lawful residence. His appeal was dismissed in
2016 because he made an unmeritorious application. If the Appellant's
submission was followed then an applicant could make several applications
just for the purposes of extending his leave.

20.  Mr O'Brien submitted the judge had erred in law in  failing  to  engage
    with the Appellant's argument at paragraph 45.5. He failed to  properly
    assess the public interest factors, in particular the  lack  of  public
    interest in removing the Appellant while his appeal  was  pending.  The
    Respondent had a residual  discretion  which  she  failed  to  exercise
    resulting in a breach of Article 8. The judge had erred in law  in  his
    assessment of proportionality.

Relevant legislation

21.  The relevant parts of section 3C 1971 Act are as follows:

         (1)  This section applies if-

             (a)  a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                  United Kingdom applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
                  variation of the leave,

             (b)  the application for variation is made  before  the  leave
         expires, and

             (c)  the leave expires without the application  for  variation
                  having been decided.

         (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during  any
    period when-

             (a)  the application for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
         withdrawn,

             (b)  an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum
                  and Immigration  Act  2002  could  be  brought  while  the
                  appellant is in the United Kingdom against the decision on
                  the application for variation (ignoring any possibility of
                  an appeal out of time with permission),

             (c)  an appeal  under  that  section  against  that  decision,
                  brought while the appellant is in the United  Kingdom,  is
                  pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act).

         (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if  the
             applicant leaves the United Kingdom.

         (4)  A person may not make an  application  for  variation  of  his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this section.

         (5)  But subsection (4) does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
             application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).

22.  Section 78 2002 Act provides as follows:

         (1)  While a person's appeal under section 82(1) is pending he  may
             not be-

             (a)  removed from the United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  a
                  provision of the Immigration Acts, or

             (b)  required to leave the United Kingdom in accordance with a
                  provision of the Immigration Acts.

         (2)  In this section "pending" has the  meaning  given  by  section
         104.

         (3)  Nothing in this section shall prevent  any  of  the  following
             while an appeal is pending-

             (a)  the giving of a direction  for  the  appellant's  removal
                  from the United Kingdom,

             (b)  the making of a  deportation  order  in  respect  of  the
                  appellant (subject to section 79), or

             (c)  the taking of any other interim or preparatory action.

         (4)  This section applies only  to  an  appeal  brought  while  the
             appellant is in the United Kingdom in accordance with  section
             92.

Conclusions and reasons

23.  It is not in dispute that the Appellant came to the UK on 3 March  2009
    as a student and his leave to  remain  ended  on  11  April  2017.  The
    Appellant's leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (post  study)  work  migrant
    expired on 14 August 2014. On the same day, he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (entrepreneur) migrant. His leave  was  extended  by
    virtue of section 3C and ended when his application for  permission  to
    appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal and he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 11 April 2017.

24.  The Appellant's leave was brought to an end by  operation  of  statute.
    It cannot be revived or extended under the Immigration  Rules.  Section
    3C(4) prevents the Appellant from varying his application whilst he has
    an appeal pending. There is no provision to extend leave  once  section
    3C leave comes to an end. There was no tension between section  3C  and
    appeal rights under the 2002 Act.

25.  In this case the Appellant made an application for leave to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds on 13  April  2017.   Leave  is  not  extended  under
    section 78 of the 2002. The fact that the Appellant cannot  be  removed
    whilst his appeal is pending does not operate so as to grant  a  period
    of leave nor does it make  this  period  of  residence  lawful  if  his
    application is subsequently refused as it was in this case.

26.  I  am  not  persuaded  by  Mr  O'Brien's  argument  that,  because  the
    Appellant cannot be removed and he cannot pursue his application if  he
    leaves the country, he should be considered to  be  lawfully  resident.
    Paragraph 276A does not assist the Appellant. There is no notional form
    of  lawful  residence  capable   of   affecting   the   proportionality
    assessment.

27.  The Appellant is not exempt from immigration control.  This  point  was
    argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  rejected.  There  was  no
    application for permission to appeal  on  this  issue.  Permission  was
    granted on a single ground. I refuse permission to amend the grounds to
    argue  that  Juned  Ahmed  was  wrongly  decided.  The  application  is
    significantly out of time and there was no good reason for  the  delay.
    The grounds specifically state that this point was not  relied  on.  In
    any event, the First-tier Tribunal was bound by Juned Ahmed endorsed by
    Masum Ahmed and no error of law flows from its application.

28.  This is  a  human  rights  appeal.  It  is  not  an  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The issue is whether the refusal of indefinite leave
    to remain breached the Appellants' Article 8 rights.

29.  The Appellant does not have 10 years' continuous lawful  residence.  He
    cannot satisfy paragraph 276B, Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The judge properly directed himself under Article  8
    and section 117B.

30.  The Appellant came to the UK in 2009 and his wife and child joined  him
    in 2014. They have remained in the UK  without  leave  since  11  April
    2017. There will be no interference with the  Appellants'  family  life
    because they will return to Bangladesh  as  a  family  unit.  The  best
    interests of the Third Appellant are to remain  with  her  family.  Any
    private life has been established when the Appellants were in the UK on
    a temporary basis. Under section 117B of the 2002  Act,  little  weight
    should be attached to the  Appellants'  private  life.  The  Appellants
    cannot satisfy the Article 8 requirements of the Immigration Rules  and
    there were no  unjustifiable  harsh  consequences  identified.  On  the
    facts, the public interest outweighs the Appellants' Article 8 rights.

31.  The judge engaged with the Appellant's argument at paragraph  45.5  and
    gave cogent reasons for why he rejected it. There was no error  of  law
    in the judge's assessment of proportionality.

32.  There was no error of law in the decision  promulgated  on  31  October
    2019. The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
