
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04970/2018
     HU/04969/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |(delivered orally at the hearing)    |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Suman Sarangi
                              Priyanka Bandela
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed via Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal (Judge Abebrese) which allowed the appeals of the respondents
(whom I shall refer to as "the claimants") under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The claimants are a married couple and are both citizens of India.  They
were born respectively on 11 August 1985 and 30 April 1985.  Their appeals
concern an application made on 3 January 2017, by way of variation of an
earlier application for further leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant which
had been made on 18 November 2016, based upon ten years' long residence
under para 276B of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  The second
claimant's appeal is dependent on that of the first claimant.  The
claimants were refused leave respectively on 5 and 8 February 2018.

Before the judge the claimants' case was that they had established ten
years' continuous lawful residence, and as I understand it there is no
dispute over that, but in refusing the claimants' application for leave,
the Secretary of State had been wrong to apply para 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules to the first claimant.

Paragraph 322(5) contains a discretionary general ground of refusal.  It
applies where:

         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including
         convictions which do not fall within para 322(1C)), character or
         associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security".

In this case the Secretary of State applied that provision because of
differences in the first claimant's submissions of his income to HMRC for
the tax year 2010/2011 and that put forward as his income for that period
in a previous application for leave under Tier 1 made on 14 March 2011.

The background is this.  The first claimant's declared income in his tax
return to HMRC for the year 2010/2011 when initially made in 2012 was
earned income of �17,600 but there was no declared income from self-
employment.  On 22 October 2013 the first claimant made an amended
submission to HMRC in which he declared a sum in relation to his self-
employment of �17,500.  Therefore, the corrected revised tax calculation
which was made in October 2013 was based on a total taxable income of
�35,100.  There then followed a further revision of his declared income in
August 2016 where, although the employment income remained the same, the
self-employed earnings were increased by a little under �2,000 but his
expenses were reduced by some �16,000 so that his taxable income increased
from �35,100 to �53,482.

In his application for leave to the Home Office the first claimant had
declared his income for the relevant year to be �46,329.  The Secretary of
State considered that the discrepancy with his initial declaration of
income to HMRC was sufficient to engage para 322(5).

The Judge's Decision

Before Judge Abebrese the first claimant gave evidence and I have been
taken today to his witness statement in relation to that.  There was also a
substantial bundle of documents which were relied upon, in particular a
document emailed to one of the first claimant's accountants, which, it was
said, supported his case that the discrepancy was at worst careless and was
not dishonest.

In his determination, the judge dealt with the evidence and found, in para
27 and thereafter, that the appellant was credible.  The appellant's
evidence, which is summarised in paras 27 to 31, relates how he came to
discover that the initial submission to HMRC in relation to the tax year
2010/2011 was wrong and that, having changed his firm of accountants, the
error was corrected in the first amendment in 2013 so as to declare the
self-employment income of �17,500.

As the judge's reasoning is challenged by Mr Howells, who represented the
Secretary of State, it is necessary for me to set that out.  The judge said
this at paras 27 to 31:

"27. I find the appellant credible for the following reasons.  The
appellant does have a degree in business administration but I do not find
this qualification would have provided him with expertise in tax matters of
the UK.  The appellant therefore in relation to tax matters acted
appropriately in seeking the advice of an accountant to handle such
matters.  The appellant I find did disclose all relevant information to his
accountant and that he did keep abreast of matters and that he came to know
from his accountant that his tax return figures had not been correctly
completed by his accountant Dwiref Patel who advised the appellant that the
deadline to complete the corrected figures to HMRC was 31 January 2013.

28.  I find it credible that the first appellant was informed by his
accountant that the correct figure had been filed with HMRC and that he
should expect a bill in due course.  I find it credible that the first
appellant was also informed that his accountant would be out of the country
between the period of April 2013 to June 2013.  The appellant did wait for
a period of six to seven months and he had not received any correspondence
from HMRC and at this stage he did try to take steps to make contact with
his accountant.

29.  The appellant in these circumstances was justified in seeking to
instruct new accountant firm to further progress the matter from Sivapalan
& Co.  The appellant paid the amount of tax that was assessed by HMRC after
the correct figures were provided to HMRC.  This in my view shows that the
appellant showed every intention that he did not intend to deceive the
respondent or HMRC and if it were not for the particular facts especially
reliance on his previous accountant that he could have provided the correct
figures from the outset and paid the appropriate tax.

30.  The appellant also explains that from November 2015 he started trading
through a limited company, i.e. Sarangis IT Consultancy Ltd.  He instructed
a new accountancy firm because of changes that had taken place at Sivapalan
& Co.  The first appellant's new accountants found that a typographical
error had been made in respect of his expenses in the tax year 2013, which
brought his net earnings down for that year.  [I interpolate there that the
judge means the tax year 2010/11 but the correction was made in 2013.]  I
have taken into account and given weight to the fact that the respondent
has not charged the first appellant with any penalty on his tax
rectification in accordance with their own policy.  Furthermore the first
appellant does not have any outstanding tax with HMRC.

31.  The appellant also explained why his SA02 did not show the declared
figures in 2013.  Mr Sivapalan retired from his firm in November 2014 and
he therefore requested documents from HMRC in respect of his tax returns in
2013 and that the appellant had declared and paid tax.  He claims that
eventually they did find his information and they informed him that the
information could only be updated manually on the system.  The first
appellant has acknowledged that the appropriate figures were not provided
by his previous accountants but he has been proactive in providing the
correct figures to HMRC and in my view his conduct does not make him
undesirable to remain in this country."

Then at para 32 the judge reached the following conclusion:

"I note that the Rules under paragraph 322(5) is not mandatory and the
conduct of the first appellant does not amount to anything which may be
deemed to be criminal or a threat to national security and at the very
least he has been careless as it could be argued that he should have been
more diligent in scrutinising the documents prior to their filing with the
respondent.  I accept the submissions made by the respondents and the
authorities which he has provided.  I note in particular the statement made
by Judge Taylor in Kadian that the fact that the appellant had not declared
his income whilst being highly regrettable cannot properly be described as
conduct such at that set out in the respondent's guidance.  The appellant
has not been involved in criminal activity or involved in activity which is
a threat to national security."

The Submissions

On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Howells relied upon the grounds of
appeal, which he developed in his oral argument.  His submissions were as
follows.  The judge failed to apply the reasoning process to the evidence
as set out by the Upper Tribunal in its decision in R (on the application
of Khan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKUT 00384
(IAC) in the judgment of Spencer J.  Further, Mr Howells submitted that the
judge misdirected himself by relying on the unreported case of Kadian,
which he had taken to decide that para 322(5) did not apply to cases of
this sort where the Secretary of State relies on discrepancies in income
submitted to HMRC and in an application for leave made to the Secretary of
State.  Mr Howells submitted that that was not consistent with the recent
decision of the Court of Appeal in R (on the application of Balajigari and
others) [2019] EWCA Civ 673, where it was accepted that provided dishonesty
was established, para 322(5) could in principle be engaged where there were
the discrepancies in income declared.

Mr Gajjar, who represented the claimants, submitted that the judge had
found that the claimant's conduct was at worst careless.  He had accepted
the first claimant's explanation and had therefore concluded that the
discrepancies did not establish on the evidence that the first claimant had
been dishonest.  Any reference by the judge to Kadian had to be seen in the
context of the judge having determined already in paras 27 to 31 that the
first claimant's behaviour was innocent and that he was at worst careless
in what he had done.  In respect of that, Mr Gajjar particularly relied on
the fact that the evidence which the judge accepted showed that the first
claimant had sought to deal with the misstatement of his self-employed
income in 2013, well before his application for leave in December 2016 was
made in which he submitted the discrepant income to the Home Office.  He
helpfully took me through the evidence which the judge had before him, in
particular the witness statement of the first claimant and the documentary
evidence including an email to his first firm of accountants in July 2013
which demonstrated, Mr Gajjar submitted, in essence that the first claimant
was seeking to rectify this in an honest way some time before the
application for leave was made.

Mr Gajjar submitted that the process and relevant matters set out by
Spencer J in Khan were in fact considered by the judge when he looked at
the background documents, the claimant's explanation and when the
correction to HMRC had initially been made.  Mr Gajjar pointed out that the
2013 correction resulted in the first claimant's declared income exceeding
that which would have been required for his subsequent application under
the points-based system, which required him to establish an income of
�35,000 and the correction in 2013 resulted in a declared income of
�35,100.

Mr Gajjar submitted that the Secretary of State could only succeed if the
judge's factual finding that the first claimant was not dishonest, but at
worst only careless, was perverse and that was a high standard to reach.

Discussion

It is clear from the Court of Appeal's decision in Balajigari that in order
for the Secretary of State to establish, and the burden of proof is on the
Secretary of State, that para 322(5) applies it must be established that
the individual was dishonest.  That is a precondition to para 322(5)
applying.  It is also clear that the judge found as a fact that the first
claimant was not dishonest but, although slightly inelegantly put in para
32, he was at worst only careless.

Mr Howells relied upon what was said by Spencer J in Khan.  In the headnote
the approach is summarised as follows:

         "(i) Where there has been  a  significant  difference  between  the
             income claimed in a previous application for leave  to  remain
             and the income declared to HMRC, the  Secretary  of  State  is
             entitled to draw an inference  that  the  Applicant  has  been
             deceitful or dishonest and therefore he should be refused  ILR
             within paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules.   Such  an
             inference could  be  expected  where  there  is  no  plausible
             explanation for the discrepancy.

         (ii) Where an  Applicant  has  presented  evidence  to  show  that,
             despite  the  prima  facie  inference,  he  was  not  in  fact
             dishonest but only careless, then the Secretary of State  must
             decide whether the explanation and evidence is sufficient,  in
             her  view,  to  displace  the   prima   facie   inference   of
             deceit/dishonesty.

         (iii)    In approaching that fact-finding task,  the  Secretary  of
             State should remind herself that,  although  the  standard  of
             proof is the "balance of probability", a finding that a person
             has been deceitful  and  dishonest  in  relation  to  his  tax
             affairs with the consequence that he is denied  settlement  in
             this  country  is  a  very  serious   finding   with   serious
             consequences.

         (iv) For an Applicant simply to blame his or her accountant for  an
             "error" in relation to the historical tax return will  not  be
             the end of the matter,  given  that  the  accountant  will  or
             should have asked the tax payer to confirm that the return was
             accurate and to have signed the tax  return.  Furthermore  the
             Applicant will have known of his or her earnings and will have
             expected to pay tax thereon.  If the Applicant does  not  take
             steps within a reasonable time to remedy  the  situation,  the
             Secretary of State may  be  entitled  to  conclude  that  this
             failure justifies a conclusion that there has been  deceit  or
             dishonesty.

         (v)  When considering whether or not the Applicant is dishonest  or
             merely careless the Secretary of  State  should  consider  the
             following matters, inter alia, as well as the extent to  which
             they are evidenced (as opposed to asserted):

                  i.    Whether  the  explanation  for  the  error  by   the
                  accountant is plausible;

                  ii.  Whether the documentation which  can  be  assumed  to
                  exist (for example, correspondence between  the  Applicant
                  and his accountant at the time of the tax return) has been
                  disclosed or there is a plausible explanation for  why  it
                  is missing;

                  iii. Why the Applicant did not realise that an  error  had
                  been made because his liability to pay tax was  less  than
                  he should have expected;

                  iv.  Whether, at any stage, the Applicant has taken  steps
                  to remedy the situation and, if so, when those steps  were
                  taken and the explanation for any significant delay."

The decision in Khan did not set out a straitjacket as to the approach that
should be followed before a decision maker - there it was the Secretary of
State - reached a decision in respect of para 322(5).  It provides a
helpful guide, and no more than that, to how a decision-maker should
approach the task.  The approach was largely approved in Balajigari ([40]-
[44], but note at [42] the caution expressed in relation to the "starting
point" in (i) and (ii)).  The importance of the guidance is that it
emphasises that the decision-maker should consider carefully the evidence
of the explanation or otherwise for the discrepancy in the submitted income
to HMRC and the Secretary of State in the application for leave.

Here, it is clear to me that the judge did consider all relevant matters.
He had the first claimant's explanation and he accepted that, looking at
the material that was submitted, in particular that his income was a matter
addressed by the first claimant with his first firm of accountants and,
when that proved to be of no effect, through a second firm of accountants
in 2013, well before, as Mr Gajjar submitted, the first claimant made his
application for leave in December 2016.

In my judgment, the judge was entitled to accept the first claimant's
evidence as to how the discrepancy arose.  It is perhaps axiomatic to state
that an appellate tribunal should be cautious in interfering with a factual
finding based upon all the evidence and should only do so if the
conclusions reached are inadequately or irrationally reasoned, or the
decision itself is an irrational one.  Here, in the paragraphs of the
judge's decision that I set out above, he gave clear and adequate reasons
based upon all the evidence why he accepted as credible the first claimant
and his explanation as to how the initial figures submitted to HMRC were
inaccurate and how he sought to have those corrected through his
accountants in 2013 and then subsequently again by a further firm of
accountants in 2016.  The judge no doubt had well in mind that the initial
correction in 2013 looks, on the face of it, to be wholly unconnected to
any immediate or foreseeable application for leave which would only be made
some three years later. It was, in itself, without the further correction
sufficient to meet the requirements of the Rules.

There was also documentary evidence that provided some support to the first
claimant's explanation and, as I have said, the judge was entitled to
accept the first claimant's evidence.  The judge's reasons were not
inadequate and his conclusion is simply not one that can be described as
having been irrational in that no reasonable judge properly directing
themselves could reach it.  It was a finding open to the judge.

The judge's reference to the decision of Kadian in para 32 has, in my
judgment, to be seen in the light of his prior finding that the first
claimant had not been shown to be dishonest.  It may be that the judge in
Kadian did understate the application of para 322(5) but the present
judge's reference to it in para 32 did not, in my judgment, affect in any
material way his finding that it had not been established by the Secretary
of State that the first claimant was dishonest.  It may be that the
decision in Kadian is best archived in the light of the Court of Appeal's
decision in Balajigari.

In this appeal, having found in the claimants'' favour under para 322(5),
the judge went on to allow the claimants' appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR.
It was accepted before me that the judge's decision to allow the appeal
under Art 8 could not be challenged if the judge's conclusion in relation
to 322(5) was sustainable.  It is accepted that the first claimant met the
requirement of the long residence rule in para 276B.  There is no
conceivable reason why it could be said that his removal would be
proportionate if he meets the requirements of the Rules on that basis, and
the contrary was not argued before me.



Decision

For those reasons therefore, the judge did not materially err in law in
allowing the claimants' appeals under Art 8.

The Secretary of State's appeal to this Tribunal is accordingly dismissed.

Costs

The final issue concerns an application by the claimants for costs, relying
upon rule 10(3)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698 as amended).  That is the relevant provision and it allows
the Upper Tribunal as a matter of discretion to make an order of costs in
the circumstances where

          "the Upper Tribunal considers that a party or its representative
         has acted unreasonably in bringing, defending or conducting the
         proceedings".

The approach to that provision is identified in a number of important cases
which for these purposes are drawn together in the Upper Tribunal's
decision in Thapa & Ors (costs: general principles; s 9 review) [2018] UKUT
0054 (IAC).  In that case the Upper Tribunal, presided over by its
President, Lane J, pointed out that as a result of earlier guidance in the
case of Cancino [2015] UKFTT 00059 (IAC) the application of rule 10, or
rather the exercise of discretion under rule 10, should be done with
significant restraint.

As the case law such as Cancino makes clear, the requirement to show
unreasonable conduct imposes a significant hurdle.  Here, the Secretary of
State raised grounds based on the then leading case of Khan, a case which
has, with some slight caveat, been approved by the Court of Appeal in
Balajigari.  The Secretary of State's grounds were considered to be
arguable when the First-tier Tribunal granted permission on 31 December
2018.  It is difficult in my view to conclude that the Secretary of State
sought permission to appeal unreasonable and certainly in continuing
proceedings after permission was granted.

Mr Gajjar relied upon his rule 24 response, which is dated 7 February of
this year, and submitted that in the light of that, the Secretary of State
should in effect have withdrawn his appeal to this Tribunal.  Whilst Mr
Gajjar's rule 24 response sets out the claimants' case as to why the
judge's decision was not reached in error of law and should stand, it did
not, in my view, demonstrate unequivocally that the Secretary of State's
appeal was now a hopeless one or one that had no arguable merit despite the
fact that the First-tier had granted permission on the basis that it did
have arguable merit.

Of course, today I have, in my judgment, concluded that the Secretary of
State's grounds were not made out.  That is not to say that the grounds
were not arguable to start with and that therefore Judge Pedro was wrong to
have granted permission.  Indeed, there are many appeals in the Upper
Tribunal which are unsuccessful.  That is not inconsistent with the appeal
to the Upper Tribunal initially being at least arguable.

In these circumstances, I am not satisfied that the Secretary of State
behaved unreasonably in seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
and that would of course have been at a time when the claimants would not
have incurred any costs in any event, or in continuing his case in the
Upper Tribunal following the grant of permission in December of last year,
or in the light of Mr Gajjar's rule 24 response in February of this year.
The claim remained arguable and pursuing it was not unreasonable.  I
therefore decline to make an order for costs in favour of the claimants.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                12 June 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Abebrese made no  fee  award  as  none  was  requested.   I  heard  no
submissions  by  the  claimants  that   that   order   should   not   stand.
Accordingly, no fee award is made.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                12 June 2019

