
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04253/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2020                    |On 20 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                             RIZWANA BEGUM MENAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R Solomon, Counsel, instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant is a national of India and is aged 29. She seeks entry
clearance as a partner, under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The
respondent refused the application by means of a decision dated 29 January
2018.

Her appeal was initially heard by the First-tier Tribunal (JFtT Housego)
and was dismissed by a decision sent to the parties on 30 January 2019. The
appellant was granted permission to appeal and this Tribunal (UTJ
Kopieczek) allowed the appeal on all grounds by a decision dated 19
September 2019. UTJ Kopieczek set aside the decision and saved no findings
of fact made by JFtT Housego. He directed that the Upper Tribunal remake
the decision at a resumed hearing.

This matter was listed before UTJ Kopieczek on 11 December 2019 but was
adjourned as the sponsor informed the Tribunal that he was unable to attend
because of ill-health. A subsequent hearing listed to be heard on 14 April
2020 was adjourned by the Tribunal on 20 March 2020 consequent to
circumstances arising from the Covid-19 pandemic. It was subsequently
listed before me by means of a remote hearing held at Field House on 4
September 2020. The appellant relied upon five bundles, filed and served
between 16 November 2018 and 24 February 2020, of which some appeared to be
single documents with no covering letter. Mr. Solomon accepted on behalf of
the appellant that he was required to produce up-to-date medical evidence
if he wished to advance his argument relying upon the Court of Justice
judgment in Ruiz Zambrano v Office National de l'Emploi (ONEm) (C-34/09)
EU:C:2011:124, [2012] Q.B. 265. Consequently, with the agreement of both
parties, the hearing was adjourned so as to give the appellant further time
to secure relevant medical evidence concerning her husband.

I directed the appellant to file and serve any further evidence to be
relied upon under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 by 11 September 2020. Unfortunately, an unpaginated bundle that
did not possess an index was filed with the Tribunal on 14 September 2020,
with no explanation for the delay in complying with directions. Further, no
explanation was provided as to the service of new documents in accordance
with rule 15(2A). A simple, and unhelpful, request was made for 'more time'
in which to collect further documents without any timeframe being provided
to the Tribunal.

The appellant's legal representatives served a 126-page supplementary
bundle at 15:21 the day before the hearing. No explanation was given for
the breach of directions by the late filing and service of the bundle. No
effort was made to identify documents that were being filed for the first
time or had previously been relied upon, and no explanation was provided as
to the filing of new documents as required under rule 15(2A). The fact that
some pages were upside down and others unintelligible appeared not to have
been noticed by the legal representatives. I observe that during the course
of these proceedings the appellant's legal representatives have previously
failed to comply with directions, resulting in their being directed to
explain their behaviour to UTJ Kopieczek.

At the hearing before me on 9 October 2020, Mr. Walker confirmed that he
took no issue with the late service of documents. Upon considering the
contents of the bundle I decided that it was in the interests of justice
that it be admitted. I observed to the parties that the recent evidence as
to the sponsor's mental health post-dated the hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal.

Mr. Walker confirmed that with the aid of Mr. Solomon he had been able to
identify and consider the relevant pages within the supplementary bundle
and was able to proceed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not issue an anonymity direction and no request
was made by either party for such direction before me.

Background

The appellant married the sponsor, a British citizen hailing from Sri
Lanka, in India on 17 August 2009. They have two children, presently aged 9
and 6, who are British citizens and who reside with their mother in India.

The sponsor has an established diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder,
first diagnosed in June 2015.

On 28 March 2017 the appellant applied for entry clearance under the
Immigration Rules ('the Rules') as the partner of a British citizen. She
provided evidence that the sponsor was earning over �18,600 per annum
consequent to employment with three employers including a firm of
accountants, Agnon LLP, at their London office.

It is accepted by the parties that after the filing of the appellant's
entry clearance application the sponsor ceased employment consequent to
mental health concerns and on 13 December 2017, prior to the decision of
the respondent, secured social benefit provision through the award of
Personal Independence Payment ('PIP').

By a decision dated 29 January 2018 an respondent refused the appellant's
application for entry clearance as a spouse detailing, inter alia:

         'Under paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) your application falls for refusal on
         grounds of suitability under Section S-EC of Appendix FM.

         You stated on your visa application form your sponsor was employed
         by Agnon Chartered Certified Accountants and provided the required
         specified documents including payslips and an employment letter.

         On several occasions we attempted to contact Agnon Chartered
         Certified Accountants on the telephone number provided in their
         letter ... however each time the number was unavailable and
         disconnected. Furthermore, we attempted to contact the employer
         using the telephone number provided on their website ... however
         this dialled to an engineering firm. When questioned whether they
         had any relation to Agnon Chartered Certified Accountants they
         confirmed they did not.

         When your sponsor was interviewed about this claimed employment
         with Agnon Chartered Certified Accountants he was very vague about
         his role and responsibilities; only able to state he helped with
         the files. He was unable, when questioned, to name any colleagues
         apart from Ramraj who wrote the employment letter, despite claiming
         to have worked there for over 6 months. Your sponsor was unclear
         how many hours he worked per week or the days of the week he worked
         stating it varied. Considering his payslips always showed a basic
         salary of �624 I do not find it credible that his working hours
         varied each week. Your sponsor was unable, when asked, to describe
         the business premises or its surroundings.

         Considering all of the above, I am not satisfied your sponsor was
         employed as claimed by Agnon Chartered Certified Accountants.
         Furthermore, I am satisfied, whether or not to your knowledge,
         false documents and information have been provided in support of
         your application. Your application is therefore refused under
         paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules (S-
         EC.2.2).'

As to eligibility the respondent concluded:

         'You do not meet the eligibility financial requirement of
         paragraphs E-ECP.3.1. to 3.4.

         As stated above I am not satisfied your sponsor's employment with
         Agnon Chartered Certified Accountants was genuine therefore I have
         only considered his employment with KFC and Tesco towards the
         income requirement.

         You have provided all specified documents in relation to these
         employments. These indicate he had a combined income of �xx [sic]
         over the 6-month period prior to your application. In order to meet
         the financial requirement your sponsor must have an annual income
         of at least �18,600 (�9,300 over 6 months) therefore your sponsor's
         income was not sufficient to meet this requirement. Your
         application is therefore refused under paragraph EC.P.1.1(d) of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (E-ECP.3.1).'

At the date of decision, the respondent was unaware that the sponsor had
been admitted to hospital under section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983
('the 1983 Act') on 19 August 2017 and under section 3 of the 1983 Act on
15 September 2017. He was given 'section 17 extended leave' on 20 September
2017 but self-presented to hospital on 22 September 2017 as he was not
coping at home. He was transferred to PICU on 26 September 2017 and later
transferred to a triage ward on 9 October 2017 before being transferred to
another ward on 13 October 2017. He subsequently enjoyed a period of
section 17 leave under the care of the home treatment team before being
discharged back to the care of the local early intervention service.

Decision

I wish to observe from the outset my appreciation for the efforts of both
Mr. Solomon and Mr. Walker in this matter, both of whom espoused the
highest standard of representation. Between them Mr. Solomon was able to
throw light upon the documents contained in the poorly prepared bundles
filed in this matter and Mr. Walker was ultimately content to accept upon
consideration of the relevant documents that the appellant's appeal should
properly be allowed.

I set out below my reasons for approving the respondent's acceptance that
the appellant should succeed in this appeal under the Rules.

As to the purported earnings by the sponsor from his employment from Agnon
LLP, Mr. Walker accepted that the sponsor's employment history identified
by HM Revenue & Customs by its letter dated October 2018, in which the
relevant employer is detailed to be three named persons, is consistent with
the sums earned as identified in the Agron LLP payslips relied upon. One of
the named persons, Nagen Ramraj, authored a letter as a partner of Agnon
LLP dated 20 March 2017 that accompanied the entry clearance application.
Further, Mr. Walker accepted that the P60 relating to the tax year ending
April 2017 and the P45 dated 15 April 2018, both of which refer to Agnon
LLP as being the sponsor's employer, are genuine documents. Mr. Walker
further noted payment from Agnon LLP, detailed as 'salary', on a bank
statement, being paid into the sponsor's bank account in a sum consistent
with a relevant pay slip. Consequently, he accepted as genuine the email
from Nageen Ramraj dated 29 October 2018, confirming that the sponsor had
been employed by the firm as an unskilled office assistant and explaining
that the telephone number unsuccessfully called by an entry clearance
officer related to a previous office.

I observe as to the respondent's interview with the sponsor that no copy of
the interview has been filed with the Tribunal and to date the Tribunal has
not been provided with, at the very least, the date of the interview. Mr.
Walker appropriately accepted that there was a likelihood that as such
interview took place before the decision in January 2018, the sponsor was
either being cared for under 'section 17' measures or had recently been
discharged from such leave. Section 17(1) of the 1983 Act covers the
entitlement of the responsible clinician ('RC'), the approved clinician
with overall responsibility for a patient's care, to grant leave from
hospital detention under the 1983 Act with any conditions that may be
necessary 'in the interests of the patient or for the protection of other
persons.' Such conditions are to be a proportionate restriction to the end
they seek to achieve or the risk they seek to manage. Only the RC can grant
section 17 leave and only to patients detained under sections 2, 3, 4, 37
or 47 of the 1983 Act. I observe that the RC has a right under s17(4) to
recall patients from leave, revoking their leave of absence. The medical
evidence relied upon by the appellant does not provide a date upon which
the sponsor was discharged from section 17 measures, simply referring to
his being subject to a 'period' of such leave, but I am satisfied that the
sponsor was vulnerable at the time of his interview and the respondent has
provided no evidence that such vulnerability was positively and
appropriately addressed during the telephone interview. Consequently, I
conclude that Mr Walker was correct to concede that no reliance can be
placed upon the purported contents of the interview.

In such circumstances, the respondent cannot satisfy the burden placed upon
her in seeking to establish that documents originating from Agnon LLP are
false, and therefore could not lawfully refuse the application on
suitability grounds under paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM to the Rules
(S-EC.2.2).

On behalf of the respondent Mr. Walker conceded that the sponsor was
employed by Agnon LLP as stated in the appellant's application for entry
clearance and consequently at the date of application the appellant met the
relevant financial requirements. Further, though unbeknown to the
respondent, at the date of decision the appellant met the relevant
financial requirements consequent to the sponsor being in receipt of PIP:
paragraph E-ECP.3.3.(1)(vi).

Mr. Walker further confirmed that the appellant satisfied the accommodation
requirements established by paragraph E-ECP.3.4.

Upon considering the evidence in the round, I am satisfied to the
appropriate standard that the appellant meets the requirements of Section
EC-P of Appendix FM to the Rules and therefore her appeal is allowed on
human rights (article 8) grounds.

Upon the respondent now accepting that the appellant meets the relevant
entry clearance requirements under the Rules, I am not required to consider
the appellant's alternative submission, namely that her application should
have been granted on 'Zambrano' grounds under EU law.

Notice of Decision

By means of a decision sent to the parties on 19 September 2019 this
Tribunal set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9
January 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007.

The decision is re-made, and the appellant's appeal on human rights
(article 8) grounds is allowed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 12 October 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant was granted a fee exemption and so no fee  award  is  payable.
In any event, the respondent's  decision  was  reasonable  on  the  evidence
initially presented. The Tribunal's decision  is  founded  upon  documentary
evidence submitted consequent to the decision and  so  no  fee  award  would
have been made.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 12 October 2020
