
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: HU/04143/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 April 2017                  |On 23 May 2017                   |
|                                  |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               Mr leon clarke
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Coleman, counsel instructed by Barar &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on 7 October 1977. He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 July 2001 with leave to enter as a
visitor until 25 July 2001. He was granted further leave until 9 July 2002
and a further application for leave to remain as a student was refused. On
14 May 2015, an application was submitted on his behalf for leave to remain
on the basis of family and private life in the United Kingdom. This
application was refused on 25 August 2015 and he appealed against this
decision.

2. The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Cassel for hearing on
30 September 2016. In a decision promulgated on 18 October 2016, the Judge
dismissed the appeal, both under the Immigration Rules and with regard to
Article 8 of ECHR. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal was made, in time, on 25 October 2016. The grounds in support of
the application submitted that the First tier Tribunal Judge had erred
materially in law: (i) in failing to properly consider the Appellant's
British citizen child, born on 5.9.15; (ii) in failing to take account of
the Home Office policy viz the Immigration Directorate's Instructions
"Family life as a partner or parent and private life: 10 year routes."

3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First tier
Tribunal Judge Colyer in a decision dated 21 February 2017 on the basis
that: "it is arguable that the judge may have erred in law for the reasons
outlined in the appellant's representatives' detailed submissions ...
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted on all grounds
submitted." In a rule 24 response dated 8 March 2017, the Respondent
opposed the appeal on the basis that the Judge directed himself
appropriately; was clearly aware that the child was British and
appropriately concluded at [29] that it would be reasonable for the child
to leave, thus no error of law arises.

Hearing

4. I heard detailed submissions from Mr Coleman on behalf of the Appellant.
He acknowledged that the Appellant is an overstayer but he has been in a
relationship with a British Citizen for the past 8 years. He has one
British Citizen child and one on the way and is the primary carer for the
child. Mr Coleman submitted that British Citizens are in a stronger
position than a child who has resided in the United Kingdom for 7 years cf.
ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4. Whilst the Judge's attention was drawn to the
Home Office guidance at 11.2.2 and 11.2.3. at [27] she erroneously did not
refer to it and it should have been the starting point for her
consideration. Therefore at [28] her reference to the Appellant's son that
"he is very young" is erroneous and fails to implement the approach of the
Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [38] and [46] where
consideration was given to the guidance at 11.2.4. and the "very strong
expectation for a child to remain in the United Kingdom with his parents as
part of the proportionality assessment." Consequently, the Judge erred in
finding that maintenance of effective immigration control must take
priority and failed to conduct a proportionality exercise in light of the
best interests consideration pursuant to section 55 of the Borders,
Citizenship & Immigration Act 2009.

5. Mr Coleman submitted that the Judge further erred in the emphasis placed
on the Appellant's immigration history. Whilst the Appellant is an
overstayer he is no more than that and there is no criminality. Moreover,
whilst at [28] the Judge notes in line with the judgment in Zoumbas [2013]
UKSC 74 cited at [52] of MA (Pakistan)[2016] EWCA Civ 705 that a child
should not suffer as a result of his parent(s)' actions, the Judge looks
entirely at the immigration history of the father and does exactly that. In
respect of the Article 8 assessment at [34] the Judge clearly erred in
finding that there were no circumstances that required her to carry out an
analysis outside the Rules and also in finding at [38] that the maintenance
of effective immigration control must take priority.  Further, there was no
assessment of the reasonableness of the British Citizen child leaving the
United Kingdom and the judgment in Treebhawon [2017] (NIAA 2002 Part 5A -
compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) was not taken
account of. At [34] the Judge fails to give reasons as to why it would not
be disproportionate. Mr Coleman submitted that the whole Article 8
assessment fails to engage with section 55 cf. [39] of PD Sri Lanka
(Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC). He
submitted that "reasonableness" was a much less exacting test and falls
into a different category of consideration. Mr Coleman submitted that the
cumulative effect amounts to a material error of law and that the Judge
misdirected herself in applying the decision in Azimi Moayed [2013] UKUT
0197 (IAC) in that this relates to 7 years residence not British Citizen
children. Similarly, in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 the children had no status
and in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 they were not qualified
children so this was not relevant at all.

6. Ms Isherwood, on behalf of the Respondent, submitted that there was no
material error of law. She argued that the Appellant was not the primary
carer of his son but cares for him whilst his partner is working part time
as a dental nurse for which she earns ï¿½15,000 pa and, consequently, they
share the care. On the evidence presented to the Judge, the Appellant was
illegally in the UK as an overstayer and the Judge was entitled to put
weight on this. In respect of the Home Office Guidance, throughout the
determination the Judge acknowledges that there is a British Citizen child
and at [4] of the determination that the relationship is genuine and
subsisting. At [16.2.] it is clear that the Judge is fully aware of the
Appellant's partner and British Citizen child. The Judge clearly refers to
the best interests of the child and there is a heading to this effect after
[22] and reference to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4. At [26] the Judge
directed herself correctly that the issue of reasonableness is an intensely
fact finding exercise.

7. The Judge acknowledges the Home Office guidance at [27] but also notes
that the Appellant does have a poor immigration history and one cannot
choose where one wants to live. Taking that into account at [28] the Judge
was entitled to place weight on the fact that the Appellant has lived in
the UK unlawfully for 13 years and that his child is very young and that
there was no credible evidence to show that to leave the United Kingdom
would be unreasonable. Ms Isherwood submitted that the findings made were
open to the Judge and that the challenge put forward is a matter of
disagreement with Judge's findings of fact.

6. In his reply, Mr Coleman submitted that it was not his case that the
child's best interests are paramount but they are a primary consideration.
His partner clearly stated at [8] of her witness statement that she would
not relocate to Jamaica.

Decision

7. I found an error of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge
Cassel and indicated my decision at the hearing. My reasons for so finding
are as follows:

7.1. whilst it is the case that the First tier Tribunal Judge considered
the jurisprudence in respect of the best interests of the Appellant's child
in some detail at [23]-[24] of the decision, I find that the Judge erred
materially in law in applying those principles to her consideration of the
best interests of the British child in this case. As Mr Coleman pointed
out, none of the cases relied upon by the Judge bar ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
UKSC 4 viz EA (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 315; Azimi Moayed [2013] UKUT 0197
(IAC); Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874
involved a British citizen child. Moreover, in finding at [38] that "the
maintenance of effective immigration control must take priority" there is
no reference to her statutory duty to consider the Appellant's son's best
interests as part of the proportionality assessment and it would appear
that she did not do so. Further, the Judge failed to give any reasons as to
why she concluded that the maintenance of effective immigration control
must take priority.

7.2. The Appellant sought to rely upon the Home Office guidance in the form
of the Immigration Directorate's Instructions "Family life as a partner or
parent and private life: 10 year routes" August 2015 and this was
acknowledged by the Judge at [27] of her decision, however, I find that the
Judge erred materially in law in her approach to the guidance. At 11.2.3.
the guidance provides that where a refusal would require a parent to return
to a country outside the EU, the case must always be assessed on the basis
that it would be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave
the EU. The Respondent retains a discretion to refuse leave, "where the
conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of such
weight as to justify separation." The examples given include criminality or
"a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has repeatedly
and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules". The Judge acknowledged at
[28] that the period of overstay was not a repeated breach although it was
arguably a deliberate one, however, this is insufficient to constitute
circumstances justifying the refusal of leave, given that the guidance
provides that "the person has repeatedly and deliberately breached the
Immigration Rules." Even if that were the case, it is clear from the
guidance that refusal in such circumstances is discretionary and " the
decision maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation."
The Judge failed so to do on the basis that the family would return to
Jamaica together [28] and [29] but this is contrary to and fails to take
account of the position of the Appellant's partner that she would not
relocate to Jamaica and this is not addressed by the Judge;

7.3. I further accept Mr Coleman's submission that there is no analysis of
the reasonableness of expecting the child to leave the United Kingdom and
there is no reference to or engagement with the decision of the Court of
Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, despite the fact that this was
expressly referred to in Ms Akhtar's skeleton argument before the Judge at
[22]. This is a material error in that, whilst the cases concerned children
with residence in the United Kingdom of 7 years or more, it is recorded at
[35] that counsel for the Respondent acknowledged that it would be
"relatively rare for it to be reasonable to expect a child who is a British
citizen to leave the UK."

8. The parties agreed that I could proceed to re-make the decision so I
then heard submissions from both parties.

Submissions

9. In her submissions, Ms Isherwood submitted that, despite the fact that
there is a British Citizen child, it has to be borne in mind that the
Appellant has abused the system and this was material in respect of the
assessment of reasonableness pursuant to both EX1 of Appendix FM and
section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002. She submitted that there was no evidence
as to whether or not the Appellant would meet the requirements of the
Rules, including the financial requirements, given that his wife is
currently working part time and there was an absence of evidence to show it
would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant to leave. He chose to be
unlawfully here, only submitted the application form when his partner was
pregnant and everything was done in a precarious manner. Ms Isherwood
sought to rely on the judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [75]
and [85]. The Judge found if the child was to leave he would not be
expected to learn a new language and nothing has been put forward to
dispute that or that they would not get support from the United Kingdom.
She submitted that, taking account of the Appellant's actions and his
circumstances in the United Kingdom and looking at the question of
reasonableness there were no insurmountable obstacles and no compelling
circumstances. The child is 1 year old and is dependent on his parents and
it is a choice for them to go back together or make an entry clearance
application.

10. In his submissions, Mr Coleman sought to rely on the skeleton argument
drafted by Ms Akhtar prepared for the hearing before the First tier
Tribunal. He further sought to rely on the judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016]
EWCA Civ 705 at [35] and [37] but submitted that that concerned a 7 year
case rather than a British Citizen child and counsel for the Respondent
conceded that it was relatively rare for it to be reasonable to expect a
child who is a British Citizen to leave the United Kingdom. The evidence of
the Appellant's wife is that she would not go to Jamaica so the family
would be broken up. He submitted with respect to the Home Office guidance
that the Appellant's immigration history was not such as to fall to be
excluded from the guidance in that it was not a "very poor" immigration
history, which would need to be both repeated and deliberate. Mr Coleman
submitted that the child's age is not relevant as he is a British Citizen
and that the Appellant and his wife were expecting a baby due on 5 May
2017.

Findings and reasons

11. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.


12. The issue to be decided is whether or not the Appellant qualifies for
leave pursuant to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, specifically with
reference to the requirements of R-LTRP 1.1.(d)(i)-iii) cf. Sabir (Appendix
FM - EX1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) or Article 8 of ECHR.
There is no dispute about the Appellant's ability to meet the relevant
requirements of the Appendix FM, except for EX1 (a) which provides


"EX.1. This paragraph applies if
(a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
with a child who-
(aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years when
the applicant was first granted leave on the basis that this paragraph
applied;
(bb) is in the UK;
(cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously for at least
the 7 years immediately preceding the date of application; and
(ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK."

13. It is not disputed that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting
parental relationship with his son, who is a British citizen, aged 8
months. The issue is whether or not it would be reasonable to expect the
child to leave the United Kingdom. Relevant to the consideration of
reasonableness are the following:

13.1. the Appellant's fiancï¿½e has made clear at [8] of her witness
statement that she intended continuing her life in the United Kingdom and
would not relocate to Jamaica due to her work and social commitments and
the fact that their son was born here and is a British citizen. In the
refusal decision of 25 August 2015, the Respondent asserted that there
would be no insurmountable obstacles to her relocating to Jamaica, given
that she was born there and would have familiarity with the culture and
could seek employment there. The First tier Tribunal Judge upheld the
Respondent's decision in this respect, with reference to EX1(b) of Appendix
FM and there has been no challenge to that finding. However, the
Appellant's fiancï¿½e is a British citizen and is not obliged to relocate and
I accept her evidence that she would not. It is also the case that the
Appellant's fiancï¿½e is pregnant with their second child;

13.2. the Appellant's fiancï¿½e works as a dental nurse and receptionist,
currently part time as she is on maternity leave and the Appellant is
responsible for the care of their son while she is at work. Whilst it was
submitted by Mr Coleman that this showed that the Appellant was the child's
primary carer, Ms Isherwood's submission was that, in truth, they share the
care of their son, given that the Appellant's fiancï¿½e is only working part
time and I accept that submission. That is not to say that removal of the
Appellant would have no impact upon his son but that he is not the only
person responsible for his care, which he shares with his wife;

13.3. In VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255, the Court of Appeal per Lord
Justice Sales, accepted the submission by the Respondent that the
concession previously made by the Respondent in Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048
(IAC) was wrongly made, skews the position and obscures the proper analysis
[52]-[53] refers. His Lordship adopted the reasoning put forward in FZ
(China) [2015] EWCA Civ 550 that: "the critical question is whether there
is an entire dependency of the relevant child on the person who is refused
a residence permit or who is being deported" and at [64] held: "It follows
that the presence of children in the UK does not, as a result of the
operation of EU law, have to be treated as a fixed point for the purposes
of the proportionality analysis under Article 8." The Appellants in both
Sanade and VM (Jamaica) were subject to deportation orders.

13.4. The question of how the test of reasonableness should be applied
after a child has been resident for more than 7 years was considered by the
Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705. The Court did not
consider EX1(a) nor the position of British children however, at [35]
leading counsel for the Respondent accepted that: "it will be relatively
rare for it to be reasonable to expect a child who is a British citizen to
leave the UK."

13.5. Moreover, the Home Office guidance in respect of Appendix FM: Family
Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10 year routes, remains
that of August 2015 and provides at 11.2.3.

"Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take a
decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a British Citizen
child where the effect of that decision would be to force that British
child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child. This reflects
the European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano...

Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must always
be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect a British
child to leave the EU with that parent or primary carer.

In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the parent
or primary care, to enable them to remain in the UK with the child,
provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and subsisting
parental relationship.

The exceptions to this principle are set out at 7.2 above viz criminality
or a "very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules." It is also
necessary for the decision maker to consider the impact on the child of any
separation.

Whilst it is the case that removal of the Appellant would not force his
British son to leave the EU, because he could be cared for by his mother,
the second paragraph of the guidance suggests that it would be unreasonable
to expect a British child to leave the EU with a parent or primary carer,
which would appear to include a parent who is not a primary carer and that
leave in such cases will usually be appropriate. In respect of the
exceptions, the Appellant's application for leave to remain as a student
was refused on 9 January 2003 since which time he overstayed and then made
an application for leave to remain on the basis of his private and family
life on 14 May 2015. Whilst this is a substantial period of time and was a
deliberate breach of the Immigration Rules, I do not consider that a period
of overstay can be properly considered to be repeated conduct, which would
appear to indicate something that happened more than once eg repeated
entries to the United Kingdom unlawfully or in a false identity. Moreover,
whilst I consider that the Appellant's immigration history is poor, the
fact that the guidance utilises the phrase "very poor" would indicate that
the word "very" is more than mere surplusage and that it requires an
aggravating feature. In these circumstances, I find that the Appellant is
entitled to the benefit of the guidance and he does not fall within the
exceptions to the principle that it will usually be appropriate for leave
to be granted.

13.6. It is also necessary to consider the best interests of the
Appellant's son, pursuant to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship &
Immigration Act 2009. Whilst he is only 20 months old, he is a British
citizen and as Lady Hale makes clear in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4:

      "30. Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
importance  in assessing the best interests of any child. The UNCRC
recognises the right   of every child to be registered and acquire a
nationality (Article 7) and to    preserve her identity, including her
nationality (Article 8)...

      32.     Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship be played
down. As    citizens these children have rights which they will not be able
to exercise if   they move to another country. They will lose the
advantages of growing up     and being educated in their own country, their
own culture and their own    language. They will have lost all this when
they come back as adults. As      Jacqueline Bhaba (in 'The "Mere Fortuity
of Birth"? Children, Mothers,     Borders and the Meaning of Citizenship',
in Migrations and Mobilities:     Citizenship, Borders and Gender (2009),
edited by Seyla Benhabib and Judith     Resnik, at p 193) has put it:


         'In short, the fact of belonging to a country fundamentally
         affects the manner of exercise of a child's family and private
         life, during childhood and well beyond. Yet children, particularly
         young children, are often considered parcels that are easily
         movable across borders with their parents and without particular
         cost to the children.'

I further find that it is clearly in the best interests of the Appellant's
son to be brought up by both his parents, as he is currently: cf E-A
(Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC.)
Removal of his father would adversely impact upon him not only at the
current stage of his development but in the future, given that he would be
brought up by a single mother, unless or until such time that she is in a
position to work full time and earn sufficient income so as to support an
application for entry clearance of the Appellant as a fiancï¿½ or spouse
under the Rules.

14.  Consequently, for the reasons set out at 13. above, I find that it
would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's British son to leave the
United Kingdom and that the Appellant meets the requirements of the
Immigration Rules. In these circumstances, I am not required to go on to
consider whether removal of the Appellant would constitute a breach of
Article 8 of ECHR, but for the avoidance of doubt and taking account of the
public interest considerations set out at section 117B of the Nationality
Immigration & Asylum Act 2002, in particular, section 117B(6), I find that
the decision to remove the Appellant constitutes a disproportionate
interference with his right to family life in the United Kingdom, also for
the reasons set out at [13] above.

Decision

15. I find that First tier Tribunal Judge Cassel erred materially in law in
dismissing the Appellant's appeal. I substitute a decision allowing the
appeal on human rights grounds, in light of the fact that the Appellant
meets the requirements of R-LTRP 1.1. (d) (i)-(iii) and EX1(a) of Appendix
FM of the Immigration Rules.

Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

19 May 2017
