
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04464/2018
     HU/09837/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 September 2019                 |On 26 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                               Mr Muhammad [Z]
                               Mrs Mariam [Y]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel, Chambers of Glen Hodgetts
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal brought by the appellants against the decision of
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies dated 25 January 2019 in which
the judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the respondent's
decision of 30 January 2018 refusing the appellants indefinite leave to
remain and refusing their human rights claims.

2.   The first appellant has resided in the UK with lawful leave to enter
and thereafter leave to remain since September 2006.  He had initially
resided in the United Kingdom as a student, thereafter as a Tier 1 post-
study migrant, and later still as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.  His
application for indefinite leave to remain was made as long ago as 20 April
2016.  I have seen reference within the papers suggesting that the
respondent had suspended decision-making in certain types of case for a
period of time, such that the respondent's decision on the application was
only ultimately made on 30 January 2018.

3.   The respondent's reasons for refusing indefinite leave to remain were
that, using the discretionary power under paragraph 322(5) in Part 9 of the
Immigration Rules, general grounds for refusal, it was undesirable to
permit the first appellant to remain in the UK in the light of certain
conduct, character and associations of the appellant.

4.   That conduct was said to have involved the submission of a tax return
for the year 2010/2011 to HMRC, asserting that the appellant's income in
that year totalled only �18,447. The respondent noted, however, that in an
application for leave to remain made by the appellant at that time, he had
declared to the respondent earnings of some �38,646.50.  This discrepancy
only came to light during the course of the respondent considering the
application for indefinite leave to remain. The respondent made further
enquiries of the appellant in relation to the discrepancy. It was the first
appellant's case that a friend and trainee accountant ('FM') had assisted
him in preparing his accounts in 2011 and had mistakenly used incorrect
figures.  This had only come to light at a later stage in or around 2015,
when the appellant instructed new accountants.  It was said that those new
accountants had then advised the appellant of the apparent discrepancy as
between his tax return for 2010/2011 and his income as declared to the
respondent. There was then some further delay before the appellant
instructed those accountants to make an amended tax return for the
2010/2011 period. Although the appellant does not appear to have informed
the respondent of these changes to his tax returns prior to his application
for indefinite leave to remain, the respondent took the appellant's further
explanation into account when making the decision on the application.

5.   In making the decision of 30 January 2018 the respondent disbelieved
the explanation given by the appellant for the lower figure having been
included in the appellant's tax return for 2011 and found it implausible
that he would not himself have checked the figures.  The conclusion reached
at page 6 of 12 of the decision letter is as follows:

"The Secretary of State considers that it would be undesirable for you to
remain in the United Kingdom in light of your character and conduct.  She
is satisfied that you have misrepresented your earnings and have changed
what you have represented in respect of your earnings to HM Revenue &
Customs and/or UK Visas and Immigration for the purpose of reducing your
tax liability or for the purpose of obtaining leave to remain or both."

That same formula of words is also used towards the end of page 7 of 12.

6.   It seems to me then that the position of the respondent in the
decision letter at that time was to plough two furrows in the allegations
against the appellant; either deception had been employed against HMRC in
seeking to underestimate his tax liability, or the respondent when
declaring his income for the purposes of his application for leave to
remain, or potentially both. That seems to me to be an unfortunate position
to adopt as it fails to identify with any specificity what the deception
was that is said to have been employed by the appellant.

7.   The appellants appealed against that decision, the matter coming
before the judge on 18 December 2018.  In the judge's decision of 25
January 2019, the judge notes as follows under the heading 'Cross-
examination - Mr Phillips' (the Presenting Officer):

"33. The witness accepted that had he declared the correct income in 2011
he would not have been awarded points."

8.   Further, under the heading 'Respondent's Submissions' is the
following:

"45. If the principal Appellant had put in the correct level of income
regarding his 2011 tax return he would not have scored the necessary points
to be granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 immigrant and that is of
significance today."

9.   The judge's own findings, which start at paragraph 67, provide as
follows:

"67. ... The principal Appellant accepted that had he supplied the correct
information to the Respondent he would not have been entitled to points
which would have allowed him to remain in the United Kingdom.


68.  I consider taking into account all the evidence that in all
probability the principal Appellant chose to perpetrate a deception upon
the Respondent to enable him to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1
Migrant, even though he was not entitled to remain in the United Kingdom on
that basis.


69.  I am also satisfied that the principal Appellant with the assistance
of (FM) perpetrated a deception upon the HMRC with the intention of paying
a lesser amount of tax and national insurance than was due.


70.  The significant feature of this appeal is the large difference between
the Appellant's income declared to the HMRC in his 2011 tax return and his
actual income.  I conclude that it is wholly implausible that the principal
Appellant or (FM) made a genuine error and that the deception that was
perpetrated was innocent.  We are talking about a figure of some �16,000.
It is simply not credible that the Appellant or (FM) would not be aware
that figures had been submitted to the HMRC which were not correct.


71.  I take into account the evidence of (FM).  Although I accept he has
never qualified as an accountant he was working for a firm of accountants
who authorised him to submit his own tax return.  It is wholly incredible,
as (FM) claims, that he simply got the figures on his own tax return
confused with those of the Appellant.  It is wholly implausible that (FM),
a trainee accountant and long-standing friend of the principal Appellant,
would not check the figures he had submitted in the tax return.  I
therefore conclude that it is probable that the principal Appellant in
conjunction with (FM) decided to perpetrate a deception on the HMRC and
that was done intentionally and with the intention to deceive."

10.  The judge also provides as follows at his paragraph 78, when
considering any interference with the Appellants' rights under Article 8
ECHR:

"Even if interference had been established by the Appellants it would not
have consequences of such gravity as to potentially engage the operation of
Article 8.  Even if interference was established the Respondent would be
able to satisfy me that it was in accordance with the law and for one of
the reasons set out in Article 8.  The Respondent would also be able to
satisfy me on the balance of probability that it was proportionate to the
legitimate public end sought to be achieved, namely the maintenance of
effective immigration control.  That is particularly pertinent taking into
account the Appellant's immigration history and the circumstances in which
he obtained leave to remain as a Tier 1 Student when he was not entitled to
do so because of his inadequate income."

In fact, the judge there seems to erroneously suggest that the Appellant in
2011 had been applying for further leave to remain as a student whereas it
was a Tier 1 (General) leave to remain application but nothing stands on
that particular point. The judge dismissed the appeals.

11.  In detailed grounds of appeal dated 5 February 2019 a number of points
were raised against the judge's decision.  Permission was initially refused
on 1 April 2019 and renewed grounds were submitted to the Upper Tribunal in
substantially the same form on 8 June 2019.

12.  The grounds argue that the judge erred in law, in summary, as follows.

(1)  Ground 1 argues that the judge erred in law by proceeding under a
mistake of fact as to the evidence actually given by the appellant as
recorded in the decision at paragraph 33 and as referred to in the decision
again at the end of paragraph 67.  The appellant asserts that he did not
agree that had he declared the correct income in 2011 he would not have
been awarded points.  The grounds of appeal seek to refer not only to the
appellant's own evidence in his witness statement on that point but also to
Counsel's note of proceedings, which was set out in the following way in
the grounds of appeal:


"Q:  [Do you] accept [that] if [you] declared [the] correct [figures] [you
would have had] no points.


A.   No."


The grounds assert that words in parentheses were inserted to make sense
Counsel's shorthand note.  The grounds of appeal assert that the
appellant's answer therefore disagreed with the proposition in the
question, rather than having agreed with it.


(2)  Ground 2 argues that inadequate reasoning was given for rejecting the
credibility of both the appellant and FM, the trainee accountant, having
described in particular the accountant's evidence as being 'wholly
incredible' and 'wholly implausible', these amounting to conclusions,
rather than reasons.


(3)  Ground 3 argues that the judge had acted irrationally and had failed
to take into account relevant factors in support of his conclusion at
paragraph 68.  In particular, at paragraph 4.4(b) of the grounds of appeal
it is argued that the judge's conclusion at paragraph 68 was prima facie
inconsistent with the judge's findings at paragraph 69.  I will address
this issue in more detail below.


(4)  Ground 4 argues that the judge erred in failing to take material
evidence and factors into account in accordance with the Upper Tribunal
guidance in the case of R (on the application of Khan) v Secretary of State
[2018] UKUT 00384, which is a case dealing with the potential discrepancies
that might exist as between HMRC and records and submissions for leave to
remain to the Secretary of State, and that the judge had failed to give any
consideration to the fact that the appellant himself had made an amendment
to his tax returns of his own motion in 2015.


(5)  Ground 5 argues that the judge had erred in law in failing to make any
findings on the credibility of the evidence given by the appellant's wife,
who had, it is said, given evidence that her husband had not deceived
either the Home Office or HMRC.


(6)  Ground 6 argues that the judge erred in law in failing to take into
account evidence relating to the character of the appellant, relevant both
to (i) whether any deception had taken place, and also (ii) whether the
discretionary power of the Secretary of State to invoke the terms of
paragraph 322(5) was appropriate.


(7)  Ground 7 argues that the judge erred in failing to consider the
serious consequences for both the appellant and the trainee as a result of
the finding of a criminal conspiracy to defraud HMRC.


(8)  Ground 8 argues that the judge erred in adopting the wrong starting
point for a finding of dishonesty.


(9)  Ground 9 argues that the judge proceeded irrationally at paragraph 67
in having observed that the appellant at 2011 would have been aware that he
had been required to show over a lengthy period that his applications for
leave to remain would have required submission of financial information,
whereas the appellant argues that that application for leave to remain as a
Tier 1 Migrant would have been the first such application in which evidence
of that nature would have been required.

13.  Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Peart on 28 June
2019, finding that the judge initially refusing permission to appeal may
have proceeded on an erroneous basis, not believing that the Counsel's note
of evidence had been submitted with the original application for permission
to appeal, when in fact it had.

Discussion

14.  I have heard submissions from both parties, who are in fact in
agreement that the judge materially erred in law in this appeal and that
the decision should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.
I am of the view that this is an appropriate course of action.  I have
quoted above from the respondent's decision letter, in which I have
suggested that the Respondent appears to have argued simultaneously that
the appellant deceived both the respondent and HMRC in relation to the
alleged income in 2011.

15.  The judge regrettably, in my finding, fails to identify with any
degree of clarity what deception was actually employed by the appellant.
The judge appears to find at paragraphs 67 and 68 that had the appellant
supplied 'the correct information' to the respondent he would not have been
entitled to the necessary points to qualify for leave to remain in 2011.
The premise lying behind such finding appears to be that 'the correct
information' was that the appellant had actually only earned the lower sum,
as declared to HMRC.

16.  However, the premise lying behind the judge's findings at paragraph 70
and 71 was that the appellant's 'actual income' (the expression used
paragraph 70) was the higher amount, and that the appellant and FM had
conspired to perpetrate 'a deception on the HMRC', by under declaring the
appellant's income.

17.  Further, at paragraph 78 the judge appears to revert to the hypothesis
that the appellant was not entitled to leave to remain in 2011 because he
had 'inadequate income' at that time.

18.  Although neither the respondent nor the judge may have been able to
identify with absolute certainty what the nature of any deception was, I
find that in an appeal involving the discretionary invocation of paragraph
322(5) of Part 9 of the Immigration Rules, on the grounds that a person is
not suitable to be granted leave to remain in the UK because of their
character and conduct, it is necessary to identify on a balance of
probabilities, but with a degree of specificity, what the nature of any
dishonesty was. It is also appropriate to note that the burden of
establishing any deception lies on the respondent (JC (Part 9 HC395, burden
of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027). I find that the judge's findings
appear to contradict each other with respect to whether the Appellant had
(i) dishonestly represented to HMRC that his income was lower than its true
level, on the one hand, or whether (ii) he had dishonestly represented to
the respondent that his earnings were at a higher level than was true.  I
cannot for my part reconcile the judge seemingly adopting those two
positions simultaneously.

19.  It is also relevant to note that it is now agreed between the parties
that the judge did in fact proceed under a mistake of fact as to the
content of the appellant's oral evidence, as set out at paragraph 33 of the
judge's decision.  I have admitted into evidence under Rule 15(2A) of The
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, without objection from the
respondent, a witness statement from Mr Schwenk of Counsel (representing
the appellant before the judge) dated 10 September 2019, stating that the
appellant had answered negatively, not positively in relation to the
relevant question. Mr McVeety now agrees that the appellant did not accept
the proposition that had he declared the 'correct' income in 2011 that he
would not have been awarded points.  The judge's apparent misapprehension
as to the appellant's evidence was likely to have contributed to the
judge's finding that the appellant employed deception, albeit, as I have
held above, that the judge's finding as to the actual nature of the
appellant's deception is unclear.

20.  I am satisfied overall that the decision of the judge contained
material errors of law and cannot stand.  I set aside the decision and no
findings of fact from the judge's decision will be retained.  Because of
the extent of the findings of fact that will be required in the remaking of
this decision it is appropriate according to the relevant Practice
Direction for this matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
appeal is allowed to that extent.

21.  Further, it is to be noted that although the respondent's decision
letter of 30 January 2018 appears, as noted above, to argue that the
appellant employed deception as against the respondent, or the HMRC, or
both, Mr McVeety accepts before me that the respondent has not at any time
disputed the reliability of the documentary evidence which the appellant
provided in support of his application for further leave to remain in 2011,
and accepts that that documentation resulted in him being entitled under
the relevant immigration rules relating to specified evidence to the points
that were allocated to him at that time.  Mr McVeety clarifies today the
respondent's case as being that the respondent asserts that the appellant
employed deception as against HMRC and that his character conduct would
need to be assessed in the light that alleged deception.

    Notice of Decision

     The decision involved the making of a material error of law.

     The decision is set aside.

     The appeal is remitted for rehearing by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                     Date 25.9.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

