
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05571/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 December 2019                   |On 13 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Miss Geeta Rani
                          (Anonymity not directed)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Senior Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr G O'Ceallaigh (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1.  I  shall,  throughout  this  decision,  call  the  appellant  the
         Secretary of State and the respondent the claimant.  This  is  the
         Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 18 July 2019 (the date of its  written  reasons),  following  a
         hearing of 18 July 2019 and which it sent to  the  parties  on  30
         July 2019. The tribunal decided to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal
         from the Secretary of State's decision communicated  on  13  March
         2019, refusing to grant  her  leave  to  remain  on  Human  Rights
         grounds under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights
         (ECHR).

      2. By way of brief background, the claimant is a female  national  of
         India and was born on 15 March 1983. She had  entered  the  United
         Kingdom (UK) on 1 September  2011,  for  the  purposes  of  study,
         having been granted a visa as  a  result  of  an  entry  clearance
         application. She subsequently obtained further leave as a  student
         but, according to the Secretary of State, there  came  a  time  in
         August 2014 when it was found necessary to serve her with "removal
         papers". There subsequently followed an  unsuccessful  application
         for further leave on Human Rights grounds refused in 2015,  before
         the current unsuccessful claim was also made and refused.

      3. At the appeal heard by the tribunal on 18 July 2019, the key issue
         was whether or not the claimant had, with respect to an in-country
         application of 24 August 2012 for  further  leave  as  a  student,
         deployed fraud. Essentially, the Secretary of State's position was
         that she had used a proxy  English  language  test-taker  for  the
         purposes of  obtaining  what  is  known  as  a  TOEIC  certificate
         regarding her ability to speak English. The Secretary  of  State's
         view was that since (she believed) fraud had  been  used,  it  was
         inappropriate to grant  further  leave.  The  claimant's  position
         before the tribunal was that she had not used fraud at all.

      4. There was, before the tribunal, the sort  of  evidence  which  has
         become familiar in cases such as this. It included what  is  often
         referred  to  as  "the  generic   evidence"   comprising   witness
         statements regarding the way in which fraud has been conducted and
         detected and which has involved the use of proxy English  language
         test-takers. The tribunal also  referred  to  a  "revised  look-up
         tool" with which it had also been provided. But having heard  oral
         evidence from the claimant and from her  uncle,  it  decided  that
         there had been no fraud or dishonesty on the part of the claimant.
         Having set out the competing arguments and having (on my  reading)
         somewhat confusingly but in the end correctly directed  itself  as
         to the burden and standard of proof, it went on to explain why  it
         was  concluding  as  it  was  with  respect  to   the   claimant's
         credibility. As to that, it said this:

         "My Finding and Facts of Law Relating to this Appeal.

         21.      Having carefully listened to the evidence given the
             evidence of the appellant and her uncle as well as the
             documentary evidence before me I'm satisfied that this
             appellant on the facts of this case did indeed take this test
             without a proxy test taker. It would appear that certainly the
             home affairs select committee of inquiry addressed by
             Professor Sommer acknowledge that there were a number of ways
             in which students themselves could have been on the receiving
             end of fraud namely that "we concluded that the controls
             around the processes of registering applicants on to the
             computer system used for testing and the ways in which records
             of results were combined were unsatisfactory and inadequate.
             We have particular concerns for circumstances in which local
             testing centres might decide to falsify results for the
             benefit of applicants who had paid additional fees for them to
             do so.

         22.      We identified a number of routes by which this could
             happen we agreed that in one testing centre that there could
             be a mix of genuine applicants and those who were paying for
             fraudulent results. Looking at the records supplied by ETS of
             the home office in relation to the cases we concluded that
             there was an absence of cross checking facilities to identify
             circumstances in which voice test were miss ascribed to
             individuals".

         23.      Having listened to the appellant on her uncle carefully
             and looked at the generic evidence in the appellant's case I'm
             satisfied that she was a credible witness and so was our
             uncle. There was no reason in her background circumstances for
             her to pay additional monies for this test to be falsified
             particularly when she had undertaken a 4 week course for which
             a receipt was obtained. There was therefore no need to take a
             four week course if she was going to fraudulently arrange for
             false results to be obtained. That would seem to be a
             completely unnecessary and wasteful expenditure. The booking
             and attendance at that this course was significant.

         24.      I am also satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
             this appellant did not need to falsify her English language
             test results given her ability at the time, and in fact she
             said in oral evidence both the written and oral tests she was
             asked to conduct were quite surprisingly straightforward.
             Since then the appellant has also spent a considerable amount
             of money challenging these decisions and again where there was
             a request for further clarification that there was no CCTV
             footage obtained. I am satisfied that it is certainly
             plausible that this was a genuine applicant whose results were
             falsified by a proxy test taker without her knowledge or
             assistance. I find that she was not involved in any dishonesty
             whatsoever.

         25.      In the circumstances it is right that her removal would be
             a breach of her rights under Article 8 of the ECHR as it would
             be wholly disproportionate to remove her when she is simply
             done nothing wrong according to the immigration rules and
             practice. I also find that as it was said in the case of R
             (Hasan) the SSHD 2018 and Khan -v- (VSSHD) [sic] 2018 EWCA CIV
             1684 that where and [sic] out of country FTT was successful
             "the secretary of state ought to take whatever steps were
             possible to restore successful...appellants to the position
             that they would have been [sic] but for the impugned decision.
             That would clearly include the need to grant entry clearance
             in certain cases".

         26.      I find however that there is an innocent explanation which
             meets the minimum threshold of plausibility which has not been
             discounted by the generic evidence put forward on behalf of
             the respondent. I find that the respondent cannot meet the
             legal burden of proving that the appellant acted fraudulently
             and therefore she's entitled to her human rights appeal being
             allowed outside of the immigration rules. This delay has cost
             the appellant a significant loss both financially,
             educationally and in terms of private life and family life.

         27.      It is therefore the right decision to allow this appeal
             under articulate 8 outside of the rules applying the 5 stage
             test in ex parte Razgar 2004 HL page 27 the questions I have
             to ask myself in such circumstances are:- 1. Has the appellant
             engaged private and family life? 2. Will grave consequences
             flow from the removal of the appellant in terms of a private
             and family life? 3. Would such a removal be in accordance with
             the law? 4. Would such a removal be necessary in a democratic
             society for the maintenance of immigration control? 5. Would
             such a decision to curtail the appellants [sic] leave to
             remain and remove the appellant be proportionate to the
             legitimate aim to maintain the immigration control?

         28.      I find on the facts of this case, peculiar to the
             appellant that the respondent has not discharged the burden
             which is shifted back to them after the appellant has
             established a plausible and innocent explanation for taking
             this test which she did. I find that it would be wholly
             disproportionate to remove this appellant from the United
             Kingdom and prevent her from completing her studies based on
             the fact that she has established on a balance of
             probabilities that she did take this test without a proxy test
             taker.

      5. The above passage might, at certain points,  have  benefited  from
         more complete proof-reading  but  the  meaning  is,  nevertheless,
         clear. The Secretary of  State's  application  for  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal contained contentions to  the  effect
         that  the  tribunal  had  been  wrong  to  accept  the  claimant's
         credibility; had been wrong not  to  accept  evidence  offered  on
         behalf of the Secretary of State  with respect to fraud; had  been
         wrong to attach weight to its view as to the claimant's ability to
         speak English in assessing whether or not a proxy test  taker  had
         been used; and had been wrong to attach weight to  the  claimant's
         ability to recall details of her journey to the  test  centre  and
         the examination process.

6.    The judge who granted permission to appeal relevantly said this;

         "2.      In this appeal the judge allowed the appeal of the
         appellant on grounds that she had "provided an innocent explanation
         which met the minimum threshold of plausibility which had not been
         discounted by the generic evidence put forward on behalf of the
         respondent".

         3. In the grounds which make reference to case law including SM and
         Qadir [2016] UKUT 229, and Shezhad and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 615
         it is submitted that the judge has arguably erred in law by
         misdirecting himself as to the evidence in the light of guidance
         given by case law.

         4. The grounds may be argued."

7.    Permission having been granted the case was listed  before  the  Upper
Tribunal (before me) for a hearing so that consideration could be  given  to
the  question  of  whether  or  not  the  tribunal   had   erred   in   law.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above. I am  grateful  to  each
representative.

8.    Mr Mills, for the Secretary of State, relied upon the points  made  in
the grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  He  reminded  me  of  the
Secretary of State's view that the current generic evidence relied  upon  in
cases such as this is considered  to  be  reliable.  It  was  not,  however,
necessary for me to hear from Mr O'Ceallaigh.

9.    In my judgment the tribunal, in the passage set  out  above,  provided
adequately explained and legally sustainable reasons for its  conclusion  as
to the claimant's credibility and for its resultant conclusion that she  had
not acted fraudulently. It effectively resolved matters in her favour for  a
combination of reasons being her credible appearance  before  the  tribunal;
her obvious abilities  to  communicate  in  English;  her  determination  in
seeking to challenge the adverse decision  based  upon  the  allegations  of
fraud; and her having taken a course geared  towards  the  passing  of  such
tests which it thought she would not have taken had she  been  intending  to
employ a proxy test-taker. It is also implicit from what  the  tribunal  had
to say that it found the evidence of  the  claimant's  uncle,  which  had  a
degree of corroborative value, to be credible too.

10.   With respect to the grounds, it does seem to me that much of  what  is
said fails to go beyond re-argument with the  tribunal's  conclusion  as  to
credibility. It follows from  what  I  have  said  already  that  I  do  not
consider the tribunal to have been in error  with  respect  to  the  way  in
which it directed itself as  to  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof.  The
question of weight to be attached to particular aspects of the evidence  was
one for  the  tribunal.  As  to  its  decision  to  take  into  account  the
claimant's abilities in the usage of the English language, it did not  treat
that as being  determinative  but  merely  a  component  of  its  wider  and
holistic consideration.

11.   In the circumstances I have concluded that the tribunal did  not  make
an error of law and that its decision shall stand. The Secretary of  State's
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, therefore, dismissed.



Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made in this case.  No  such  direction  had  been
made by the First-tier Tribunal and none was sought before me.


Signed:     Dated: 7 January 2020

M R Hemingway; Judge of the Upper Tribunal

