
                                    [pic]

IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05381/2017 ('V')


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2020                  |On 14th October 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS KHALEDA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant:     Mr Raza, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
were given orally at the end of the hearing on 5th October 2020.

Both representatives attended the hearing via Skype and I attended the
hearing in-person at Field House.  The parties did not object to the
hearing being via Skype and I was satisfied that the representatives were
able to participate in the hearing.

The Secretary of State was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal,
while Mrs Begum was the appellant, appealing the refusal of her claim to
remain in the UK on the basis of her human rights. To avoid confusion, I
will refer to the Secretary of State by that name and Mrs Begum as the
Claimant in this appeal.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE, (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 25th of June
2018, by which he allowed the Claimant's appeal against the Secretary of
State's refusal on 27th November 2016 of her application for leave to
remain as the spouse of a settled person, on the basis that such refusal
would breach her rights under article 8 of the European Convention on Human
Rights ('ECHR').

In essence, the Claimant's claim involves the core issue of whether she had
participated in deception by use of a proxy test taker for tests of
proficiency in English (a so-called 'TOEIC' test), via a third party test
provider, ETS, as a test centre in Dhaka in Bangladesh on 13th April 2013,
prior to her initial entry to the UK. The Claimant's test result had been
assessed under a "look up" tool as "questionable", as a result of which the
Secretary of State subsequently interviewed the Claimant on 24th October
2016. As a result of her answers given at that interview, (particularly
what was said to be the poor standard of her English) when combined with
the ETS results, the Secretary of State concluded that the Claimant had
used deception to obtain the TOEIC in 2013. The Secretary of State
therefore refused the Claimant's application on 'suitability' grounds. The
Secretary of State accepted that the Claimant met the 'eligibility'
requirements of the Immigration Rules.

The FtT's decision

The FtT considered that where a TOEIC result was 'invalid', the Secretary
of State met the initial evidential burden of proving deception, which then
passed to the Claimant to provide an explanation. In the Claimant's case,
where the TOEIC result was 'questionable', the Secretary of State had
attempted to discharge the burden of proof with the TOEIC result and the
interview analysis in combination. At �[23] to �[26] of his decision, the
FtT then provided an analysis of the standard levels of English proficiency
(the source of the evidence about those standards, and the FtT's expertise
in those standards is unclear), compared with the questions posed to the
Claimant during the 2016 interview. The FtT assessed the interview
questions as being at a level higher than the Claimant's asserted 'A1'
proficiency, based on his linguistic assessment. He noted the fact that the
Claimant had nevertheless understood half of the questions; the TOEIC test
had been taken some three years prior to the 2016 interview; and that her
2016 answers could be explained by her lack of notice that the purpose of
the interview was to assess her English, and she was nervous; and he also
took into account her relatively good proficiency in English before him. At
�[27], the FtT then considered and applied section EX.2 of Appendix FM of
the Immigration Rules, concluding that there were insurmountable obstacles
to the Claimant's family life with her husband continuing in Bangladesh, as
he would be "forced to relinquish his British citizenship"; would lose the
home in the UK which he rented and his UK job (�[27]).

Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT allowed the Claimant's
appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The Secretary of State lodged grounds of appeal which are essentially as
follows: the FtT had failed to consider that the initial burden of proof
had been met. The FtT had erred in assessing the Claimant's English
proficiency and the percentage of questions she had answered successfully
during the 2016 interview and should instead have focused on whether she
had engaged in deception. The FtT's assessment of the proportionality of
the refusal of the Claimant's application had been influenced by his
appraisal of her English proficiency, as the Claimant's circumstances were
not exceptional.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Bulpitt granted permission on 20th April 2020,
regarding the FtT's assessment of deception as arguably unclear and focused
instead on an appraisal of the Claimant's English in 2016, rather than the
guidance set out in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]
UKUT 229 (IAC). While not limiting the scope of the grant of permission in
the decision itself, in the reasons, he suggested that the second ground in
relation to proportionality was misconceived, on the basis that the
Claimant's application had only been refused on suitability grounds.

The Law

I noted not only the authority of SM and Qadir, but also the Court of
Appeal decision of SSHD v Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615, which was
authority for the proposition that reliance on the so-called 'generic'
evidence of ETS fraud, together with the results of a specific 'look up'
tool, may be sufficient for the respondent to discharge the initial
evidential burden of proving deception in an ETS case. Once this is met
initially, the evidential burden then passes to the Claimant to provide an
innocent explanation; the final question is and whether, on the balance of
probabilities, the Secretary of State has discharged the legal burden of
proving that the explanation should be rejected.

However, there are important caveats to those propositions. SM and Qadir
distinguished between 'invalid' and 'questionable' results (�[16]). In that
case, the initial evidential burden was described as 'comparatively modest'
(�[68]), which called for an evaluative assessment on the part of the
Tribunal. Shehzad was considering cases of 'invalid' results.  Shehzad
confirmed, at �[30]:

         "But, in circumstances where the generic evidence is not
         accompanied by evidence showing that the individual under
         consideration's test was categorised as "invalid", I consider that
         the Secretary of State faces a difficulty in respect of the
         evidential burden at the initial stage."

 That is unsurprising, not least because, as the court in Shehzad recorded
at �[25], "In "questionable" cases it was accepted that there may not have
been deception."

The hearing before me

The parties' representatives assisted me in narrowing down the issues in
dispute.  The only two issues were whether the FtT had erred in analysing
the evidence and in applying the burden of proof in SM and Qadir and
Shehzad, when concluding that that the Secretary of State had not
discharged the initial burden of proof.  Mr Tufan accepted that if there
were no such error, nor an error in the subsequent analysis of an
satisfactory explanation from the Claimant, then the Claimant's human
rights appeal would succeed as she had only been refused on suitability
grounds. A wider proportionality analysis, as conducted by the FtT, was
unnecessary.  An assessment of proportionality was only necessary if the
Secretary of State had made out the case of TOEIC deception.

The Secretary of State's submissions

The Secretary of State was entitled to rely on a combination of the
'questionable' look up result and the Claimant's answers in the 2016
interview. The FtT had failed to consider the evidence adequately and in
particular, the FtT had failed to explain why the Secretary of State had
not met the initial evidence burden; or assess the adequacy of the
Claimant's explanation. The flaws in the FtT's explanation extended to his
analysis of the 2016 interview, in particular at �[23] of the decision,
where the FtT compared the questions asked of the Claimant with the level
of proficiency at level "A1".

The Claimant's submissions

Mr Raza accepted that a "questionable" look up result may, in combination
with other satisfactory evidence, satisfy the initial evidential burden of
proof on the Secretary of State. However, in this case, the FtT was
entitled to conclude that she had not.  Whilst the source of the evidential
analysis and the FtT's expertise in comparing the 2016 interview questions
with the TOEIC level 'A1' was unclear, they may have come from the Common
European Framework of Reference for Languages or 'CEFR', which provided the
sufficient context for the FtT's analysis.  If instead, the FtT was being
criticised for impermissibly adopting the role of an expert, without
identifying his expertise or the source of the comparison between the TOEIC
level of English and the 2016 interview questions, precisely the same could
be said of the Secretary of State's decision letter dated 27th November
2016, at page [A11] of the Claimant's bundle. It comprised a brief excerpt
of recorded questions and answers during the 2016 interview, with little
more than a bare assertion that the Claimant's level of English was not at
the standard that would have been expected.  Indeed, the precise wording
was in two, limited parts:

         "On 24th October 2016 you attended the interview. However, you
         failed to understand the majority of the questions and your answers
         were unclear or irrelevant. The questions and your responses are
         below." ...

"It is clear from the answers given that your understanding of the English
language is limited and it was concluded by the interviewer that your
spoken English and your understanding of English is poor and not to the
standard required for the English language test you claim to have passed."

That comprised the entirety of the Secretary of State's analysis and
reasoning.  Any criticism of the FtT could similarly be levelled at the
Secretary of State. In any event, the FtT had gone on to consider the
Claimant's innocent explanation, including her lack of awareness of the
purpose of the 2016 interview, her nervousness and the quality of her
English before the FtT, although noting that this was some years after the
2016 interview.

Discussion and conclusions

While briefly stated, I conclude that the FtT's reference to the correct
application of the initial evidential burden, as outlined above in SM and
Qadir and Shehzad, is just about sufficiently clear. At �[21] and �[22], he
noted:

         "21. The burden of proof in cases where the test score is
         questionable rest [sic] on the respondent home office to establish
         that the appellant was not the test taker on a balance of
         probabilities.  In cases where the test score are [sic] clearly
         said to be invalid the burden of proof moves to the appellant to
         establish that they were the test taker who had passed with the
         relevant score.

         22.  In the circumstances on the balance of probabilities, the
         interview conducted in the UK is evidence that the appellant relies
         upon together with the test score as to whether the original
         questionable test score to suggest the appellant was not the test
         taker in Dhaka."

The reference at �[21] correctly draws the distinction between
'questionable' and 'invalid' look up results and correctly confirms that in
the latter, the evidential burden passes to the Secretary of State.  The
reference in �[22] to the evidence "relied on by the appellant" must be a
typographical error and must have intended to refer to the Secretary of
State, as opposed to the Claimant. This can be the only logical reading of
the sentence, as the interview evidence was clearly relied upon by the
Secretary of State, rather than the Claimant and the FtT had noted, in the
prior paragraph, that the burden (presumably the initial evidential burden)
was on the Secretary of State.

Where the FtT did err was in how he then analysed the evidence.  I accept
the force of Mr Tufan's submission that the FtT essentially adopted the
role as his own expert, without explaining his expertise or knowledge about
the TOEIC criteria for standards of English language proficiency.
Instead, at �[23] to [25], he states:

         "23. I find the analysis of the interview itself questionable
         because the definition of the common European frame maker [sic] for
         reference for languages under which the respondent operate [sic] is
         described as:

                . The test the appellant was taking as demonstrating A1, a
                  basic ability to communicate and challenge information in
                  a simple way. Example, "can ask simple questions about the
                  menu and understand simple answers." It is called the
                  "breakthrough test"."

The FtT then recites standards for levels 'A2' and 'B1', on the basis of
entirely uncited or outsourced evidence, and concludes at �[24] that:

         "24. Having read the interview, although the questions appear
         simple this is not of itself an English language test designed to
         test proficiency and the questions such as; "was the court
         recommended to you?" is not necessarily a straightforward question
         that calls for a basic ability to communicate and exchange
         information in a simple way."

 This begs the question of how FtT knows what is in a test designed to test
proficiency and how this would be inconsistent with the 2016 interview. The
FtT's adoption of the role of expert is important, given that the interview
record formed a core plank of the Secretary of State's evidence to
discharge the initial evidential burden.

However, I accept Mr Raza's submission that precisely the same criticism
can be levelled at the Secretary of State's reasoning in her letter dated
27th November 2016. The letter lists a brief excerpt of 13 questions, and
then includes the assertion about the Claimant's answers being unclear or
irrelevant; it finally states that it was concluded by the interviewer that
the Claimant's spoken English and comprehension is not at the standard
required for the test which the Claimant claimed to have passed.  The
decision letter provides no detail of the expertise and qualifications of
the unnamed interviewer who reached the conclusion, or any analysis of
whether the questions which were asked at the 2016 interview were
appropriate to the TOEIC level with which the comparison was made.   There
is a bare assertion that a comparison was made, but with no explanation,
for example, of acceptable questions for the specified standard.  This
becomes critical, when the very basis of the deception allegation is a
clear failure, on the face of it, to reach a specified standard, following
which an explanation by an individual is then required.  If the standard by
which an individual is assessed is never explained, and where there is a
failure to explain the complexity of questions which a person at a certain
standard can be expected to answer, it would be impossible for any First-
tier Tribunal judge to reach a view that the nature of the questions were
so simple that a Claimant must be expected to be able to answer the
majority of them, or, in other words, or that there was such a clear
failure.

In concluding that the FtT's decision should stand, just as the Secretary
of State seeks to challenge the analysis by the FtT on the basis of
unexplained expertise and reference to an unexplained standard, so
precisely the same criticism can be made of the respondent's decision.  In
the circumstances, I conclude that the FtT was correct in concluding that
in reaching her decision, the Secretary of State had not discharged the
initial evidential burden of proving that the Claimant was engaged in TOEIC
decision. Having failed to discharge the burden, bearing in mind that the
sole basis on which the Claimant's application was refused was on grounds
of suitability, once that reason falls away, the Claimant met all other
aspects of the Immigration Rules and Mr Tufan accepted that in those
circumstances, the Claimant's human rights appeal would inevitably have
succeeded.



Decision on error of law

Therefore, in the circumstances, although the FtT erred in law in his
reasoning, there was simply insufficient evidence before him from which any
Judge could have concluded that the initial evidential burden of proving
deception had been met, so I do not set aside the FtT's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.  The Secretary of State's
appeal fails and is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   J Keith  Date:  8th October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



