

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/06435/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 17 December 2020          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                            TARIQ MAHMUD SUHARTO

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to  them
   as they were in the FtT.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 25 January  1980.   FtT
   Judge  I  F  Taylor  allowed  his  human  rights  appeal  by  a  decision
   promulgated on 10 September 2019.

3. This decision is to be read also with:

   i) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT.


  ii) The FtT's grant of permission, dated 27 January 2020.


 iii) The UT's notes and directions issued on 20 April and on 23 June 2020.


  iv) The response for the appellant, in the form of his statement, dated 17
      July 2020.

   v) My decision, dated 29 September and issued on 7 October 2020,  finding
      error of law and seeking further submissions.

  vi) The response from the appellant's solicitors, dated 15  October  2020,
      in favour of a remit to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

4. In terms of rules 2 and  34,  it  is  now  appropriate  to  complete  the
   decision-making of the UT, without a hearing.

5. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands  only  as  a  record  of
   what was said at the hearing.  Under section 12  of  the  2007  Act,  and
   under Practice Statement 7.2, the case is remitted to the FtT for a fresh
   hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to
   include Judge Taylor.

6. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      H Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
      7 December 2020

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/06435/19 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                         |Issued on                    |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                            TARIQ MAHMUD SUHARTO

                                                                  Respondent


               DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW and FURTHER DIRECTIONS



1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision  refers  to  them  as
   they were in the FtT.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 25 January  1980.   FtT
   Judge  I  F  Taylor  allowed  his  human  rights  appeal  by  a  decision
   promulgated on 10 September 2019.

3. This decision is to be read also with:

   i) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT.


  ii) The FtT's grant of permission, dated 27 January 2020.


 iii) The UT's notes and directions issued on 20 April and on 23 June 2020.


  iv) The response for the appellant, in the form of his statement, dated 17
      July 2020.

4. In terms of rules 2 and 34, it is now appropriate to determine without  a
   hearing whether the making of the decision of the FtT involved the making
   of an error on a point of law and, if so, whether it should be set aside.

5. The nub of the SSHD's grounds is that:

      [1] the FtT found that the appellant correctly declared his income  to
      HMRC, but that was inconsistent with subsequent payment of significant
      tax arrears on undeclared income; and


      [2] if his income was as declared to HMRC, he could not have  obtained
      leave under the immigration rules (based on higher declared income).

6. Those points are well taken.  The judge appears  to  have  accepted  that
   the appellant wrongly declared his profits, as he said himself, but  also
   found "nothing unusual" in his negligible returns.  I am unable  to  find
   any reconciliation of those propositions  in  the  FtT's  explanation  at
   [20].


7. The decision does not explain its finding  the  appellant  honestly  made
   different declarations to HMRC and to UKVI.


8. If profits were genuinely as low as  originally  declared,  there  is  no
   scope  for  the  appellant  to  have   been   "beguiled   by   accounting
   technicalities", and no reason for later amendment and payment of arrears
   and penalties.

9. The FtT erred in law, by making inconsistent findings, and  by  providing
   no legally adequate explanation for its  conclusion  that  there  was  no
   dishonesty by the appellant (whether to HMRC, or to UKVI,  or  to  both).
   The error is crucial to the decision, so it is set aside.

10. Parties are directed  to  make  any  submissions  on  further  procedure
   within 14 days after this decision is sent out.

11. In absence of submissions to the contrary, the UT is likely to remit  to
   the FtT for a fresh decision.

12. Any submissions are to be sent by, or attached to, an email  to  [email]
   using the appeal reference number (as at the top of these directions)  as
   the subject line.  Attachments must not exceed 15 MB.  (This  address  is
   not generally available for the filing of documents.)

13. Service on the SSHD is to be made to [email].

14. The email address used by the appellant's  representatives  is  [email],
   or as may be apparent from communications.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      H Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
      29 September 2020

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

