
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06112/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 June 2021                             |On 13 July 2021               |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COTTON

                                   Between

                            Kevin Landu Mansende
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Z Besso, instructed by Irving & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Zambia.  He appealed to the First-tier
Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 4 April 2017
refusing a human rights claim.

2.   That appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The
appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal and, following a
hearing on 3 December 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen found errors of law
in the judge's decision and the matter was listed for a re-hearing in
respect of the findings of the judge which had been found to be legally
flawed.  As will be seen below, however, certain of the judge's findings
were preserved.

3.   This decision should be read together with the error of law decision
as that sets out in some detail the earlier decision of the First-tier
Tribunal Judge.  As regards the appellant's background, it is relevant to
note that he was born in the United Kingdom in 1994, his mother having been
in the United Kingdom since 1992, initially as a visitor and subsequently
as a working holidaymaker.  The appellant and his mother were granted
indefinite leave to remain under the long residency concession, in 2003.
In 2009 the appellant returned to Zambia to attend his mother's funeral.

4.   Between 5 March 2008 and 3 June 2016 the appellant received nineteen
convictions for 46 offences in the United Kingdom, as set out in his PNC
record.  These include offences of robbery, possession of crack cocaine,
heroin and cocaine with intent to supply, dangerous driving, violent
disorder and wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm.  He also received
three further convictions between 16 November 2016 and 3 January 2018 which
related to offences committed whilst serving his prison sentence.  Most
recently, it appears that he pleaded guilty at Bromley Magistrates' Court
on 13 November 2019 to an offence of possession of a class A drug (cocaine)
- one wrap of cocaine, and pleaded not guilty to charges of
obstructing/resisting a constable in the execution of his duty and driving
without insurance.  We have not been told what the outcome of the trial, if
there was a trial, in relation to those matters was.

5.   The most serious offences for which he was convicted were: the
conviction of 26 October 2012 of dangerous driving, driving while
disqualified, possession with intent to supply of a class A drug (crack
cocaine) and failing to comply with the requirements of a youth
rehabilitation order, for which he was sentenced to 34 months' detention at
a Young Offenders Institute and the 15 January 2016 conviction of violent
disorder and wounding/inflicting grievous bodily harm, for which he was
sentenced to 27 months' imprisonment on each count to be served
concurrently.

6.   The judge in her decision noted the terms of the decision under
appeal, including the fact that a deportation order had been made against
the appellant as that was challenged.  The judge heard evidence from the
appellant, his aunt, father, other relatives and girlfriend and considered
a psychological report of Lisa Davies, a registered psychologist, and a
country expert report of Professor Aguilar.  She did not find the appellant
to be a credible witness.  There was no challenge to her adverse
credibility findings.  She was not satisfied that the appellant or any of
the witnesses had been consistent or credible as to the lack of any
connections or family in Zambia.  The judge concluded that the appellant's
mother had more relatives in Zambia at the time that she was visiting in
the past and was satisfied that the witness was not consistent as to family
members or connections in Zambia and they were not credible as to any
remaining family members in Zambia.  She did not accept the evidence of the
appellant's aunt, Ms Kunda, that her brother had passed away nor that she
did not have remaining siblings in Zambia nor that the appellant did not
have remaining family members in Zambia.

7.   The judge accepted that the appellant has had a dysfunctional family
life and that his mother had died in 2009.  He had spent many of his
formative years in custody and received inconsistent discipline from his
parents/family members.  He was on a RESOLVE Programme in 2019 and had
expressed to Ms Davies, the registered psychologist, the resolve to live an
offence-free life for himself in the future.  However, it seems that
despite this resolve he had re-offended, the judge noting the plea of
guilty to possession of cocaine in 2020.  She considered that it was
evident that he was continuing to obtain and use drugs as evidenced by the
guilty plea and that there was no supportive evidence that he had
rehabilitated or that he presented a low risk of re-offending in the
future.  She said that whilst there were no charges relating to gang-
related matters or supply of drugs, he had re-offended and was in
possession of a class A drug, which was not consistent with the reduction
in the assessed moderate risk of re-offending.  He was not credible and
overall she was not persuaded that he was genuinely rehabilitated or
remorseful of his past offending.  As a consequence, she was not satisfied
that he had shown that he would face very significant obstacles to his
integration in Zambia.  She accepted that he did not speak Bemba, but given
that English was the official language in Zambia she was not persuaded that
he would not be able to integrate into Zambia due to his lack of knowledge
of Bemba.

8.   The judge was not persuaded by the country expert report of Professor
Aguilar.  She considered this also in the context of very significant
obstacles.  She found flaws in the report in that the expert had not been
in Zambia since the 1990s, certain of his conclusions were very vague and
not supported or evidenced by any research or contemporary document
relating to the treatment of Zambian nationals brought up outside Zambia
and the expert did not appear to have taken into consideration that the
appellant was brought up by his Zambian mother and was close to other
Zambian relatives who have returned to Zambia in recent years.  Carrying
out a broad evaluative assessment of the appellant's situation and
circumstances, and bearing in mind relevant case law, the judge was
satisfied that he was enough of an insider to Zambian culture, having
family members there and having been brought up by a Zambian mother and
having been there himself in 2009, for him to be able to integrate properly
into Zambia.  He did not have a diagnosed mental health condition which
could prevent his integration and she was not satisfied that he did not
have extended family there nor that he would not have a reasonable
opportunity to be accepted in Zambia as a young male Zambian national of
working age and fitness to work.  She found that it was likely that he
would be able to carry out unskilled manual jobs and he would be able to
study or carry out vocational training in Zambia if he wished to improve
his skills.

9.   The essential flaw in the judge's decision, as found in the error of
law decision, was that she erred with regard to her approach to the issue
of the appellant's integration in the United Kingdom.  In effect, she
failed to take into account, when concluding that the appellant was not
integrated into the United Kingdom, that he had lived in the United Kingdom
for his entire life, and had the relationships he had with his family and
girlfriend which had been accepted, and also erred in basing her findings
on severance of integration purely on his offending and failing to consider
the extent to which that behaviour broke the social and cultural ties he
had formed during his childhood.  It was concluded therefore that that
challenge to the decision was borne out and therefore, since the judge's
reasoning on integration was factored into her assessment of whether or not
there were very compelling circumstances that existed such as might justify
the allowing of the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules she had erred
in law in that regard also.

10.  However, no error of law was found in respect of her findings on the
expert report and, as noted above, there was no challenge to the adverse
credibility findings.  As a consequence, her findings with regard to the
expert evidence in the context of very significant obstacles to the
appellant's integration to Zambia were preserved and will form part of our
consideration in this appeal.

11.  In her submissions Ms Besso argued that in effect it had been found at
paragraph 31 of the error of law hearing that the appellant was integrated
in the United Kingdom.  He had lived in the United Kingdom all his life and
had his relatives and his father and aunt and his girlfriend and all had
given evidence at his appeal.  Not all the evidence had been accepted, but
the fact of the relationships and that they were extant at the time of the
appeal were accepted.  Those relationships were not said to have been
destroyed by the appellant's imprisonment.  His whole social identity had
been forged by being in the United Kingdom.  The Tribunal had all the
witness statements and reliance was still placed on them.  The only live
issue was that of whether there were very significant obstacles to the
appellant's return to Zambia and the consideration of Article 8 outside the
Rules.

12.  Ms Besso provided a document from Urban MBA, The University for Street
Entrepreneurs which was supportive of the appellant and referred to him
having volunteered for five to fifteen hours a week.  This evidenced that
he had taken steps to do something useful and progressive with his time.
It was of course limited in terms of the work he could do, given his prison
history, but he was doing something relevant in the community and that was
relevant to integration.  The guidance in CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2027
was of significance in this regard.

13.  The appellant had been in the United Kingdom lawfully for all his
life.  His early life had been affected by his mother's illness and lack of
parental support.  Pages 36 to 38 of the bundle evidenced the involvement
of Social Services in his life.  This had always been in the context of the
United Kingdom.  His formative years were spent in the United Kingdom with
his mother and with Social Services.

14.  It was true that he had a long offending history, but there was no
evidence of that disrupting his identity in the United Kingdom or his
strong relationships.  At the most recent hearing, evidence provided
attested to the strength of the relationships and supported his claim to
remain in the United Kingdom.

15.  With regard to the issue of very significant obstacles, the appellant
had no knowledge of Bemba and had never lived in Zambia for any significant
period of time and hence there were very significant obstacles to his
integration into that country.  No further evidence had been produced in
respect of the expert report, which the judge had not accepted as
assisting.

16.  With regard to Article 8 outside the Rules and whether there were
circumstances over and above those set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A, it
was argued that the appellant had had a difficult early life with his
mother's illness and a lack of parental support.  The document put in today
showed an effort on his part to engage his time usefully.  If not for his
family background he would not be in this position now as he would have
been registered as a British citizen and would not have been able to be
deported.  The Tribunal was asked to take all those circumstances into
account as amounting to circumstances over and above those set out in
paragraphs 399 and 399A.

17.  In her submissions Ms Cunha relied on the deportation decision of 4
April 2017.  She referred to paragraphs 62 and 63 of CI (Nigeria).  There
needed to be an appreciation of the length and quality of the residence
beyond the criminality.  It was the case that social and cultural
integration could be broken by criminality as had been held in Binbuga at
paragraph 57.  This was compatible with what was said in CI.  The
relationships had all been formed in the United Kingdom but nevertheless
the offending was a factor.  The appellant clearly had a pattern and
history of offending and it was persistent offending which had got worse.
This was relevant to integration in particular.  It was accepted that he
had had a problematic upbringing, with the early death of his mother, but
he was also in foster care, nevertheless all factors were to be considered
together.  Integration was fact-specific.  There had been a lack of
engagement with his schooling and he had not been integrated despite the
length of time in the United Kingdom.

18.  It was argued that in any event there were not very significant
obstacles to the appellant's return to Zambia.  The guidance in Kamara
[2016] EWCA Civ 813 was relevant, setting out as it did at paragraph 14 the
test of a broad evaluative judgment requiring to be made as to whether the
individual will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life
in the society in that other country is carried on and a capacity to
participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted
there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to
build up within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give
substance to the individual's private or family life.  More recently, as
had been said in AS [2017] EWCA Civ 1284, it was necessary for there to be
shown to be more than difficulties and discomfort in returning.  It was a
heightened threshold, especially with a persistent offender.  The guidance
in Binbuga at paragraphs 40 and 41 was also relied on.  The appellant
accepted that he had returned to Zambia for his mother's funeral and did
not say she did not have family there and that there were no integrative
ties there.  He had returned there with his aunt for his mother's funeral.
He had said he did not know family members in Zambia and it was unclear
whether he had stayed in his aunt's house but he was able to access
accommodation there.  There was no evidence to say he did not have family
who could assist his integration.

19.  Little weight should be paid to the language issue, bearing in mind
what had been said by the judge and in the error of law decision, noting
that the judge, who had observed that English was the official language of
Zambia.  He would be able to attend church in Zambia and play football
there.  There was no evidence as to why he could not do the kind of social
work he was doing in the United Kingdom in Zambia.  The extended family
member who had put in a witness statement did not say that the family did
not exist.  As regards the appellant's lack of skills or specialist
qualifications it was true in the United Kingdom that he was able to get a
job and being a repeat offender would be detrimental whereas he would be
starting afresh in Zambia.  He had not shown that he was in bad health and
though the social worker identified historical risk factors it had not been
shown that he had health problems requiring medication or that he needed
family in the United Kingdom for his mental health.  Little weight should
be attached to what was said by the psychologist concerning the risk
factors and family breakdown and the causes of his crimes.  He had had his
uncle as a figure in his life even if no father.  He had lost his mother
when he was young.

20.  With regard to his offending, the PNC had not been provided but it was
said that albeit that he had been in prison and had sentences including 27
months he had still been convicted of a further offence on 16 November
2016, which was indicative of his lack of remorse and integration.  The
very compelling circumstances test was a very high threshold and there was
no evidence of that nature provided.  The appeal should be dismissed.

21.  Ms Besso had no points to make by way of reply.

22.  We reserved our decision.

Discussion

23.  We consider first the issue of social and cultural integration in this
case.  In the case of an appellant such as Mr Mansende, it is clear from
section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that in a
case of a foreign criminal such as him, who has not been sentenced to a
period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest requires
his deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.  Exception 2 is
not relevant in this case.  Exception 1 applies where first, he has been
lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life, secondly,
that he is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom and
thirdly, that there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
into Zambia.

24.  It is clear that the appellant has been lawfully resident in the
United Kingdom not only for most but indeed all of his life.  That element
of section 117C(4) is therefore met.  As regards social and cultural
integration in the United Kingdom, though we did not agree with Ms Besso
that at paragraph 31 of the error of law decision there was a clear
decision that the appellant was socially and culturally integrated into the
United Kingdom, it had been rather a finding that the judge had erred in
finding that he was not, we have little difficulty in agreeing with the
submission capably made by Ms Besso, that the appellant is socially and
culturally integrated into the United Kingdom.  He has lived here all his
life, he has a number of family members here and a girlfriend and has
worked here.  Although it is clear that it is possible for a degree of
criminal offending and imprisonment to destroy a person's social and
cultural integration, we remind ourselves of what was said in CI, in
particular in the quotations from paragraphs 62 and 77 of that judgment,
set out at paragraph 11 of the error of law decision.  There has not been
in our view at any time a breach in the appellant's social and cultural
integration in the United Kingdom.  That remains despite his criminal
behaviour, and therefore that element of Exception 1 is satisfied.

25.  As regards the issue of very significant obstacles to his integration
into Zambia, the point is essentially decided by the judge's decision.
That is not infected by the flaws in the judge's decision about social and
cultural integration. Bearing in mind the guidance in Kamara and the
judge's adverse credibility findings, there are the factors that English is
the official language of Zambia, the appellant is a national of Zambia, he
was brought up by a Zambian mother and at times by other relatives of
Zambian origin and is likely to have extended family and/or connections in
Zambia who would be able to assist him on arrival into Zambia. Also
relevant is the absence of health problems and the fact that he is a young
man of working age and fitness to work. We consider that it has not been
shown that there exist very significant obstacles to his integration into
Zambia. We adopt the sound findings of the judge on this point.  The
appellant therefore does not satisfy this requirement of Exception 1 of
section 117C.

26.  The final issue is that of whether there have been shown to be very
compelling circumstances such as to justify the appeal being allowed under
Article 8 outside the Rules.  In this must be factored our findings above
on his social and cultural integration in the United Kingdom and the
absence of very significant obstacles to his integration into Zambia.  The
test is a high one, bearing in mind also that he has not been able to
satisfy the requirements of Exception 1.  We bear in mind his family and
other relationships in the United Kingdom and the amount of time that he
has lived here.  Against that, we factor in the points made above about the
absence of very significant obstacles to his integration into Zambia.  The
public interest must of course be borne in mind and in that regard we must
of course recall his significant criminal history.  Bringing these matters
together, we consider that it has not been shown that there exist such
compelling circumstances as to justify the appeal being allowed under
Article 8 outside the Rules and as a consequence, this appeal is dismissed
on all grounds.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 7 July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

