
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07389/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote hearing heard                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|at Field House on 20 August 2020 (V) |On 26 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              WAQAR HUSAIN SYED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr Z. Raza, instructed by Marks and Marks
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I shall refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant (Mr Syed)  appealed  the  respondent's  (SSHD)  decision
    dated 03 April 2019 to refuse a human rights claim on the  ground  that
    the appellant did  not  meet  the  'Suitability'  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules because of an allegation of ETS  fraud  and  did  not
    meet any other requirements of the immigration rules in any event.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockerill ("the judge") allowed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 25 February 2020. The judge summarised the
    appellant's  immigration  history  and  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    refusal [1-11]. He summarised the evidence given  and  the  submissions
    made at the hearing [17-37]. The judge made his  findings  relating  to
    the key aspects of the appeal from [39] onwards.

4.     The  judge  began  his  analysis  by  considering   the   appellant's
    submission that he had accrued 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence.
    This was not a matter that had formed part of the original human rights
    claim and was arguably a 'new matter' that should have been  considered
    first  with  reference  to  section  85(5)-(6)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). It is unclear  from  the
    face of the decision whether the judge considered whether it was a  new
    matter, and if it was, obtained  the  respondent's  formal  consent  to
    determine it. The respondent's position was that the appellant  entered
    the UK on 06 December 2009, but his lawful leave came to an end when he
    was refused further leave to remain on 11 June 2014 with  no  right  of
    appeal. The appellant's position  was  that  he  had  made  an  in-time
    application for further leave to remain on 09 June 2014 but  had  never
    received a decision rejecting the application  as  invalid.  The  judge
    concluded that there was evidence to show that the appellant replied to
    the respondent's correspondence asking for further documents  and  that
    there was no evidence to show  that  the  application  was  voided.  He
    concluded  that  the  application  was  outstanding,   and   that   the
    appellant's leave was extended under section 3C of the Immigration  Act
    1971 ("the IA 1971") while the application was pending [39-42].

5.    The judge turned to consider the allegation  of  fraud  and  deception
    relating to an English language test that was said to have  been  taken
    on 18 April  2012  at  Premier  Language  Training  Centre.  The  judge
    currently identified the three-stage approach to  the  legal  framework
    [44]. He accepted that the generic evidence produced by  the  Secretary
    of State was sufficient to discharge the initial evidential  burden  of
    proof [45]. He went on to consider the appellant's evidence in response
    to the allegation and made the following findings:

                       "46.  The critical point then arises  as  to  whether
                 or not the appellant has provided a plausible and  innocent
                 explanation for what has taken place. I  have  clearly  had
                 the benefit of seeing the appellant and have heard his oral
                 evidence. I have also been able to study the papers  lodged
                 in this appeal. I accept, looking at the  totality  of  the
                 material, that the appellant has given an honest and  clear
                 account of sitting that test in person and he did not use a
                 proxy. I find  that  he  is  a  reliable  witness  on  that
                 critical feature. I  can  say  that  with  some  confidence
                 because round about that time when there was this  impugned
                 TOEIC  the  appellant  was  a  student  at  Oxford  Brookes
                 University. That in itself tells me a good deal  about  the
                 appellant's capacity to speak  English.  Although  he  only
                 gained a third class degree he nevertheless gained a degree
                 from that universityin (sic) applied  accounting  where  of
                 course the medium of instruction was English.  Whilst  that
                 is not dispositive of this appeal it  does  help  me  in  a
                 significant  way  to  understand  how  well  the  appellant
                 grasped English at that time.

                         47. The overall picture that has been presented  to
                 me, and I stress this, is that the appellant  has  provided
                 enough information about how he sat the test to persuade me
                 that he has provided an innocent and plausible account.

                              48. The third stage then needs to be  examined
                 and I stress that the respondent has not answered the point
                 at all that was raised by the appellant. The respondent has
                 not provided any further evidence that would challenge  and
                 rebut what the appellant has been  saying.  The  respondent
                 has not met  the  test  that  lies  on  her.  She  has  not
                 discharged the burden at that third stage.

                              49. Looking then at  the  matter  overall  the
                 appellant in my respectful judgment has shown that  he  had
                 leave. The appellant has also shown that  he  did  not  use
                 deception, that he obtained this TOEIC by going and sitting
                 the test personally.

                              50. In all the circumstances there is  nothing
                 which can really be held against the appellant  and  in  my
                 judgment the requisite tests set  in  Paragraph  276B  have
                 indeed been met."

6.    The Secretary of State appealed the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

       i) The judge failed to take  into  account  relevant  considerations
          when calculating  whether  the  appellant  accrued  a  continuous
          period of 10 years' lawful residence, including the fact that the
          appellant was served with an  IS.151A  decision  dated  20  March
          2015, the effect of which  was  to  curtail  any  existing  leave
          including leave extended under section 3C IA 1971.

      ii) The judge failed to give adequate  reasons  and  failed  to  make
          findings relating to relevant evidence produced by the respondent
          regarding the scale of the fraud  at  Premier  Language  Training
          Centre.

7.    A face to face hearing was not held because  it  was  not  practicable
    due to public health measures put in place to  control  the  spread  of
    Covid-19. The appeal was heard by way of a remote hearing by Skype  for
    Business with consent of the parties. All issues could be determined in
    a remote hearing. The documents before the Upper Tribunal include those
    that were before the First-tier Tribunal:

       i) The respondent's bundle (SSHD) before the First-tier Tribunal;
      ii) The appellant's bundle (Mr Syed) before the First-tier Tribunal;
     iii) The First-tier Tribunal decision;
      iv) The respondent's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal;
       v) Written submissions on behalf of both parties  before  the  Upper
          Tribunal.


Decision and reasons

8.    Having considered the written arguments  and  oral  submissions  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error of law and must be set aside. Although  many  of  the  judge's
    findings were open to him to make, I have come to the  conclusion  that
    it is the omissions that give rise to errors of law.

9.    The question of whether the judge should have considered the 10  years
    continuous residence point as a 'new matter'  was  not  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal or the respondent's rule 24  response.  However,  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to that issue cannot  stand  in
    any event. Although it was open to the judge to consider  the  evidence
    relating to the application for an extension of leave to remain made on
    09 June 2014, even if he was satisfied that there was  no  evidence  to
    show that the application was deemed invalid, the decision is silent as
    to the effect of the service of the IS.151A form dated 20 March 2015.

10.   The evidence was material  to  a  proper  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant had established 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence.  The
    service  of  the  IS.151A  was  highlighted  in  the  summary  of   the
    appellant's immigration history in the decision letter and  a  copy  of
    both parts of the form including the Statement of Reasons was contained
    in the respondent's bundle. The IS.151A form was  a  formal  notice  of
    immigration decision to remove the appellant under section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 ("IAA 1999")  because  it  was  alleged
    that he used deception in seeking leave to  remain.  The  Statement  of
    Reasons made clear that the  decision  was  based  on  the  information
    obtained from ETS, who confirmed that the English language  certificate
    was cancelled because there was evidence to indicate that the appellant
    used a proxy test  taker.  The  Part  2  notice  that  accompanied  the
    decision made clear that the  service  of  the  decision  curtails  any
    existing leave (including leave extended under section 3C IA 1971)  and
    there was no need to consider any outstanding applications as a result.
    The appellant had a right to appeal the decision from outside the UK.

11.   Although Mr Raza accepted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    impact of the IS.151A notice in assessing the 10 year period of  lawful
    residence, he argued that in light of the  decision  in  Ahsan  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 the error would make no material difference to the
    outcome if the judge's findings relating to  the  allegation  of  fraud
    were sustainable. It is not necessary to go into  the  detail  of  this
    argument before considering whether those findings involved the  making
    of an error of law.

12.   Mr  Raza  made  detailed  submissions  relating  to  the  respondent's
    evidence to explain why, in his submission, the judge was  entitled  to
    come to the conclusions that  he  did.  However  well  expressed  those
    arguments were, the task I am asked to consider was whether  the  judge
    himself gave adequate reasons for finding that  the  evidence  did  not
    discharge the overall legal burden of proof.

13.   It was open to the judge to find that the  initial  evidential  burden
    of proof was discharged by the Secretary of State with  little  further
    explanation  given  that  the  courts  have  found  that  the  'generic
    material' produced by the respondent is sufficient to meet the  initial
    burden: see SM & Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
    229 and SSHD v Shehzad [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615.  However,  the  'generic
    material' considered in those cases consisted  solely  of  the  witness
    statements of Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington, combined with  the
    'look up tool' print out confirming the cancellation  of  the  test  as
    'invalid'.

14.   In this case the respondent  produced  further  evidence  including  a
    'look up tool' print out for the particular day  the  test  was  taken,
    showing the wider pattern of tests  taken  at  the  college.  She  also
    produced a copy of a report outlining statistics that were relevant  to
    an assessment of how widespread  the  fraud  might  have  been  at  the
    Premier Language Training Centre. Although the  judge  noted  some  key
    elements of this evidence when he summarised  the  decision  letter  at
    [5], at no point in the decision did he evaluate what weight should  be
    placed on the evidence.

15.   The  more  widespread  the  evidence  of  potential  fraud,  the  more
    important it is for a judge to engage with the evidence. In  this  case
    the 'look up tool' print out for 18 April 2012 showed that 68% of  test
    results for that day were cancelled as 'invalid' and 32%  cancelled  as
    'questionable'. In other words, none of the tests  for  that  day  were
    deemed to be valid by ETS due to  evidence  of  widespread  fraud.  The
    report relating to Premier Language Training Centre dated January  2017
    concluded that the majority of tests  taken  at  the  Premier  Language
    Training Centre during the period between 06 March 2012 and 05 February
    2014 were  not  conducted  under  genuine  test  conditions.  When  ETS
    conducted voice  analysis  upon  the  speaking  element  of  the  5,055
    speaking tests taken it deemed 75% to  be  invalid  (3,780/5,055).  The
    other 1,275 speaking results were deemed 'questionable'. This  evidence
    suggested that persistent and widespread fraud may have taken place  at
    the Premier Language Training Centre over a period of nearly a year.

16.   The evidence relating to the  potentially  widespread  nature  of  the
    fraud was relevant to a proper assessment of (i) the credibility of the
    appellant's evidence; and (ii) whether the  respondent  had  discharged
    the legal burden of proof as a whole.

17.   The judge was impressed by the evidence given by the appellant at  the
    hearing, but when one considers his findings at [46] he fails to  place
    the appellant's account in the context of the evidence produced by  the
    respondent. Although the fact that a person  might  be  able  to  speak
    English is a factor that could be taken into account, the judge gave no
    consideration to what was said in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016]  UKUT
    450 at [57], where the Upper Tribunal observed  that  there  may  be  a
    range of reasons why a person who can speak English might still  cheat.
    In this case, the judge recorded at [28] that the appellant  said  that
    he did not have time to take an IELTS test, which was why he  opted  to
    take the TOEIC test before he applied for further leave to remain.  The
    judge failed to consider whether this might have acted as an  incentive
    for the appellant to cheat even if he spoke English.

18.   Although many of the judge's findings were open  to  him  to  make,  I
    find that his failure to consider the appellant's credibility in  light
    of the respondent's evidence and/or to  engage  with  the  evidence  of
    apparently widespread fraud at the particular test centre in  question,
    were material omissions that amount to errors of law.  Because  I  have
    found that there is also an error in the judge's findings  relating  to
    the allegation of ETS fraud it  is  not  necessary  to  deal  with  the
    arguments made with reference to Ahsan. The judge  failed  to  consider
    whether service of the IS.151A 'stopped the clock' for the  purpose  of
    continuous lawful residence.

19.   The usual course of action would be for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake
    the decision even if it  involves  making  further  findings  of  fact.
    Although there was some discussion as to whether the  judge's  findings
    relating to the application for leave  to  remain  made  in  June  2014
    should be preserved, I decided that there would  need  to  be  a  fresh
    hearing and that no findings should be preserved.

20.   The issue of whether the appeal should include  consideration  of  the
    appellant's claim to 10 years lawful residence is yet to be determined.
    The matter did not form part of the original application  and  has  not
    been formally considered by the respondent. The success of this  aspect
    of the case is likely to be inextricably linked to  the  allegation  of
    ETS fraud given my observations about the  effect  of  the  section  10
    decision and the fact that a grant of leave to remain on that basis  is
    reliant on there being no reasons why it would be undesirable to  grant
    ILR and there being no reason  to  refuse  the  application  under  the
    general grounds for refusal.

21.   I note that the appellant's solicitors purported to make a  "Statement
    of Additional Grounds  under  s.120"  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing, but this  disclosed  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  the
    relevant procedure. A Statement of Additional Grounds under section 120
    NIAA 2002 is a form issued by the  respondent.  The  plain  wording  of
    section 120(2) makes this clear. Merely stating  it  on  correspondence
    generated by the solicitor does not engage the wider scope  of  matters
    to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal under  section  85(2)  NIAA
    2002. As far as I can see, there is no evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    respondent has issued a section 120 notice in this case.

22.   Although the respondent has now been on notice of the issue  for  some
    time and should not be disadvantaged if it is relied on, it is  a  'new
    matter' that has not been  considered  and  is  likely  to  engage  the
    operation of section 85(5) NIAA 2002. Because it is not  clear  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal had consent to determine the matter, I consider
    that there is no utility in preserving a single finding. It will  be  a
    matter for the next  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  assess  once  the
    respondent has confirmed  whether  she  gives  consent  for  it  to  be
    considered in compliance with the direction made below.

Direction

23.   The respondent shall confirm in writing at least 14  days  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing whether she  gives  consent  for  paragraph
    276B of the immigration rules to be considered.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   M. Canavan          Date   26 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




