
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
hu/07442/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 November 2019                       |On 26 November 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                           HER HONOUR JUDGE STACEY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)

                                   Between

                          ATHANASIUS CHINENYE NWOGU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Dingley, Counsel instructed by Direct Public
Access
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen of  Nigeria  against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
respondent refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. We  begin  by  looking  carefully  at  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal. This shows that the appellant was  born  in  July  1976.   He  is
therefore now 43 years old. He entered the United Kingdom in September 2004
with entry clearance as a student.  His leave as  a  student  was  extended
until 31 August 2007.  On 29 August 2007 he applied for  further  leave  to
remain but the application was invalid.  He made a further  application  on
22 April 2018 which was refused with no right of appeal on 28 January 2010.
 On 9 February  2010  he  was  served  notice  confirming  that  he  is  an
overstayer.  On 4 May 2013 he applied for leave to remain  on  family  life
grounds.  The application was successful when he was given leave  until  12
December 2015.  That leave was then extended until 8 October 2018.   On  24
September 2018 he made the application leading to the  decision  complained
of.  His application was to remain on the basis of his private  and  family
life with his current partner. The application was refused on 4 April 2019.

3. A fundamental problem with his application is that the appellant did  not
satisfy the requirements of any relevant Immigration Rules.

4. He was not married to his current partner  and  although  they  may  well
have a close and intimate relationship it had not  lasted  for  two  years.
The relationship began in April 2018.   It  follows  that  the  appellant's
partner was not a "partner" for the purposes of the  Immigration  Rules  or
Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

5.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were  "very  significant
obstacles" to the appellant's reintegration into Nigeria.  Although he  had
not lived there since 2004 he had lived there for the first 28 years of his
life and the respondent expected him to have retained knowledge of life  in
Nigeria.  The respondent was  alert  to  the  possibility  of  there  being
exceptional circumstances but found  none.   His  marriage  to  his  former
spouse was the main reason for the appellant being given leave to remain on
an earlier occasion but they divorced on 19 May 2017.

6.  The  appellant  said  that  he   supported   his   former   stepdaughter
financially.

7. He commenced a relationship  with  his  current  partner  who  identifies
simply as "NAB" in April 2018.   The  respondent  was  satisfied  that  the
appellant could continue  to  support  his  stepdaughter  from  Nigeria  or
wherever he chose to live.  He had no proper  basis  for  assuming  that  a
relationship with his present partner, which  was  of  short  duration  and
formed when he had no relevant leave, would lead to his being  entitled  to
remain on human rights grounds.

8.  Paragraph  6  of  the  judge's  Decision  and  Reasons  is  particularly
important.  There he said:

  "In oral evidence the appellant was asked to describe the  level  of  his
  relationship with his former stepdaughter T... .  He  said  that  he  has
  indirect telephone contact with her.  When asked  to  explain  what  this
  means, he said that he passes  messages  to  the  appellant  through  her
  aunts.  Recently, he saw her at the train station.  On a  monthly  basis,
  he provides ï¿½100 to her as well as some extra funds.   She  is  14-years-
  old.  Her mother only allows her to be contacted whenever she wishes.  In
  the last two/three months, she has not allowed him to see her".

9. The judge went on to note the evidence that T regards  the  appellant  as
her father and calls him "daddy".  She did make  indirect  contact  through
her aunts and they met on occasions.

10. The appellant explained that he and his current partner wanted  to  have
a baby together. They were currently  trying  for  a  baby  and  undergoing
medical treatment.  He said it would delay the process to return to Nigeria
and make an application for a visa.

11. Additionally he contributed to the community.  For  example,  he  worked
with vulnerable people on suicide watch.

12. He would not be able to obtain employment  outside  the  United  Kingdom
that was similar to his present work.

13. He then explained that his partner  had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
since she was a baby.  Her parents were aged and she gave them care.

14. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied  that  the  respondent's  decision
was in accordance with the Rules.  The  judge  described  the  decision  as
"unassailable".

15. The judge looked for exceptional  circumstances  that  might  support  a
conclusion that the appellant had established a human right  to  remain  in
the United Kingdom. He noted with approval that  the  appellant  made  some
provision for the daughter of his former wife but found  that  he  was  not
playing an active role in the upbringing of the child. The judge also  gave
weight to letters of recommendation drawing attention  to  the  appellant's
character and contributions he made to the community.  The  judge  said  at
paragraph 19 that the appellant worked in jobs giving support  to  children
and adults with disabilities.  The judge said:

  "The complexity of his work firstly, requires  multi-agency  involvement.
  This might to be safeguard a young  person  who  is  at  risk  of  sexual
  exploitation or involvement in drugs and gang crimes.  He has worked with
  specialist  police   teams,   Probations   Service   and   other   health
  professionals to ensure services users are effectively supported.   As  I
  have already indicated, the work he does is of tremendous benefit to  the
  community and needs to be commended".

16. The judge went on to say that he had found nothing to show that  "family
life" between the appellant and his partner could not continue  in  Nigeria
although the appellant and his partner no doubt preferred to  live  in  the
United Kingdom.

17. The judge  directed  his  mind  to  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and found that the appellant  is  a  fluent
English speaker. However the judge found that evidence that  the  appellant
and his partner were independent financially was not satisfactory.

18. Further the judge could not see why, even if the appellant could  expect
to succeed in an out  of  country  application  for  entry  to  the  United
Kingdom, it would be unduly harsh for him to return to Nigeria and make  an
application in  accordance  with  the  rules.   The  judge  concluded  that
"exclusion" (he meant return to Nigeria) would not result in  unjustifiably
harsh consequences and dismissed the appeal.

19. The grounds of appeal are settled by Mr Dingley and  are  extensive.  We
have considered them with the skeleton argument and oral submissions.

20. Mr Dingley's first complaint is the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  by
failing to consider the best interests  of  the  British  child.   This  is
clearly a reference to the child of  his  former  partner  and  wife.   The
ground is made out in the sense that there is no express  consideration  of
that child's best interests although it is equally plain from  reading  the
decision that the judge had regard to the interests  of  that  child.   The
evidence before the Frist-tier Tribunal did not support a  conclusion  that
the appellant was in a parental relationship with  the  child.  Rather  the
evidence showed that there was occasional contact between the appellant and
the child at her mother's  discretion.   There  is  no  indication  of  any
guiding role by the appellant and although  he  paid  some  money  for  the
child's maintenance, the sums are modest.  They do not live  in  a  nuclear
family. There is no evidence of exceptional dependency or need.  She is  14
years old and she attends a boarding school.  We do not see  how  the  most
rigorous consideration of the evidence could have led to a finding that the
relationship was weighty for the purposes of  Article  8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights.

21.  The  grounds  of  appeal  refer  to  authority  that   underlines   the
desirability of considering the best interests  of  the  child  and  it  is
certainly right that it is a potentially very important  consideration  but
the grounds point to nothing in  the  evidence  which  indicated  that  the
appellant's  relationship  with  his  former  partner's   daughter   is   a
relationship that should have been given great weight.

22. The grounds then complain under "ground 2" that the First-tier  Tribunal
Judge failed to consider properly paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of HC 395 and the
appellant's circumstances.  This Rule sets out matters to be considered  in
the case of a person who  has  not  managed  to  accumulate  twenty  years'
continuous  residence  but  for  whom  there  would  be  "very  significant
obstacles" to his integration  into  the  country  to  which  he  would  be
required to go.  Again, the  evidence  does  not  support  the  appellant's
contention that such obstacles exist.  The appellant is a  mature  man  who
had adult life experience of living in Nigeria.  He has a work ethic and is
apparently fit.  It may well be that  he  has  no-one  to  support  him  in
Nigeria.  We can see nothing, and the grounds certainly point  to  nothing,
which would support the contention that very  significant  obstacles  exist
here.

23. Ground 3 refers to the case of Chikwamba.  This is clearly  a  reference
to the decision of the House of Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40.
Somewhat surprisingly, the grounds refer to the decision of  this  Tribunal
in R (on the application of  Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC).   We  do
not follow the argument here.  Chikwamba was a decision about the  futility
of a person having to leave the United Kingdom and in so doing separate, at
least for a while, a nuclear family and make provisions for a small baby in
order to travel to Zimbabwe, which at  that  time  was  in  a  particularly
difficult state, in order  to  make  an  application  which  was  bound  to
succeed.  Put like that it is, with respect, unremarkable that the House of
Lords was not impressed with the Secretary of State's insistence on  policy
for its own sake.  The  point  is  developed  in  R  (Agyarko  v  Ikuga)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  Those cases all
considered partners of UK nationals.  As  has  been  explained  above,  the
appellant does not have a "partner" here within the meaning of  the  Rules.
He cannot hope to satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  He is not  asking
to be excused the obligation to return to make  a  successful  application.
He has been asking to have it accepted that he has established a  right  to
remain here even though he has no right under the Rules.  Sometimes  people
do establish such a right because  such  is  the  nature  of  human  rights
applications.  We cannot see how it can be argued effectively that this  is
such a case.

24. It is suggested in the grounds that there is a particular need  for  the
appellant to remain in the United Kingdom.  He wishes to start a family and
he and his partner have been  discussing  fertility  treatment.   There  is
clear evidence that  they  have  been  discussing  it.   There  is  medical
evidence of initial testing.  There is nothing before us, or the First-tier
Tribunal, to show that there is any significant progress  in  participating
in that kind of treatment.

25. We have not been told if  the  proposed  treatment  raises  any  ethical
considerations given that the people involved are not married and have  not
been together for long  enough  to  be  in  a  committed  relationship  for
immigration purposes to start a family.  Neither is there any indication of
whether such treatment could be available in Nigeria or  if  the  appellant
actually needs to be present or whether his  contribution  to  the  process
could be frozen.  We are not ruling on  these  things.   We  do  not  know.
There is no evidence and that is the problem.

26. There was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  of  some  involvement
in community activities, some of them church based.   This  is  not  nearly
enough to establish a human right to remain.

27. The fact is the appellant was in the  United  Kingdom  on  a  particular
basis.  He was actually an overstayer for a while but that was excused when
he was allowed to remain on the basis of a  marriage  and  given  leave  to
remain until a date in the  autumn  of  2018.   The  marriage  fell  apart.
Marriages do and that is a very often sad event.  It  was  probably  a  sad
event here.  However, his leave to remain  was  no  longer  necessary.   He
applied to extend it on the basis  of  a  new  relationship  but,  for  the
reasons given, the Secretary of State did not regard them  as  sufficiently
weighty to give him the right to remain outside the Rules  and  he  had  no
right inside the Rules.  Mr Dingley has set out to find material fault.  We
agree with him that it would have been  better  if  there  had  been  clear
findings about the rights of the child.  His contention that the First-tier
Tribunal Judge failed to carry out a balancing exercise is  not  made  out.
The points can be expressed differently but the judge clearly had  in  mind
the imperative of enforcing immigration control and the  particular  points
in the appellant's case.  There is no obligation to carry out  a  balancing
exercise in any particular way, if at all.  It is good practice to  prepare
a  "balance  sheet"  because  it  shows  the  relevant  points  have   been
considered.  Failure to prepare a balance sheet is not an error of law  and
certainly not necessarily a material error of law. We can see nothing  that
has not been considered that ought to have  been  considered  and  possibly
found weighty.  The decision is adequate.  It is a brisk  consideration  of
what is essentially a weak case.

Notice of Decision

28. We find no material error and we dismiss the appeal against  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge's decision.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 November 2019               |



