
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07991/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th October 2019                 |On 3rd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                Mr Erdal [C]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, instructed by Andrew Williams Solicitors
                    (Roundhay Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the dismissal of his appeal
by the First-tier Tribunal against a refusal decision of the Entry
Clearance Officer dated 7th March 2018.  The appellant applied for entry
clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse of Mrs [AC] ("the Sponsor")
but the application was refused under ECP.3.1-3.4 on the sole basis that
the sponsor did not meet the financial requirements under Appendix FM.

The grounds of appeal were as follows:

the judge failed to remind himself of the burden and standard of proof,
there was no clear structure or findings and the judge had not referred to
the submissions made by either the appellant's representatives or the
respondent's representatives.

an inadequate assessment of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
Immigration Act 2009.  Although the best interests of the child were
addressed from paragraph 20 in the determination, they were not properly
considered in the light of Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting children
onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) and Zoumbas v Secretary of State
[2013] UKSC 74.  The judge had failed to apply the relevant test of whether
it would be reasonable to expect the child to relocate to Turkey.  There
was a flawed assessment with regards the public interest whereby the judge
stated at paragraph 22:

              "There is a strong public interest in the maintenance of
              effective immigration control, there is a strong public
              interest in denying entry clearance to those who do not meet
              the Rules."

              The judge had failed to recognise that the respondent in
              exercising the public interest in maintaining effective
              immigration control should strike a fair balance between the
              competing interests of the needs of the individual and the
              needs of the wider society.  Further the judge failed to
              recognise that a child could not be punished for the conduct
              of their parents as per KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.

the judge at paragraph 23 concluded he did not need to proceed outside the
Rules but, even if he did, the decision did not take into account the
child's best interests and all relevant factors and was thus flawed
throughout.

a failure to give adequate reasons on material matters.  The judge failed
to identify and consider the evidence such that the sponsor, despite
improvements in her mental health, remained on antidepressants and her
difficulties were ongoing.  The judge failed to provide adequate reasoning
for his findings in relation to the evidence on health and his approach to
the sponsor's letter from her GP dated 31st January 2019.

a failure to assess all of the evidence.  The appellant's representative's
skeleton argument relied on MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC
10 but this was not properly applied as the judge concluded that because
exceptional circumstances were not in existence, he did not proceed to
consider relevant factors such as the ability of the sponsor to work in
Turkey

failure to identify the full facts of the case and to engage with the facts
of the case.

At the hearing before us, Mr Lindsay conceded that there was an error of
law, particularly in the approach to the relevant child.  Two rule 24
notices were submitted; one on 11th July 2019,  which conceded that the
judge failed to consider the reasonableness of the child leaving the UK but
nonetheless the sponsor could not meet the financial requirements and a
differently constituted tribunal would not come to a different conclusion.

On 27th August 2019 the Secretary of State submitted a revised response to
the grounds of appeal under rule 24 which agreed that the judge had not had
proper regard to key parts of the evidence or that the analysis had been
adequate.

The revised rule 24 notice, however, identified that at the appeal it
appeared to have been accepted that the appellant still could not meet the
financial requirements of the Rules and the judge correctly identified the
principal issue was whether there were exceptional circumstances leading to
unjustifiably harsh consequences.  Consideration of GEN.3.1 and GEN.3.2 of
Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules was relevant.

"GEN.3.1.
(1)   Where:
(a)   the financial requirement in paragraph E-ECP.3.1., E-LTRP.3.1. (in
the context of an application for limited leave to remain as a partner), E-
ECC.2.1. or E-LTRC.2.1. applies, and is not met from the specified sources
referred to in the relevant paragraph; and
(b)   it is evident from the information provided by the applicant that
there are exceptional circumstances which could render refusal of entry
clearance or leave to remain a breach of Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal could result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner or a
relevant child; then

the decision-maker must consider whether such financial requirement is met
through taking into account the sources of income, financial support or
funds set out in paragraph 21A(2) of Appendix FM-SE (subject to the
considerations in sub-paragraphs (3) to (8) of that paragraph).
(2)   Where the financial requirement in paragraph E-ECP.3.1., E-LTRP.3.1.
(in the context of an application for limited leave to remain as a
partner), E-ECC.2.1. or E-LTRC.2.1. is met following consideration under
sub-paragraph (1) (and provided that the other relevant requirements of the
Immigration Rules are also met), the applicant will be granted entry
clearance or leave to remain under, as appropriate, paragraph D-ECP.1.2., D-
LTRP.1.2., D-ECC.1.1. or D-LTRC.1.1. or paragraph 315 or 316B of the
Immigration Rules.

GEN.3.2.
(1)   Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application for entry
clearance or leave to enter or remain made under this Appendix, or an
application for leave to remain which has otherwise been considered under
this Appendix, does not otherwise meet the requirements of this Appendix or
Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-maker must consider whether the
circumstances in sub-paragraph (2) apply.
(2)   Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
consider, on the basis of the information provided by the applicant,
whether there are exceptional circumstances which would render refusal of
entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a breach of Article 8 of the
European Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal would result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner, a
relevant child or another family member whose Article 8 rights it is
evident from that information would be affected by a decision to refuse the
application.
(3)   Where the exceptional circumstances referred to in sub-paragraph (2)
above apply, the applicant will be granted entry clearance or leave to
enter or remain under, as appropriate, paragraph D-ECP.1.2., D-LTRP.1.2., D-
ECC.1.1., D-LTRC.1.1., D-ECPT.1.2., D-LTRPT.1.2., D-ECDR.1.1. or D-
ECDR.1.2.
(4)   This paragraph does not apply in the context of applications made
under section BPILR or DVILR."

The Secretary of State referred to an updated policy Family life (as a
partner or parent), private life and exceptional circumstances Version 1
published on 25th July 2019, (helpfully provided by Mr Lindsay at the
hearing) which confirmed at page 68:

"To reflect the findings in the Court of Appeal case of Secretary of State
for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica) & Anor [2019] EWCA Civ 661, where
the relevant child is a qualifying child (a British child or a child who
has been continuously resident in the UK for at least seven years), it will
be unjustifiably harsh to refuse if both of the following apply:

there is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship to the qualifying
child

it is unreasonable for the child to leave the UK."

The guidance continues:

           "Where, under paragraph GEN.3.2. of Appendix FM, you consider
           that refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences
           for the applicant or their family, they must grant entry
           clearance or limited leave to remain."

As set out in the rule 24 notice, in this case the position of the British
child was clearly a relevant factor and at page 50 of the guidance the
reasonableness of a qualifying child leaving the UK is addressed.  The
Secretary of State's position as outlined in the rule 24 notice was that
'she would not normally expect a qualifying child to leave but this was in
the context of the case where a family was being split.  At page 51
guidance is given for consideration of those cases where it may be
reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the UK'.

The Secretary of State opined that in view of the accepted errors by the
judge further fact-finding would be required to establish if there were
exceptional circumstances leading to unjustifiably harsh consequences such
as the requirements of GEN.3.1 or 3.2 and that the matter was best
addressed in the First-tier Tribunal.

We note that Family Life policy guidance, has subsequently been revised in
September and is now dated November 2019.

We agree the judge failed to apply the relevant test, which is whether it
would be reasonable to expect the child to relocate to Turkey.  That
assessment should be made in the light of Azimi-Moayed and Zoumbas and of
relevance is the British citizenship of the child.

A further point was explored at the hearing before us.  The application was
accompanied by financial evidence of third-party support.  The judge
proceeded on the basis at paragraph [22] that

         "the sponsor does not meet the MIR [Minimum Income Requirement]
         which gives rise to the prospect that the couple will be reliant on
         benefits.  The couple would not be financially independent because
         they would be reliant on Mrs [C]'s parents".

      The judge had failed to consider the dicta of the Supreme Court at
    paragraph 99 of MM (Lebanon):

"Operation of the same restrictive approach outside the rules is a
different matter, and in our view is much more difficult to justify under
the HRA.  This is not because 'less intrusive' methods might be devised (as
Blake J attempted to do: para 147), but because it is inconsistent with the
character of evaluation which article 8 requires.  As has been seen,
avoiding a financial burden on the state can be relevant to the fair
balance required by the article.  But that judgment cannot properly be
constrained by a rigid restriction in the rules.  Certainly, nothing that
is said in the instructions to case officers can prevent the tribunal on
appeal from looking at the matter more broadly.  These are not matters of
policy on which special weight has to be accorded to the judgment of the
Secretary of State.  In doing so, it will no doubt take account of such
considerations as those discussed by Lord Brown and Lord Kerr in Mahad,
including the difficulties of proof highlighted in the quotation from
Collins J.  That being the position before the tribunal, it would make
little sense for decision-makers at the earlier stages to be forced to take
a narrower approach which they might be unable to defend on appeal."

In essence, the judge failed to address all relevant facts, failed to give
adequate reasoning and failed effectively to address Article 8 at all.  He
proceeded on the basis of a previous flawed assessment with regards to the
child and misapplied caselaw, not least MM (Lebanon). The judge concluded
that as the exceptional circumstances criteria did not apply the
alternative source of income provided by her parents to make up the
shortfall could not be used.  It was, however, incumbent upon him to
consider all of the circumstances in order to consider whether any
unjustifiably harsh consequences were extant.

All grounds of challenge, which are intertwined, appear to us to be well-
founded and disclose fundamental and material errors of law as explained.
The First-tier Tribunal determination should be therefore set aside.

It was agreed at the hearing by both Ms Allen and Mr Lindsay that remittal
was the appropriate course, given that notwithstanding the quality of the
evidence before the First-tier Tribunal on the medical issues, there was
significant change to the circumstances of the appellant because another
child has been born.

Decision
The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  We set aside the
decision pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made, the matter is remitted de novo to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Signed      Helen Rimington                                   Date 2.3.2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

