
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/08430/2019
                                                               HU/08432/2019
                                                               HU/08433/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27 April 2021                           |On 27 May 2021                  |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                               Khalilur Rahman
                        Jannatul Ferdous Trisha Moni
                                    [K T]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms D Revill, instructed by Makka Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh.  They appealed to the
First-tier Tribunal against decisions of the respondent made on 15 April
2019 refusing in the case of the first appellant his entry clearance
application to join his wife, the sponsor, in the United Kingdom and in the
case of the second and third appellants, the children of the first
appellant, applications for entry clearance to join the sponsor, their
mother.

2.   The refusal was on the basis that the Entry Clearance Officer was not
satisfied that the financial requirements of Appendix FM were made out, nor
that there were exceptional circumstances such as to show that the decision
to refuse entry would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences in breach
of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  It was common
ground that the appellants were not able to meet the financial requirements
of the Rules out of their own resources and that it would be necessary and,
it was argued, possible to do so on the basis of third party support.

3.   The judge misread the provisions of GEN.3.1(1)(b), in that she read
the test as providing that there are exceptional circumstances which could
render refusal of entry clearance or leave to remain a breach of Article 8
as reading would render refusal of entry clearance or leave to remain a
breach of Article 8.  At the error of law hearing I was satisfied that that
error of the judge was material.  She had considered unjustifiably harsh
consequences but did this on the basis that the evidence and the
circumstances would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
party rather than that they could do so.  As a consequence, I directed that
the decision could be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

4.   On behalf of the appellants Ms Revill applied under Rule 15(2A) of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008 to adduce fresh
evidence, in the form of witness statements and employment and earnings
evidence.  I granted permission for this evidence to be adduced.

5.   Ms Shahida Begum, who is the niece of the first appellant, had
provided a witness statement, relying also on her earlier statement,
confirming her salary as a staff nurse in the NHS, the fact that she lives
rent-free and household expenses free with her parents, and confirming that
she is in a position to provide financial support to the sponsor, her aunt,
and the appellants as long as they require.

6.   Ms Begum adopted her statement and Mr Clarke had no questions for her.

7.   There was also a further witness statement from the sponsor, Mrs
Lovely Begum Chowdhury.  In that she referred to the fact that she
continued to work for her previous employer though her salary had
increased, and that she had also started a second job role as a crew member
at Domino's Pizza on a part-time basis.  She said that her combined income
from both roles was over the financial threshold to support her husband and
two children but made the point that her niece continued to be willing to
provide third party support to the family.  On cross-examination the
witness confirmed that she had had the new job with Domino's since April
2020.  Her gross salary from that as set out in her statement was
�10,863.78.  She was referred to the payslip in the bundle from 26 March
2021 stating that her total pay for the year to date was �7,728.79.  She
was asked to explain the discrepancy and said that when she began the job
it was not the full year, so the full year was not completed.  She had
begun in April though she was not sure on what date.  It was put to her
that the payslip indicated a shortfall in the region of �3,000 between the
earnings on the payslip and the earnings she had stated.  She was asked
whether she was saying the difference was one month potentially and she
said that due to COVID-19 it was less work.

8.   She was also referred to the employer's letter, Mr Clarke making the
point that it did not confirm either earnings figure and in fact provided
no figures.  She agreed that it was correct that she said with regard to
the pandemic that she did not have fixed hours a week.  She agreed that
potentially if the work was not there she was paid nothing.

9.   She agreed also that she was continuing in her other job.  She had
stated in the witness statement that she was now earning a gross annual
salary of �14,510.40.  This was �2,000 more than previously.  It was put to
her that she had not provided another employer letter to confirm that they
were paying her this and she said sorry, she had not been asked about that
or advised about it.

10.  She agreed that as was said in the papers her husband and children
were dependent on the money she earned in the United Kingdom.  She was
asked how much of her money she sent to the family a month and said she did
not pay monthly but after five or six months.

11.  She was referred to the bank statements she had put in and was asked
whether she could identify anything there to show that she sent money to
the family and she said she sent it by cash.  There had been evidence
before the First-tier Tribunal of payments to the family in Bangladesh.
Money transfer slips had been provided.

12.  She was referred to the earlier decision of the First-tier Judge who
dismissed her appeal.  She was referred to the fact that the judge had
criticised her thoroughly for a lack of evidence for the circumstances in
Bangladesh and she was asked whether there was any reason why she had not
tried to produce that evidence and she said she had provided it.  It was
put to her that they had been criticised for providing no evidence about
the accommodation or living circumstances of the family and this was still
not before the Tribunal.  The witness said that she had provided all of
this information.  It was put to her that they were also criticised about
the lack of evidence of it being unsafe for women to work in Bangladesh and
the lack of employment opportunities.  She said that she could confirm that
in Bangladesh husbands did not allow wives to do any work.  She did not
have any evidence that her husband did not allow her to work.  She was
asked whether it was her husband who did not allow her to work in
Bangladesh and she said that in Bangladesh housewives did not work.  She
agreed that it was the case that her husband allowed her to work in the
United Kingdom.  She was asked whether she would agree that there was work
available for women in Bangladesh and she said she could confirm that in
Bangladesh there were work opportunities for females but her husband did
not allow her to work as she was a housewife but he allowed her to work in
the United Kingdom.  She was asked whether it was the case that he would
let her do so in Bangladesh and she said she could confirm that in
Bangladesh they did not have that environment in their family as she was a
housewife but here she had opportunities to work and she did work.

13.  She was asked whether her husband worked in Bangladesh and said yes, a
little, he did a little work and sometimes she helped him.  She was asked
what he did and she said there was no specific work but whatever came in
front of him.  There was no reason why there was no evidence of the income
he earned.

14.  With regard to the accommodation in Bangladesh, it was a family house.
 Her husband lived with his family.  There was no reason why she could not
stay there with them if she went back.  It was correct that that was where
she had lived for the seventeen years before coming to the United Kingdom.
The house was in a rural village area.

15.  Her son was now 4� and had not yet started school.  Her daughter was
19 and was studying at school.  She was asked what she was studying and
said no specific direction but she was studying and would take any specific
direction within the United Kingdom.  She was asked whether her daughter
was studying any particular subject or qualification and said she was
trying to achieve something good and she intended to have a good education.
 She was not at university but at the college.  She did not know what she
was studying.  She was still living in the family house with the witness's
husband.  There was no reason why there was no witness statement from her
daughter concerning her circumstances now she was an adult.  She was asked
whether this was because she was not dependent on her and her husband as
her husband alleged and she said that her daughter was studying and not
doing anything else and was staying with the family.

16.  On re-examination the witness was asked what she did with her wages
and she said that for the Domino's job she was paid by transfer to her bank
account and the other job was mostly cash in hand.  Some of that she put in
the bank and some she kept for her own expenses.

17.  In his submissions Mr Clarke argued that there were problems with the
documentary evidence before the Tribunal.  The application had been refused
as the income level was below the threshold.  No error of law had been
contended for in the judge's findings of fact, so that was the starting
position at least.  The judge had made specific findings about the lack of
evidence.  The sponsor had come to the United Kingdom in 2018.

18.  There was now new evidence which was said to be enough to show the
income threshold was met today.  It could not be met at the date of
decision as had been accepted and funds from the third party in the
alternative were argued for on the basis that there would be unjustifiably
harsh consequences.  The couple had two children at the time of the
decision and the threshold is �24,800.  There would only be one child as of
today's date, so the figure would be �22,400, being the first appellant and
the younger child.  It was necessary to show family life of the daughter so
as to make out any argument about disproportionality to refuse her entry
clearance.  If the third party support were allowed, then it could be
disproportionate on the basis of unjustifiably harsh circumstances.  There
was no new evidence from the family in Bangladesh.  The new bundle had
nothing with regard to any of the issues the judge had addressed, so they
had not shown the necessary circumstances even with the lower threshold.
It seemed there was property in Bangladesh and employment.  It was argued
that it was incredible that the sponsor would be precluded from working if
her husband would not let her but he let her work in the United Kingdom.
There was no evidence as to the property being too small or inadequate.
So, given the job opportunities, property and the appellant working and the
vague answers about that, the Tribunal could not be satisfied on the basis
of harsh consequences.

19.  With regard to the income as of today, the evidence was problematic.
Even if the relevant figure was �22,400 the employers' letters were
inadequate even at today's date.  They did not meet the requirements of
Appendix FM in that it was necessary to confirm employment and gross annual
salary.  The latter had not been done nor the period over which the salary
had been paid.  It transpired that the Domino's job was only there when
work was available and it was important with regard to the payslip
evidence.  The sponsor had given her explanation for the discrepancy in the
figures, referring to the date when the work began, but that could only be
two or three weeks short of a year, and that was not enough to make up the
shortfall.  It would still leave her short by some �760 of the required
level.

20.  Also, it was said that the earnings from the other employer had gone
up but there was no new employer's letter, so it was difficult to see even
without the daughter in the equation that the earnings level was met.  They
could therefore not succeed and third party support could not be relied on.
 In any event, the daughter was now an adult aged 19 and there was no
witness statement from her and there was no presumption of family life
between adults.  It could not be assumed even that she was still living in
the family accommodation.  The requirements of the Rules were not met and
there were no circumstances to show disproportionality.

21.  In her submissions Ms Revill relied on and developed the points made
in her skeleton argument.  The respondent argued that under the Rules there
could only be consideration of third party support if it was thought that
there were exceptional circumstances to make the situation harsh but that
did not bind the Tribunal.  Reference was made to the guidance in Hesham
Ali [2016] UKSC 60 on this.  The Immigration Rules expressed the Secretary
of State's policies and weight was to be attached to them, but they were
not the law.  The Tribunal was bound not to follow what was said in the
Rules if they did not allow for consideration of all relevant issues.  The
guidance in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 was relied on in this regard with
what it had to say about third party support.  This issue was relevant for
Article 8.  The Tribunal could not treat the tests in the Rules as
determinative.  It was part of the overall proportionality assessment.  No
special weight was to be attached to the Secretary of State's view.  It was
said at paragraph 99 in Hesham Ali that the Tribunal must take account of
alternative sources of finance.  At paragraph 101 it was said that the
Immigration Rules were not unlawful but might need to be amended to take
account of the need to make provision for third party support and that had
been done and was now in the Immigration Rules.  However, the MM (Lebanon)
point still stood.

22.  The First-tier Judge had erred in considering exceptional
circumstances without third party support and found there were no such
circumstances, so had not considered it.  That was wrong.  The third party
support was important here.

23.  Family life was to be considered as at the date of the hearing.  The
issue raised by Mr Clarke as to the potential independence of the daughter
now being over 18 had not been raised previously and she had been over 18
at the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and as the matter
had not been argued before the appellant could not be criticised for not
providing evidence in that regard now.  The application had been made when
she was under 18 and so she was to be treated as being under 18.  There was
family life as of now and no reason to disbelieve what the sponsor said.
It would be unusual culturally in Bangladesh for the daughter to be living
separately.

24.  The Tribunal was not asked to go behind the judge's findings of fact
as it was agreed that there was nothing to show that the family could not
live together in Bangladesh as they had done previously.  There was the
question of needing to follow the Rules.  That had been accepted in all
respects except the minimum income point and the policy behind that was
required to be taken into account.  Put generally, they were entitled to
come and live in the United Kingdom but the level of support required was
as set out and that was entirely reasonable.  That was entirely met in this
case at the date of application and as of now.  The third party evidence
had not been challenged plus the sponsor's earnings.  It was reliable
evidence and the third party evidence had not been disputed.  The Tribunal
had evidence of her income and she was in a stable job and had been doing
it for a time and could afford to provide the support.

25.  Regardless of whether the Tribunal accepted the sponsor's second job,
the legitimate public interest was entirely satisfied and there was limited
interest in refusing entry clearance therefore and what was said in MM
(Lebanon) was relevant to this.  The minimum income had been made up.

26.  As regards the evidence respecting the second job, the employer's
letter did not meet the requirements of the Rules but it confirmed the
employment, which did not seem to be disputed, and it was a matter for the
Tribunal's judgment on this.  As regards the payslips, her pay was
dependent on the hours done and hence the variations and Ms Revill thought
the witness statement figure was a consequence of adding the gross pay over
six months and doubling it, it was clearly a rough estimate.  That was
credible in the context of the pandemic and relevant to the reduced hours.
She was doing more normal hours now.  The employment was relatively durable
and it should be accepted that there was a genuine income and a job.

27.  As regards the other job, it was true there was no update letter but
reference was made to the bundle with the earlier letter and it did not
seem the job had not been accepted.  It was again a matter for the
Tribunal's judgment.

28.  Taking all into account, there was evidence of ongoing support at the
requisite level and no need to show they were living in dire circumstances
or that the sponsor could not live with them in Bangladesh.  It was a
question of whether they needed to meet the requirements of the Rules when
the evidence showed the levels were met.  The other factors were as set out
in the skeleton argument, in particular at paragraph 15.  Exceptional
circumstances was not a threshold, just an exception to the general rule.
The best interests of the child were relevant as was the sponsor's British
citizenship.  There was a relatively low public interest in refusal.  The
appeal should be allowed.

29.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

30.  Appendix FM GEN.3.1 states as follows:

"(1) Where:

(a)  the financial requirement in paragraph E-ECP.3.1., E-LTRP.3.1. (in the
context of an application for limited leave to remain as a partner), E-
ECC.2.1. or E-LTRC.2.1. applies, and is not met from the specified sources
referred to in the relevant paragraph; and

(b)  it is evident from the information provided by the applicant that
there are exceptional circumstances which could render refusal of entry
clearance or leave to remain a breach of Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights, because such refusal could result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner or a
relevant child; then

the decision-maker must consider whether such financial requirement is met
through taking into account the sources of income, financial support or
funds set out in paragraph 21A(2) of Appendix FM-SE (subject to the
considerations in subparagraphs (3) to (8) of that paragraph)."

31.  It is common ground that the earnings of the sponsor in this case were
not such that at the date of application or the date of the hearing before
the judge the minimum income requirements were met.  The financial
requirements were such as to require a gross annual income of �24,800, and
her earnings at that time were �12,214.80.

32.  The first point to be addressed is whether the situation as of now is
such, albeit bearing in mind that at the date of application the
requirement to meet the requirements of the Rules must be met, albeit that
Article 8 has to be decided at the date of the hearing, that the sponsor's
earnings are such as to meet the specified level.  In relation to this it
may be appropriate to take account of the fact that since her daughter is
now 19 the necessary earnings would be �22,400.

33.  As noted above, the earnings at the time of the hearing before the
judge were �12,214.80 per annum.  In her witness statement the sponsor says
that she is now earning �14,510.40 from that job.  She refers to payslips
and bank statements, but has not provided a letter from her employer.  In
an absence of such documentary evidence I am not prepared to accept that
her earnings have increased as claimed.  This is particularly so bearing in
mind the difficulties that I find there to be with her evidence in respect
of the second job.  She claimed to be earning �10,863.78, but was unable to
explain satisfactorily why it was that the total pay stated on the payslip
of 26 March 2021 which only two or three weeks short at the most of the
full year, showed a total pay of �7,728.79.  If she did, as Ms Revill
suggested, take six months of payslips and double them, then that was not
an appropriate way in which to calculate her earnings in light of the
figure on the payslip of 26 March 2021.  Nor was she assisted in this
regard by the letter from the employer which said nothing about the salary
that she is earning.  In the circumstances, I do not accept that her
earnings from Spice of Romsey are more than the �12,214.80 that she was
earning at the time of the hearing before the judge, and I do not accept
that her earnings from Domino's were more than the �7,728.79 in the payslip
for 26 March 2021.  As a consequence, her earnings come to something
slightly under �20,000 a year and again are short of the minimum required
even if one discounts her daughter from the equation.

34.  Accordingly, in order for the appellants to succeed under the
Immigration Rules, it is necessary for them, in accordance with the Rules
set out above, to show that it is evident from the information provided
that there are exceptional circumstances which could render refusal of
entry clearance a breach of Article 8 because it could result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant, their partner or a
relevant child in order for third party income to be considered.

35.  Ms Revill has argued that the Tribunal, in light of what was said in
particular in MM (Lebanon) and Hesham Ali, can effectively come to its own
view in the assessment of proportionality.  She accepts that the Tribunal
must have regard to the extent to which the appellants satisfy the
requirements of the Immigration Rules and argues that third party support
has to be considered notwithstanding that the Rules only mandate doing so
where it is evident that there are exceptional circumstances which could
render refusal a breach of Article 8.

36.  The Immigration Rules were amended as a consequence of MM (Lebanon) to
take into account circumstances in which third party funding might be
appropriate.  We are reminded in Hesham Ali that the policies adopted by
the Secretary of State and given effect by the Rules, though they are not
law and do not govern the determination of appeals, are nevertheless a
relevant and important consideration for Tribunals determining appeals
brought on Convention grounds because they reflect the assessment of the
general public interest made by the responsible Minister and endorsed by
Parliament.

37.  As Mr Clarke has argued, it appears that there is accommodation for
the family in Bangladesh, the first appellant works, and there is no
suggestion that the quality of life is such as to come at all close to
anything resembling unjustifiably harsh consequences.  It is relevant that
on a proper interpretation of the Rules, it does not seem to me that one
reaches the stage where it is necessary to consider whether third party
support can take the amount of funding available over the minimum income
level in the absence of it being shown that refusal of entry clearance
could amount to a breach of Article 8 because it could result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant or the children.  It
would simply mean that they remained separate from the sponsor, who is
perfectly free to return to Bangladesh and resume the life that she lived
there with her husband and family for some seventeen years before coming to
the United Kingdom.

38.  It is clearly the case in my view that the funding offered by the
third party would take the amount of funds available over the minimum
income threshold.  But even considering the matter outside the Rules, I do
not consider that the proportionality balance falls in favour of the
appellants.  I bear in mind the points made in Ms Revill's skeleton and in
her oral submissions about such matters as the best interests of the third
appellant, the improved financial circumstances of the family, the
sponsor's British citizenship, the financial independence the appellants
would enjoy, the fact that the first appellant speaks English and the fact
that the relationship between the first appellant and the sponsor was not
established when either had precarious immigration status in the United
Kingdom.  The best interests of the child are to remain with his parents
and sister (and in this regard I should observe that I see no force to the
point that the elder child may be living away from home.  As Ms Revill
argued, it would be very unusual for her at the age of 19 to have moved
away from the family home).  The fact remains that the requirements of the
Immigration Rules are not met in this case, and though there are
circumstances that favour the appellants, equally there are circumstances
relating to the public interest which go the other way.  The appellants
have a home in Bangladesh where they lived with the sponsor for a number of
years, and I attach weight to the guidance set out in the Rules as to the
circumstances in which third party support may be made.  That is not a
complete answer, as is clear from Hesham Ali, but bearing in mind the
public interest in this case in maintaining a fair and clear immigration
system  and balancing that against those factors that favour the
appellants, I consider that the proportionality balance falls against the
appellants.  As a consequence, these appeals are dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 26 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
