


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09173/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 October 2017                        |On 20 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                              md muhibur rahman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Hussain, Counsel instructed by Hafiz & Haque
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal brought with the permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Bruce against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal against refusal of leave.

2. There is really only one point of any significance;  the  appellant  says
that he did not go to the  hearing  because  he  did  not  know  about  the
hearing.  If he did not know about the hearing then, in my judgment,  there
was procedural unfairness and the proper remedy is for the case to be heard
again.  Of course, I have no way of knowing beyond all  doubt,  whether  or
not he knew of the  hearing  but  certain  things  are  quite  clear.   The
Tribunal's records show that notice of hearing  was  sent  to  the  correct
address in November 2016.  Something was sent out because the Secretary  of
State knew about the hearing which indicates strongly  that  the  documents
were served as the records show.  That of course does not prove  that  they
arrived.  There was no legal  representative  so  there  was  only  service
directly on the appellant.  He then had an address in H--- Road in  London.
That is the address to which the Tribunal sent the notice of hearing.   Not
very long after that, the appellant notified the Tribunal of  a  change  of
address and he continues to live at this address in W--- Lane  so  this  is
not a case of somebody disappearing from the system, rather it is a case of
somebody drawing to the attention of the Tribunal their whereabouts.

3. Further, without in any way wishing to encourage him  to  think  that  he
has a guaranteed success because he does not, the appellant's case  is  not
hopeless and Mr Kotas for the Secretary of State today recognised,  without
in any way committing anybody to anything, that this is a man who does have
something to say on private and family life grounds if on no other grounds.



4. The point of this is that this is not a man who has an obvious  incentive
to hide.

5. The appellant told me in evidence today that he has spent a lot of  money
on this appeal and he wanted his money's worth. He did not  want  to  waste
it.  I accept that evidence.  I think it is probable that for  some  reason
the notice that was sent by the Tribunal did not  come  to  his  attention.
The most likely explanation is that it was one of  the  surprisingly  large
number of letters sent out by this Tribunal that appear  to  get  lost.   I
have to accept his evidence because there is no good reason not  to  accept
it.  I am therefore satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  acted  in  the
mistaken belief that the appellant had notice and I  therefore  find  there
was procedural irregularity.

6. I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  as  this
appellant has not had a hearing at all and that  is  not  in  any  way  his
fault, I direct the case be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.  Notice
of the new hearing no doubt will be sent out by the First-tier Tribunal  in
due course but that is a matter for that Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

To the extent indicated above, this appeal is allowed.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 17 November 2017              |
|Judge                                |                                     |









