
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: HU/09588/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                  |
|On 2 December 2020                           |On 21 December 2020          |
|                                             |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mr Jean [K]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)
                              Given ex tempore

The Secretary of State for the Home Department ('the SSHD') has appealed
against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FtT') promulgated on 17
June 2020, in which it allowed the respondent's appeal on human rights
grounds (Article 8 of the ECHR).  I shall refer to the respondent during
the course of this decision as K.

The FtT did not make an anonymity direction and one has not been sought
before me.  There has been no application for international protection and
although K has four children, all born in the United Kingdom ('UK') between
2008 and 2019, I make little reference to them.

Background

K is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo ('the DRC').  He married
his wife, also a citizen of the DRC, in 2007, when they were both living in
the DRC.  I have been told that she was granted refugee status in 2010 in
the UK, at a time when K worked as a lawyer in the International Criminal
Court ('ICC') in The Hague.  He took a position as a case manager in the
defence team of Jean-Pierre Bemba.   K's wife and children resided in the
UK whilst he worked in The Hague.

K was charged in November 2013 with offences relating to the Rome Statute,
detained and bailed.  In December 2014 he entered the UK, having been
granted entry clearance to join his family members here, whilst dealing
with the charges against him under the Rome Statute.  The skeleton argument
submitted on behalf of K before the FtT states that the reason given for
granting K entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules ('the Rules') was
as follows: "separation from your family for an indeterminate period is on
the balance of probabilities unjustified."

The SSHD's summary of K's immigration history is set out in the covering
page to the SSHD's bundle before the FtT.  Just pausing there, it is
regrettable that during the course of these proceedings there has been no
comprehensive chronology prepared by either party.  I have done my best to
piece one together from the various documents before me.  I note that there
must have been some delay in the international criminal proceedings because
there was no final conviction until 17 September 2018.  Between 2014 and
2018 K made a number of applications to remain outside of the Rules, which
were all granted.  He therefore benefitted from rolling six-month periods
of leave up until his leave was curtailed in a decision dated 30 November
2018.  In that decision the SSHD noted that K had been granted leave
outside of the Rules since December 2014 and more recently on 30 July 2018,
but that he was found guilty on 17 September 2018 of nine counts of giving
false testimony when under obligation to tell the truth and 12 counts of
corruptly influencing a witness, obstructing or interfering with the
attendance or testimony of a witness, retaliating against a witness for
giving testimony or destroying, tampering with or interfering with the
collection of evidence.  He was, however, found not guilty of presenting
evidence that the party knows to be false or forged.  He was sentenced to
eleven months of imprisonment but that was deemed to have been served
whilst he was in pre-trial detention.  The SSHD therefore considered that
the requirements of the concession which K had hitherto benefitted from
ceased to apply upon his conviction and said this:

"In the particular circumstances of your case it has been concluded that
the need to maintain the integrity of the immigration laws outweighs the
possible effect on you that might result from you having to re-establish
family life outside the UK.  It is noted that prior to your grant of
limited leave outside of the Rules you lived for a substantial period of
time away from your family whilst working at The Hague in the Netherlands.
It is considered that you have previously voluntarily chosen to live and
work away from your family and therefore given the severity of the offences
for which you have been found guilty at the ICC it remains that the need to
maintain the integrity of the immigration laws outweighs the prospect of
you re-establishing family life outside of the UK."

That meant that K's leave was curtailed with immediate effect on 30
November 2018.  However, he had an outstanding application to remain on the
basis of family reunion.  Different dates are given for this application in
the papers but it appears that it was dated 30 November 2017 and received
by the SSHD on 11 December 2017.  I shall refer to this as the 2017
application.  The 2017 application was refused in a decision dated 3 May
2019.  In that decision the SSHD made it clear that K's application for
family reunion in the UK was refused and gave three reasons in bullet
points.  The first bullet point states that K had ceased to meet the legal
requirements of the concession, bearing in mind his conviction at the ICC.
The second bullet point refers to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
and Immigration Act 2009 concerning the best interests of the children and
repeats the point that was made in the notice of curtailment that K had
previously voluntarily chosen to live and work away from his family and
could do so again.  The third bullet point says this:

"Your background, behaviour, character, conduct or associations shows you
should not be granted entry clearance or leave to enter or remain in the UK
for one or more of the grounds set out in paragraphs 320 and 322 of the
Immigration Rules."

Procedural History

K appealed the decision dated 3 May 2019 refusing his application for
limited leave to remain as the partner of a person granted refugee status
pursuant to Rule 352A, to the FtT.  This appeal has a lengthy and rather
unhappy procedural history, as summarised within the FtT's decision at [3]
to [8].  It is relevant to note that there were at least two Case
Management Review ('CMR') hearings before the FtT and it also a 'for
mention' hearing before those CMRs.  At the for mention hearing on 12
August 2019 the SSHD's representative indicated that although the SSHD's
bundle had been issued on 9 August 2019, she remained without it and
decisions needed to be made as to whether the matter would be remaining
with the Presenting Officers' Unit or Treasury Counsel might be instructed.


At a CMR on 9 September 2019 the Presenting Officer representing the SSHD
indicated that the decision under appeal dated 3 May 2019 was brief and in
his view deficient but he had no authority to withdraw it.  He indicated
that there was a need to give a rational decision which properly
particularised the SSHD's position as to K's position vis-ï¿½-vis his wife
and children, the children's best interests and Article 8.  He therefore
requested an adjournment of the listed hearing date.  K's representative,
Mr Cole, did not object to this and directions were given accordingly.  The
FtT noted at [6] of its decision that the SSHD "would within three weeks
consider supplementing or withdrawing their decision [dated] 3 May 2019".

On 25 October 2019 a second CMR was held.  Again Mr Cole appeared on behalf
of K and another Presenting Officer, Mr Spence appeared on behalf of the
SSHD.  The SSHD's representative relied upon a further letter dated 25
September 2019 which says this:

"Further to the direction issued on 10 September I write on behalf of the
Secretary of State to confirm that the decision dated 3 May 2019 is
maintained, supplemented by the additional information annexed to this
letter.  To further clarify, paragraph 322(1C)(iii) of the Immigration
Rules is relied upon.  The Secretary of State has today been notified of
the birth to the appellant's wife on [xxx] of a child who may be entitled
to British citizenship.  The birth of this child does not outweigh the
substantial reasons for refusal as set out in the letter of 3 May 2019 and
the additional information annexed to this letter.  This matter will be
fully argued at the substantive hearing."

On behalf of the appellant Mr Cole indicated that he was in a position to
serve the relevant evidence and a skeleton argument in response to this
further letter from the SSHD and directions were made to that effect.  At
this CMR, Mr Cole queried whether Treasury Solicitors would be instructed
as this was raised as a possibility at the 'for mention' hearing, but Mr
Spence, the presenting officer who appeared on behalf of the SSHD,
confirmed that the Presenting Officers' Unit in Leeds would be dealing with
the matter.  Directions were made for the parties to comply with.

On the Friday before the hearing (6 March 2000), Mr Spence applied (by way
of email) for an adjournment of the hearing which had been listed for
Monday 9 March 2020.  That referred to Mr Cole having submitted a skeleton
late in breach of directions and the SSHD needing further time to fully
consider the position and arguments in response and that had not been
possible within the short timeframe.    That email is stamped as having
been received by the Tribunal on 9 March, which was the date of the
hearing.  It therefore went before the FtT Judge who heard the appeal.  The
judge referred to the application for an adjournment at [12] of the
decision - this makes it clear that Mr Spence no longer sought an
adjournment and said that work had been done in London over the weekend and
they were ready to proceed, save that the FtT was invited to mark the file
as the SSHD having withdrawn her decision.

FtT Hearing and Decision

The FtT recorded Mr Spence's application to mark the file as the SSHD
having withdrawn the decision under appeal in the following terms at [14]:

             "Mr Spence requested that the matter should be marked
             withdrawn as the Secretary of State would like to revisit the
             file and give further consideration to her decision,
             particularly as regards the children where case law may have
             further developed of late.  It is not the Secretary of State's
             position that she is asking for the matter to be marked
             withdrawn because this is with a view to the grant of limited
             or discretionary leave to remain.  It is simply so the
             Secretary of State can revisit this matter once more."

The FtT then recorded Mr Cole's objections to that application at [16] to
[21], which I will turn to later on in this decision.  Suffice it to say
for now, the FtT did not consent to treating the decision as withdrawn.
After a decision was made on this, Mr Spence resurrected the application
for an adjournment which had been made on the papers.  That was objected to
by Mr Cole and refused by the FtT.  The FtT referred to the earlier
indication at the beginning of the hearing that the SSHD was ready to
proceed - see [32] to [36] of the FtT's decision.  The decision to refuse
the adjournment has not been the subject of an appeal and I need say no
more about it.

The FtT then summarised the evidence, noting that the SSHD's representative
did not cross-examine K or his wife and made no submissions.  The FtT then
set out its findings of fact by reference to two particular parts of the
relevant legal framework.  The FtT first accepted that K met all the
relevant requirements of Rule 352A, i.e. as a person seeking leave to
remain in the UK as a partner of a person granted refugee status.  The only
matter that had been raised on behalf of the SSHD to dispute this related
to paragraph 322(1C)(iii) of the Rules, as relied upon in her letter dated
25 September 2019.  I need not say much more about this because it has been
accepted on behalf of the SSHD that 322(1C)(iii) only applies to persons
seeking indefinite leave to enter or remain ('ILR') and K was seeking
limited leave to remain.  It follows that the only reason relied upon by
the SSHD in support of the position that K did not meet the requirements of
the Rule 352A fell away.  It followed that the FtT found that K met the
requirements of Rule 352A and that was prima facie sufficient to allow his
appeal on human rights grounds - see TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD
[2018] EWCA Civ 1109.

The FtT nevertheless went on to consider the appeal by reference to section
117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')
and found that on the undisputed factual matrix, both provisions within sub-
section (6) applied to this case i.e. K had a genuine and subsisting
parental relationship with his minor "qualifying" children and it would not
be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK.  The appeal was therefore
allowed on Article 8, ECHR grounds.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

The SSHD submitted an application seeking permission to appeal to the UT in
grounds dated 17 August 2020.  Those grounds were lodged 47 days late but
it was submitted that there was a significant public interest in this case
because K had been convicted in the ICC and the UK should not be a safe
haven for such individuals.  The grounds relied upon were three-fold.  The
first ground challenged the FtT's approach to the withdrawal of the
decision under appeal.  The grounds submitted that the FtT failed to direct
itself and apply ZEI & Ors (Decision withdrawn - FtT Rule 17 -
considerations: Palestine) [2017] UKUT 292 (IAC) ('ZEI').  Ground 1
submitted that had the Tribunal considered the position lawfully and in
accordance with ZEI, its analysis of whether there was good reason for the
appeal not to be treated as withdrawn would have been different.

The second ground of appeal related to the FtT's approach to Rule 352A.
Two points are made.  It was first contended that Rule 352A did not apply
because of the wife being a British citizen.  That has been abandoned as
this was based upon a mistaken belief that the wife was a British citizen
when she has been a refugee at all material times.  The second point was
that the FtT should have considered Article 1F even though that was not
explicitly raised within the decision under appeal or the further September
2019 letter or by the SSHD when arguing the matter before the FtT.  The
third ground of appeal submitted that the FtT was wrong to find that
section 117B(6) benefitted K, without considering the remainder of the
factors set out in Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

FtT Judge Parkes granted permission to appeal and extended time.  He
observed:

"Although the judge referred to Rule 17(2) it is arguable that he
approached the obligation to treat the decision as withdrawn from the wrong
angle and erred in having regard to the appellant's wife's citizenship and
the appellant's own conviction at the ICC."

K submitted a reply in response to the grounds of appeal that was drafted
by Mr Bazini, who has appeared on behalf of K before me.  I shall turn to
the contents of that reply in more detail in due course.

At the hearing before me Mr Malik relied upon a comprehensive skeleton
argument in which he submitted that the FtT erred in law in its approach to
the withdrawal issue and this was a material error of law.  Mr Malik no
longer placed any reliance upon the matters contained in the remainder of
the pleaded grounds of appeal.  He was correct to do so.  K's wife has
never been a British citizen.  As to the Article 1F point, it is very
difficult to see how the FtT could be said to have erred in law when
Article 1F was not raised in any shape or form within the decision under
appeal, that is to say the decision dated 3 May 2019, and then when the
SSHD was given the opportunity to clarify her case and produce an
additional letter of 25 September 2019 or at the hearing.  As to section
117B(6), Mr Malik accepted that the factual matrix that underpinned this
conclusion was not in dispute and was entirely open to the FtT.

It follows that I need only address ground 1 - the FtT's approach to the
withdrawal of the SSHD's decision.

Legal Framework

Procedure Rules

Rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and
Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 ('the 2014 Rules') provides as follows at sub-
section (2):

"The Tribunal must (save for good reason) treat an appeal as withdrawn if
the respondent notifies the Tribunal and each other party that the decision
(or, where the appeal relates to more than one decision, all of the
decisions) to which the appeal relates has been withdrawn and specifies the
reasons for the withdrawal of the decision."

Rule 17(2) has been considered by a panel of the UT consisting of the Vice
President in ZEI and the headnote of the decision summarises its contents
as follows:
"Rule 17 clearly envisages that in general the appeal is to be treated as
withdrawn.  It will continue only if a good reason is identified for
allowing it to proceed despite being an appeal against a decision that will
not have effect in any event.  The appellant needs the opportunity to
advance a case why he considers an appeal should not be treated as
withdrawn and the SSHD needs the opportunity to respond.  The Tribunal has
no power to require the Secretary of State to give or even to have a good
reason for her decision.  The list below cannot and should not be regarded
as a comprehensive account of all reasons that might be urged on judges but
we trust that as well as giving guidance on the arguments discussed the
reasoning may be adapted to other cases.

(i)  The following are not likely to be considered good reasons:
The parties wish the appeal to proceed.
The applicant is legally aided and if he has to appeal against a new
decision, he will not (or will probably not) be legally aided because the
legal aid regime has changed.
The withdrawal is for reasons the judge considers inappropriate is very
unlikely to be a good reason to proceed.  An example is that of a
Presenting Officer who seeks adjournment of a hearing and when that is
refused, withdraws the decision.
The witnesses are ready to be heard and can only with difficulty or expense
be gathered again.


(ii) The following are likely to be capable of being a good reason.
                   0. The appeal regime has changed since the first
                      decision, so that if a new decision is made in the
                      same sense, the rights of appeal will be reduced.
                   0. Undue delay by the respondent.
                   0. The appeal turns on a pure point of law that the
                      judge thinks that even after argument is certainly or
                      almost certainly to be decided in the appellant's
                      favour.
                   0. If there has already been a considerable delay in a
                      decision the appellant is entitled to expect, the
                      fact that children are affected."

Part 5A of the 2002 Act

The introduction of Part 5A into the 2002 Act imposes a statutory duty upon
a court or tribunal to pay regard to the considerations listed in section
117B.  They include in summary, the public interest in "the maintenance of
effective immigration controls" (subsection (1)); the public interest in
those seeking to enter being able to speak English (subsection (2)), and be
financially independent (subsection (3)); the little weight to be accorded
to private life or relationships established when a person was in the
country unlawfully (subsection (4)), or when immigration status was
precarious (subsection (5)); and sub-section (6), which states:

             "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

                  (a)       the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)       it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                  to leave the United Kingdom."

    24.  In cases concerning the deportation of 'foreign criminals', a
         heightened burden is placed upon those seeking to avoid removal in
         the form of additional considerations set out in section 117C of
         the 2002 Act. The effect of the additional criteria in section 117C
         is to add additional weight to the public interest question and
         thereby to reduce the relative weight that is to be attached to any
         private or family life that the appellant has acquired.  A foreign
         criminal is defined at section 117D(2).  The SSHD has at all
         material times accepted that K was not a 'foreign criminal' and not
         'liable to deportation' for the purposes of the 2002 Act, and in
         the premises, reliance upon section 117B(6) was open to him.

Discussion

During the course of the hearing before me I indicated a provisional view
to Mr Bazini that the FtT had made a clear misdirection in law in its
application of Rule 17 and in failing to follow the guidance in ZEI.  It
seemed to me, as I said to Mr Bazini, that the appeal rather turned on the
materiality of that error of law.  Mr Bazini maintained that when the FtT's
decision was read as a whole there was no error of law.  I deal firstly
with whether or not the FtT erred in law before turning to materiality.

I accept Mr Malik's submission that the FtT's reasoning for declining to
treat the decision under appeal as withdrawn contains an error of law.
That is very clear from a straightforward reading of [27], in which the FtT
said this:

"The reasons given at the hearing (not in writing) by the respondent, I
found, were not 'for good reason'.  I prefer the reasons and arguments as
put forward by Mr Cole, as to the chronology, attendance of parties ready
to proceed and lack of good reason sitting behind the respondent's
application today."

I agree with Mr Malik that the error of law in that reasoning is obvious -
the FtT proceeded on the basis that the issue before it was whether the
reasons for withdrawal provided by the SSHD constituted a good reason, when
Rule 17 does not require the SSHD to establish that the withdrawal is for
good reason.  Rather, as the panel pointed out in ZEI at [15], the Tribunal
had no power to require the SSHD to give (or even to have) a good reason
for her decision.  As the panel stated at [17] of ZEI:

"Thus, the task before the FtT is not to consider whether there is a "valid
reason" for withdrawal but instead whether is a "good reason" why the
mandatory effect of Rule 17(2) should not apply when application has been
made by the appellant for the appeal not to be treated as withdrawn."

         In my judgment the FtT misdirected itself in law by inverting the
         proper approach to Rule 17 and therefore erred in law.  Mr Bazini
         invited me to find that the decision read as a whole did not
         disclose an error of law because what the FtT was in fact doing was
         accepting the good reasons for continuing as offered by Mr Cole.
         The difficulty with that submission is that it was not altogether
         clear that Mr Cole was offering any specific good reason for
         proceeding as opposed to objecting to the approach adopted by the
         SSHD.  Mr Cole provided reasons why the SSHD's approach was the
         wrong one.  When the decision is read as a whole I do not consider
         it to be tolerably clear that the FtT properly directed itself to
         the burden resting upon K to establish a good reason for the appeal
         not to be treated as withdrawn as opposed to the SSHD establishing
         a good reason to withdraw.

I now turn to materiality which, as I indicated to the representatives
during the course of the hearing, was the matter that troubled me the most.
 I heard detailed submissions from both representatives on the point.  Mr
Malik invited me to find that the matters that were put forward on the part
of Mr Cole could not be said to be good reasons when ZEI was properly
considered.  He went through each of the reasons at [16] to [21] of the
FtT's decision to make his point.

Mr Bazini invited me to find that even if ZEI was applied the FtT would
have reached the same conclusion.  In other words, there was no material
error of law because the conclusion to proceed with the hearing and not
accept the appeal as withdrawn was an inevitable one, on the FtT's
findings.  Mr Bazini submitted that the particular (undisputed) facts
disclosed three 'good reasons' not to treat the appeal as withdrawn: delay;
the impact on the children and; the fact that this appeal involved a 'slam
dunk' for K, in other words, it was inevitably to be allowed and was
equivalent to there being a 'pure point of law'.  As set out above, the
panel in ZEI considered each of these factors as "likely to be capable of
being a good reason".  I acknowledge that does not mean that a Tribunal
must inevitably find a good reason where any of these exist.  I shall deal
with what was inevitable in this case later on but I first turn to each of
the factors, and what was said about them in ZEI.

As to delay, the panel said this at [19(d)] of ZEI:

"There has already been undue delay by the respondent.  This may be a good
reason or it may not.  It is capable of being a good reason in cases where
the appellant has, by proper process, sought a decision on an application.
The most obvious example is a paid-for application duly made.  If there has
been a long delay, which will be lengthened further by awaiting a new
decision, that may be a good reason to proceed with an appeal against the
withdrawn decision.  But this argument cannot be a good reason if the
decision is one the timing of which is wholly for the respondent.  The most
obvious example is a removal or deportation decision, whether or not
combined (as it would now have to be in order to carry a right of appeal)
with a human rights or protection decision."

Mr Malik submitted that there had not been undue delay on the part of the
SSHD.  He invited me to consider both the length of delay since the 2017
application as well as the nature of the case itself.  As Mr Malik
indicated, the final conviction was not recorded until 17 September 2018
and that would explain why there was a delay from the 2017 application -
the outcome of the criminal proceedings was a matter that the SSHD was
entitled to await before determining the family reunion application.  Mr
Bazini asked me to note that the conviction had actually accrued in 2016
and therefore the SSHD was well aware of the court processes for a much
longer period even though the conviction was not finalised as a result of
the appeals process until September 2018.  I note in that respect that the
skeleton argument before the FtT relied upon by K set out that he was
finally convicted on 17 September 2018.  No reference was made to any
previous conviction in 2016.  In any event, whether K was convicted in 2016
or he was convicted in 2018 after a final appeal process, it does not seem
to me to matter much, because there remained an explanation for the delay
up until September 2018.

Then one comes to the decision of May 2019, which was about just under
three quarter of a year after the 2018 conviction.  Within a few months the
matter was listed for mention and the FtT clearly case-managed the matter
with a degree of vigour - the FtT reviewed the matter in August 2019,
September 2019 and October 2019.  At each of these stages the SSHD had an
opportunity to clarify, amend or withdraw her decision against K.  After
the CMR in September 2019, the SSHD gave express consideration to
withdrawal and amendment.  The decision dated 25 September 2019 contains a
clear and unambiguous confirmation of reliance upon the initial decision
with supplementary reasoning added.  The matter then came before the FtT
for a full hearing on 9 March 2020.

When considering the issue of delay one must bear in mind that by the time
of the hearing the SSHD had been given numerous opportunities to review the
case and update her position, yet on the day of the hearing it was being
contended that this process needed to continue.  Mr Malik invited me to
find that this was a complex matter involving a conviction at the ICC and
that what probably happened here was that there was an insufficient grasp
of the complexity of the case at an early stage.  That might well be right
but what it does not do is explain the nature and extent of the delay in
the SSHD clarifying her case when there were so many opportunities to do
so.  The presenting officer's unit was clearly alive to the possibility of
seeking assistance from the Government Legal Service (who used to be known
as 'Treasury Solicitors').  The complexities of the case were well known
for a lengthy period: the appellant was given entry clearance and then
rolling periods of leave pending the ICC proceedings.  This was not the
type of situation where for the first time a party identified the
complexity of the case or a change of circumstances at the FtT final
hearing.  Here, the SSHD was given many opportunities to clarify her case
over a relatively lengthy period.

I also note that this was not a removal case.  This was an application that
was made by K and the timing therefore cannot be said to be akin to a
removal or deportation case.  Although there may not have been a good
explanation for the delay in clarifying the case or finalising the position
up until the date of conviction and for a reasonable period beyond that,
i.e. up to the decision of May 2019, the SSHD clearly acted with undue
delay after that point in failing to clarify which aspect of the Rules she
relied upon in order to refuse the application that had been made.
Although the overall delay itself cannot be said to be very lengthy, the
delay in clarifying the SSHD's position given the particular procedural
history was significant.  That was the overall effect of Mr Cole's
submissions, and was accepted by the FtT.  At [27] the FtT accepted the
chronology outlined by Mr Cole.  That chronology inevitably involved the
delay in clarifying the SSHD's position I have summarised above.  Although
the FtT did not specifically state in the terms suggested in ZEI that there
had been 'undue delay', I am satisfied that that is in fact what the FtT
accepted.

That delay needs to be viewed together with the fact that there are four
children in this case, who were each born in the UK and spent the entirety
of their lives in lawfully residing in the UK.  The panel said this about
children at [19(h)] of ZEI:

"Children are affected by the decision, the appeal, the withdrawal and the
wait for a new decision.  This is a special case of (d) above.  If there
has already been a considerable delay in a decision the appellant is
entitled to expect, the fact that children are affected may make a good
reason better.  But if the decision is one that the appellant has no right
to timetable, particularly if the appellant is already in breach if
immigration law, the effect on children is unlikely to make very much
difference, it being remembered that the context is still that the
withdrawn decision will not itself have any effect at all."

I note that K's wife drew attention to the adverse impact of delay upon the
children in her witness statement.  The good reason of undue delay in the
clarification of the SSHD's case was made better because four children were
affected by it.  In addition, K remained at all material times lawfully in
the UK: he was granted entry clearance, rolling periods of leave and
although his leave was curtailed, he continued to have the benefit of an in-
time application to remain pursuant to Rule 352A.

I now turn to Mr Bazini's third and in my view most significant and
attractive point.  Had the FtT directed itself to the proper test as
explained in ZEI, it would have inevitably concluded that there was a clear
and straightforward good reason why the matter should not be treated as
withdrawn - K's appeal had to be allowed on Article 8 grounds because the
undisputed factual matrix before the FTT pointed in one direction: (i) he
met the requirements of Rule 352A and in any event, (ii) he met the
requirements of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Mr Malik accepted that
the facts were not in dispute in relation to those two matters.  It is
helpful to illustrate this by reference to the proper approach to section
117B(6).  Section 117C does not apply here because it is undisputed that K
is not a 'foreign criminal', as defined at section 117D.  In addition, K's
criminal conduct played no role here, as it was not contended that he was a
person 'liable to deportation'.  Although Mr Malik's skeleton argument
before me indicated that the SSHD "is minded to make a decision to deport"
K on the basis that "his criminal conduct proven at the ICC is conducive to
the public good", that was not the position before the FtT.  Instead, in
the full knowledge of K's 2018 convictions, the SSHD opted to treat him as
a person not liable to deportation from the date of the initial May 2019
decision refusing the 2017 application and again after being given the
opportunity to clarify her case in September 2019.  It followed that for
the entirety of the FtT proceedings, section 117B(6) applied and on the
undisputed factual matrix K met its requirements.  The SSHD has not
maintained reliance upon the challenge in the written grounds of appeal
that the FtT erred in not applying the remainder of Part 5A of the 2002
Act, having found that the requirements of section 117B were met.  That
submission is plainly erroneous in law because section 117B was to be
treated as a 'self-contained' provision - see KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]
UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR 5273 at [17] as applied in Younas (section 117B (6)
(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC) at [108] to [110].

In these circumstances, I invited Mr Malik to accept that the appeal before
the FtT was bound to succeed on the undisputed facts and that this was a
situation akin to the 'pure point of law' referred to at [19(e)] of ZEI,
when the panel said this:

             "...It seems to us that the appellant's expectation of success
             may be a good reason if, but only if, the appeal turns on a
             pure point of law that the judge thinks that even after
             argument is certainly or almost certainly to be decided in the
             appellant's favour."

The appeal before the FtT did not turn on a 'pure point of law'.  The
applicable law was not in dispute and remains undisputed.  The application
of the undisputed facts to that framework was also undisputed.  However as
the panel noted in ZEI, the list of categories should not be regarded as a
comprehensive account and this was a case that was certainly to be decided
in K's favour under the Rules and pursuant to section 117B(6).  That in my
view gave rise to a 'slam dunk' good reason, as submitted by Mr Bazini,
irrespective of the delay point.  Mr Malik asked me to note that the panel
in ZEI could not have been considering a factual matrix such as this which
involved a person who has been convicted at the ICC to a not insignificant
sentence of eleven months.  That misses the point that notwithstanding his
criminal offending, K met the Rules and section 117B(6).

At the FtT hearing, Mr Spence on behalf of the SSHD opted not to cross-
examine K and his wife and not to make any submissions.  That approach
seems to be contrary to the SSHD's own policy on what Presenting Officers
should do in circumstances where an appeal is not treated as withdrawn -
see [12] of ZEI, which refers to the relevant Home Office policy document,
Withdrawing decisions and conceding appeals (Home Office, 4 June 2015),
that states that "where an appeal is not treated as withdrawn, a HOPO
should participate in the appeal as normal".  That may well have been
updated but that was the SSHD's position as it was before ZEI.

Drawing all these matters together, although I accept the FtT clearly erred
in law at [27] of its decision and clearly failed to apply the guidance in
ZEI that error of law is not material because given the way in which the
SSHD chose to run her case and given the three factors taken together, that
is delay, delay involving children and this being a matter with no factual
disputes that was bound to succeed, had the FtT applied the guidance in ZEI
it was inevitable that it would have reached the decision that there was
indeed a good reason not to accept the withdrawal.  That good reason may
not have been as clearly articulated by Mr Cole in the submissions as
recorded by the FtT, but when the decision is read as a whole and when the
undisputed evidence available to the FtT is considered holistically, I am
of the clear view that on a proper application of ZEI, the FtT would have
only reached one decision - there were good reasons to allow the appeal to
proceed.  Although generally speaking, when requested by the SSHD, an
appeal is to be treated as withdrawn, in the circumstances of this case the
FTT's findings were such that, it would have inevitably identified good
reasons for the matter to proceed.

Decision

It follows that the SSHD has not made out ground 1, the only ground that
she has sought to maintain, and her appeal against the FtT's decision is
dismissed.


Signed: Ms M Plimmer                             Dated: 14 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

