
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/09577/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th October 2020                  |On 6th November 2020                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Mr Humayun Shahzad
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik, Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M B
Hussain promulgated on 13th February 2020.  In the determination Judge
Hussain dismissed the appellant's human rights claim.

    The grounds of appeal.

The grounds of appeal maintained that the judge had erred in finding that
the appellant had not suffered historic injustice such that he should have
been restored to the position he would have had.  There had been an
improper approach to a previous First-tier Tribunal determination that of
First-tier Tribunal Judge James in 2017.

The grounds of appeal asserted that historic injustice against an
immigration applicant is an admissible consideration in any subsequent
Article 8 proportionality exercise where, but for the injustice, the
appellant would be entitled to leave to remain, Ahsan and Others v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, which
stated:

"If on a human rights appeal an appellant were found not to have cheated,
... the Secretary of State would be obliged to deal with him or her
thereafter so far as possible as if that error had not been made, i.e. as
if their leave to remain had not been invalidated."

The history of the appeal was that on 4th February 2009 the respondent
refused his application of 28th October 2008 for leave to remain as a Tier
1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  The reasons for refusal were that the
appellant had submitted a post-graduate qualification certificate in
business management from the Cambridge College of Learning but that college
had never in fact offered such a course and the appellant fell to be
refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  At that time
paragraph 322(1A) provided that leave to remain must be refused where:

"False representations have been made or false documents or information
have been submitted (whether or not material to the application, and
whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material facts have not
been disclosed, in relation to the application."

The applicant was accorded 0 points and the application was refused.

On 27th March 2009 the appellant made a further application, and this was
refused on 29th July 2009.  No right of appeal was apparently granted, but
on 5th August 2009 the appellant nonetheless appealed to the First-tier
Tribunal and on 10th November 2009 Immigration Judge Ross dismissed the
appellant's appeal.  Judge Ross found the appellant had continued in the
27th March 2009 application to represent that he had a diploma from
Cambridge College of Learning and therefore fell to be refused.  Judge Ross
further determined that in relation to the (said to have been withdrawn)
28th October 2008 application the appellant fell to be refused under
paragraph 322(2), which at the material time provided that leave to remain
should normally be refused where: "The applicant had made false
representations or ... [failed] to disclose any material fact for the
purpose of obtaining leave to enter or a previous variation of leave ... in
support of the application for leave to enter or a previous variation of
leave."

On 10th March 2010 the appellant became "appeal rights exhausted" in
relation to the proceedings before Judge Ross.



On 8th February 2011 the appellant made a fresh application for leave to
remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  The respondent refused that
application on 14th April 2011.  The appellant was awarded all points but
was refused under paragraph 322(2) based on the previous applications
refused on 2nd February 2009 and the fact that the appellant "used
deception in this application".

On 3rd December 2015 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain
based on ten years' continuous lawful residence.  That application was
refused on 11th July 2016 with a right of appeal.  The appellant was again
refused, this time under paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(2).  On 13th December
2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge James dismissed the appellant's appeal.
However, at paragraph 22 of her determination she found, based on First-
tier Tribunal Judge Mailer's determination in Saira Younas v Secretary of
State for the Home Department IA/00325/2011, (where it had been found that
the appellant in that case had unknowingly submitted documents from
Cambridge College of Learning and had in effect been the victim of fraud),
that the appellant did not "knowingly deceive when he submitted his CCoL
certificate in support of his application".  The appellant was subsequently
refused permission to appeal against the result of Judge James's
determination, however, the judge's finding on the deception point was, it
was submitted, effectively preserved.

Against this backdrop First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain at [32] to [33] of
the instant determination under challenge found that the principle of
historic injustice was not engaged because:

"The finding made by Judge James was that she was not satisfied that the
appellant had personal knowledge of the falsity of the Cambridge College of
Learning documents not that the documents were not false.  By contrast,
paragraph 322(1A) catches those who submit false documents without actual
knowledge".

Judge Hussain's reasoning was apparently that notwithstanding the First-
tier Tribunal Judge's finding in 2017 the appellant still fell to be
refused in 2009 for submitting a false document under paragraph 322(1A).

It was submitted that Judge Hussain's reasoning omitted consideration of
the fact that in the 14th April 2011 refusal, the appellant was awarded all
points but was refused under paragraph 322(2) for historically having made
false representations but not under paragraph 322(1A) for having submitted
a false document.  In order for a document or representation to be "false",
"dishonesty or deception is needed, albeit not necessarily that of the
applicant himself" - see AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 at [76].  In
other words, as stated by Rix LJ in AA, a document can "tell a lie about
itself" but in the case of a representation the deception must emanate from
a person.  The only person who could be said to have made a false
representation in the appellant's 2008 application is the appellant
himself.  The respondent's finding in the 14th April 2011 refusal that the
appellant fell to be refused under paragraph 322(2) was therefore
necessarily an allegation that the appellant had made a false
representation.  This is underscored by the fact the respondent in the same
refusal accused the appellant of having practised deception.  That
allegation was found to be unproved by Judge James in 2017.  Judge Hussain
thus erred in finding that the principle of "historic injustice" was not
engaged as a result of Judge James's finding.

Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, stating
that it was arguable that the judge had erred in failing to take into
account the finding of a previous judge as to the appellant's culpability
in relying on a Cambridge College qualification.  As pointed out at
paragraph 30 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain, the decision of Judge
James related to a refusal under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules,
"which is different from the paragraph relied on [in] the decision of 4th
February 2009".

    Submissions

At the hearing before me Mr Bilal submitted a skeleton argument relying on
Ahsan such that an historic injustice against an immigration applicant is a
powerful consideration in that applicant's favour in any subsequent Article
8 proportionality exercise where, but for the injustice, the appellant
would have been entitled to leave to remain.  This was consistent with
earlier decisions in the Court of Appeal, for example R (Gurung & Ors) v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ.  There were no
gradations of historic injustice and further, the courts should not be
exacting in searching for a causal link between the injustice and loss of
status. The issue rested on whether Judge Hussain erred in finding that the
appellant had not suffered an historic injustice.

In particular, Mr Malik submitted that Judge Hussain's reasoning omitted
consideration of the crucial fact that in the 14th April 2011 refusal the
appellant was awarded all points but was refused under paragraph 322(2) for
historically having made false representations and not under paragraph
322(1A) for having submitted a false document.  In relation to
representations dishonesty needed to be found, AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ
773.  It was the appellant who was said to have made false representations
in the 2008 application and the respondent found in the 14th April 2011
refusal that the appellant was refused under paragraph 322(2).  That
allegation was found to be unproven by First-tier Tribunal Judge James in
2017 and Judge Hussain erred in finding that the principle of historic
injustice was not engaged as a result of Judge James's finding.  But for
the historic injustice the appellant would have been granted leave as a
Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant on 14th April 2011 and the appellant was
entitled to be restored to the position he probably would have been had the
injustice not occurred.  Upper Tribunal Judge Finch made a similar
observation albeit in a different context when she granted the appellant
permission to apply for judicial review and that order culminated in the
respondent issuing the refusal of 16th May 2019 with a right of appeal.
The respondent had previously rejected the underlying application of 10th
April 2018 as a repeat claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

Mr Jarvis submitted that the argument by the appellant was misconceived for
a number of reasons.  At no point did First-tier Tribunal Judge James refer
to the earlier decision of Judge Ross of 10th November 2009.  That decision
of Judge Ross was undisturbed by the appellant's further appeals and he
became appeal rights exhausted on 10th March 2010.  That was the legal
starting point for Judge James as per Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702.
 The 2011 decision did not assist.

In Judge Ross's decision decided a few months after the 2009 refusal, the
judge made strong adverse credibility findings against the appellant and
concluded that he was thoroughly dishonest.  Judge Ross made a finding
against the appellant both under paragraphs 322(1A) and 322(2).  The
decision of Judge James therefore did not dispose lawfully of the issues of
deception and it should be noted that the appeal was dismissed and the
Secretary of State could not have appealed further, see The Secretary of
State for the Home Department v Devani [2020] EWCA Civ 612 at paragraph 27.


The decision of Judge James could not be described as an authoritative
final disposal of the issues as per Devaseelan paragraphs 37 to 39:

"37.  We consider that the proper approach lies between that advocated by
Mr Lewis and that advocated by Miss Giovanetti, but considerably nearer to
the latter.  The first Adjudicator's determination stands (unchallenged, or
not successfully challenged) as an assessment of the claim the Appellant
was then making, at the time of that determination.  It is not binding on
the second Adjudicator; but, on the other hand, the second Adjudicator is
not hearing an appeal against it.  As an assessment of the matters that
were before the first Adjudicator it should simply be regarded as
unquestioned.  It may be built upon, and, as a result, the outcome of the
hearing before the second Adjudicator may be quite different from what
might have been expected from a reading of the first determination only.
But it is not the second Adjudicator's role to consider arguments intended
to undermine the first Adjudicator's determination.

38.   The second Adjudicator must, however, be careful to recognise that
the issue before him is not the issue that was before the first
Adjudicator.  In particular, time has passed; and the situation at the time
of the second Adjudicator's determination may be shown to be different from
that which obtained previously.  Appellants may want to ask the second
Adjudicator to consider arguments on issues that were not - or could not be
- raised before the first Adjudicator; or evidence that was not - or could
not have been - presented to the first Adjudicator.

39.   In our view the second Adjudicator should treat such matters in the
following way.

(1)   The first Adjudicator's determination should always be the starting
point.  It is the authoritative assessment of the Appellant's status at the
time it was made.  In principle issues such as whether the Appellant was
properly represented, or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

(2)   Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination can
always be taken into account by the second Adjudicator.  If those facts
lead the second Adjudicator to the conclusion that, at the date of his
determination and on the material before him, the appellant makes his case,
so be it.  The previous decision, on the material before the first
Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.

(3)   Facts happening before the first Adjudicator's determination but
having no relevance to the issues before him can always be taken into
account by the second Adjudicator.  The first Adjudicator will not have
been concerned with such facts, and his determination is not an assessment
of them."

Mr Jarvis submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain did not
materially err in his conclusion because that was the only conclusion that
could have been reached as a matter of law.  The decision of Judge James
did not include consideration of the decision of Judge Ross, and merely
constituted a repetition of the oral assertion by the appellant that he did
not carry out deception.  Proper application of the binding decision of
Devaseelan, and particularly paragraph 41(6), bearing in mind the lack of
new material could not have caused Judge James to deviate from the findings
of Judge Ross,

"41

           (6)   If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on
                 facts that are not materially different from those put to
                 the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by
                 what is in essence the same evidence as that available to
                 the Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator should
                 regard the issues as settled by the first Adjudicator's
                 determination and make his findings in line with that
                 determination rather than allowing the matter to be
                 relitigated.  ..."

For completeness, within the judgment of Judge James there was no mention
at all of the Tribunal's reported decision in respect of the business
management and information technology diplomas issued by the Cambridge
College of Learning, NA & Others (Cambridge College of Learning).

Judge James made reference to an unreported decision, Younas, which had no
binding effect whatsoever on any other judge in the Tribunal and she did
not engage with the very clear findings of the Tribunal in NA at paragraphs
45, 147 and 149, in particular at paragraph 147:

         "It will be apparent from our above findings that we consider that
         no person claiming to have undertaken a PgDip course in IT or BM at
         CCoL can have done so without knowing that such a claim amounted to
         a false representation",

    and at paragraph 149:

"On the above findings none of the CCOL PgDip in IT or in BM certificates
submitted by the applicants corresponded to such underlying facts.  There
were no courses run and, a fortiori, no successful completion of such
courses.  There was no examining, whether by a board or anyone else.
Accordingly, those submitting them also used false documents."

Again, it was submitted that Judge James's decision in respect of the
appellant's claim to have been duped could not lawfully bind First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hussain or indeed constitute a lawful starting point without
proper regard to the strong findings in this reported and to the FtT
virtually binding decision of the Senior Tribunal.

Judge Hussain was therefore clearly correct when he concluded that Judge
James's decision did not show there was no deliberate deception or an
historical injustice in this case.

In respect of the historic injustice the Secretary of State relied on CI
(Nigeria) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ
2027 at paragraph 99.  Reliance here on 'historic injustice', as in CI
should be restricted.

Further, the Secretary of State contended that the appellant's reliance on
Ahsan was misconceived because there the court dealt with a materially
different scenario, namely the appellants in that appeal argued an out of
country appeal was an ineffective remedy and the Court of Appeal agreed
that such remedy was not an effective one.  The court did not conclude that
there would always be one way for the Secretary of State to remedy the
procedural disadvantage.  The decision in Ahsan should be read in its own
specific context.  It was not an historic injustice case and the general
guidance on resolution of the deception issues in those appeals centred
upon the unlawful impact of the unlawful impact of the sole out of country
appeal available and the issue was procedural unfairness, not the
consequences of an historical erroneous immigration decision.  As is
absolutely clear, this appellant had an in country right of appeal which he
exercised in 2009 and which was met by a dismissal by the decision of Judge
Ross.  There was no legal duty in this kind of case to restore the
appellant to his previous position.

There was therefore no historic injustice in law as a matter of fact and
nothing to add to the Article 8 assessment as alleged by the appellant at
paragraph 15 of the grounds.

At the hearing before me Mr Malik submitted that there were two
procedurally intact decisions of the First-tier Tribunal before me.  I was
referred to the Upper Tribunal decision PAA (FtT: Oral decision - written
reasons) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00013 (IAC) in relation to two conflicting
decisions.

Mr Jarvis submitted that the decision of PAA as a solution did not assist
the Tribunal.  These were circumstances where the same judge gave an oral
decision allowing the appeal and in a written decision dismissing the
appeal.  In those circumstances the Rules were specific.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hussain had no power to resolve the appeal in any way and
PAA had no part to play.  Judge Hussain had to determine whether Judge
James's decision resolved the issue in the appellant's favour, but her
decision was made in ignorance of the further former decision.  In essence,
there could not have been a decision other than the decision made by Judge
Hussain.  Therefore, the underpinning claim of historic injustice was
simply not present.  Judge Hussain was legally obliged to justify a
diversion and chose not to.  Ahsan did not apply.  The appellant had an
appeal in country, and he lost.  There was nothing in any jurisdiction to
return the appellant to any point in a particular time.

In order to obtain leverage from the 2011 decision in relation to paragraph
322(2) it needed to be shown that the Judge Ross' decision was wrong, that
the appellant had not displaced the decision of Judge Ross and Judge
James's decision was not a starting point.  Ahsan was not authority to say
that anyone in such circumstances should be treated as if they were here
lawfully.  Ultimately, Judge Hussain reached the right conclusion.

Mr Malik contended that Devani did not prevent the Secretary of State from
appealing on a point of law.  The ratio of PAA was that both cases were
procedurally intact.

Analysis

First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated his decision on 10th November
2009 following the promulgation of NA & Others (Cambridge College of
Learning) in August 2009.  He recorded at paragraph 1 that the appellant

"stated in his application form on 20th October 2008 for a Tier 1 (Post-
Study Work) Migrant that he had obtained a postgraduate diploma in business
management at the Cambridge College of Learning and that he had studied
there between October 2007 and August 2008.  He produced a copy of the
diploma from the Cambridge College of Learning dated August 2008, and a
letter from the college confirming that he had passed the course, and a
further letter showing his grades."

Judge Ross found that that application was refused on 2nd February 2009 on
the basis that the documents submitted from the Cambridge College of
Learning were false because the college

         "have never offered a legitimate postgraduate qualification in
         business management.  As a consequence, false representations had
         been made under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules".

Judge Ross found in his determination at paragraph 8 that in that
subsequent application (that before Judge Ross) the appellant stated that
he had obtained a postgraduate diploma from the Cambridge College of
Learning (that document being before the Secretary of State).  I shall
return to his findings below.

Judge James considered the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
Secretary of State dated 11th July 2015 to refuse his application for
indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his ten years' residence.  She
refused that appeal, not least because he had not shown that there were
very significant obstacles to his removal to Pakistan but stated this in
2017 in her determination:

"Turning to the suitability requirements I can deal with the issue of
deception briefly.  It is clear that CCoL acted in an entirely improper
fashion by offering qualifications for which it had no authority.  I have
noted the decision in Younas which, as a First-tier decision, is not
binding authority.  The circumstances in that application are not
dissimilar from those in the present appeal.  In that appeal he (sic) FtT
determined that the circumstances were suspicious but nonetheless found
that the Appellant had not used deception.  In this appeal I also find that
the circumstances are suspicious.  The Appellant is a qualified lawyer in
Pakistan.  It could be expected that he would recognise when he was being
duped.  However, looking at the evidence in the round and on the narrowest
of margins I find that he did not knowingly deceive when he submitted his
CCoL certificate in support of his application.  I have noted the decision
in A (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 and LU 30.8.2010 and I am not
satisfied that the Respondent has established that the appellant acted
dishonestly."

This decision was promulgated on 13th December 2017.

In the decision under challenge before me, Judge Hussain considered the
point made by the appellant that he must consider whether the appellant had
been the victim of an historic, injustice and if he had, whether that was
sufficient for allowing his appeal on the basis of paragraph 120 of Ahsan.
Judge Hussain, however, did not accept that the appellant had been a victim
of historic injustice and stated at paragraph 29:

"As noted earlier, the injustice is said to arise from the respondent's
decision of 4th February 2009 which it is said wrongly accused the
appellant of deception and that wrong is proven by the finding of Judge
James in his/her determination of 13th December 2017."

The judge continued:

         "As I will demonstrate below, the finding of Judge James does not
         undermine the Secretary of State's conclusion that the appellant
         was engaged in deception and the subsequent finding of Judge Ross."



The judge proceeded that looking closely at Judge James's decision that the
paragraph relevant to that refusal was paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration
Rules, which was different "from the paragraph relied on in the decision of
4th February 2009".  Judge Hussain cited paragraph 22 of Judge James's
conclusions and proceeded at paragraph 32 as follows:

"32.  The finding then made by Judge James was that he/she was not
satisfied that the appellant had personal knowledge of the falsity of the
Cambridge College of Learning documents not that the documents were not
false.  By contrast, Paragraph 322(1A) catches those who submit false
documents without actual knowledge.  In the brackets, the emphasis is made
very clear 'whether or not to the applicant's knowledge'.

33.   In my view, the findings of Judge James does (sic) not show that the
allegation of deception made against the appellant in the refusal letter of
4 February 2009 is now proven to be wrong.  In any event, there is an
interesting jurisprudential question as to whether a decision of a First
Tier Tribunal made later can overturn a decision of a Tribunal of the same
level made earlier?  It is unnecessary to examine that issue in light of my
findings that Judge James' decision does not prove that in taking the
decision on 4 February 2009 the appellant was the victim of a historical
justice."

Judge Hussain stated that paragraph 322(1A) caught those who submitted
false documents without actual knowledge but that the findings of Judge
James did not show that the allegation of deception made against the
appellant in the refusal letter of 4th February 2009 were now proven to be
wrong.  Judge Hussain addressed the arguments in relation to historical
injustice finding the appellant was not a victim of any injustice but found
on the above reasoning that there had been none.

The point asserted by the appellant's representative was that Judge James'
decision referred to a different paragraph, that being 322(2).

Nonetheless, Judge Ross in the determination promulgated on 10th November
2009 and which postdated NA (Cambridge College of Learning), recorded the
history, noted the applicant had submitted a postgraduate diploma
certificate in business management at the Cambridge College of Learning and
that the application was refused on 2nd February 2009.  The judge recorded
at paragraph 3 that the appellant made a fresh application to study at the
University of East London but this application was "refused for similar
reasons", that being both paragraph 322(1A) and 322(2).  Judge Ross cited
NA (Cambridge College of Learning), reviewed the evidence before him
including the appellant's oral evidence and his statement in which he
stated that he was a genuine student but had attempted to withdraw his
original application and recorded  "he claimed that the Cambridge College
of Learning had provided a course.  However, he decided to withdraw his
application under Tier 1 because he was aware that the Cambridge College of
Learning had been investigated".

The judge noted that in his subsequent application the appellant continued
to represent that he had obtained a postgraduate diploma (which had been
submitted to the Secretary of State) from the Cambridge College of Learning
and at paragraph 12 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross concluded:

"It is clear to me that the appellant has been thoroughly dishonest in
relation to his applications in this case.  He has submitted the first
application on the basis that he had a diploma at the college which was
plainly untrue, since an exhaustive and definitive decision of the Tribunal
has determined that no such diploma has ever been legitimately issued by
the college.  Realising that his application was going to be refused on the
basis that he had submitted a bogus document, he then withdrew his
application before the decision was made.  He then made a fresh application
based on enrolment at the University of East London.  However, the
application, part of which I have been provided with makes it clear that he
was claiming in this application that he had a postgraduate diploma from
the college."

At paragraph 13 Judge Ross stated:

         "It has been submitted to me that although it could be argued that
         the appellant fell foul of paragraph 322(2), this paragraph does
         not apply as the application did not deceive anyone because it was
         withdrawn",

and at paragraph 14:

"Apart from the fact that the submissions made to me are extremely
unattractive in the context of the history of this appeal, I also consider
that they are wrong.  Firstly it is clear to me that in relation to the
second application, which is the subject of this appeal as I understand it,
the appellant has continued to represent that he has a diploma at the
Cambridge College of Learning.  His application therefore is to be refused
under paragraph 322(1A)" [my underlining],

and the judge continued:

         "I also consider that the appellant has made a false representation
         in the past in relation to his initial application."

Judge Ross proceeded to refuse the appeal under paragraph 322(1A) and
paragraph 322(2).  Those findings by Judge Ross were definitive and are the
underpinning for future decisions.  The appellant either did not or was
unsuccessful in any challenge to the decision of Judge Ross, which stands.


First-tier Tribunal Judge James, however, in her decision in 2017 recorded
that the appellant submitted that he had not been complicit in dishonesty.
  She was clearly aware that there had been an appeal dismissed in 2009 as
it is recorded in the appeal documents on the file before her, but she
seemingly made no further investigations and was not provided with the
appeal determination by the appellant. The appellant did, I note, provide
the First-tier Tribunal decision of Younas, which was another First-tier
Tribunal decision exculpating on the particular facts, an appellant who had
studied ABE level 6.  (By contrast, the appellant's marks clearly showed
various courses at level 7 on the transcript although that is not the issue
in play here).  The appellant in 2017 submitted that the Cambridge College
of Learning had perpetrated a fraud on him.

As per Devaseelan the starting point for Judge James's decision should have
been the decision of Judge Ross.  There was no mention of that decision in
her determination and save for the assertions and statements of the
appellant no further evidence.  As can be seen from above from paragraph
41(6) of Devaseelan, if the second Adjudicator relies on facts that are not
materially different from those put to the first Adjudicator the second
Adjudicator should in effect regard the issues as settled by the first
Adjudicator's determination.

Secondly, the decision of Judge James made no reference to NA (Cambridge
College of Learning), which is also cited above.  It was clear that at
paragraph 149 that with reference to the Cambridge College of Learning
PgDip in business management "there were no courses run and, a fortiori, no
successful completion of such courses.  ...  Accordingly, those submitting
them also used false documents."

NA (Cambridge College of Learning), is a binding authority, and there is no
explanation with reasoning as to why the judge  departed from that
authority, merely with an observation that the Cambridge College of
Learning "acted in an entirely improper fashion by offering qualifications
for which it had no authority".

In preference First-tier Tribunal Judge James chose to rely on Younas,
which she noted as a First-tier Tribunal decision was not binding
authority.  The Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber
of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal at Section 11.3 identify
that "it should be emphasised that the Tribunal will not exclude good
arguments from consideration but it will be rare for such an argument to be
capable of being made only by reference to an unreported determination".
The judge merely stated that the circumstances in that appeal "are not
dissimilar from those in the present appeal", although these were not
explored in detail.  As stated, however, she did not reference the decision
of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross, not least because it was not before her.

What Judge James did was to enlist, without more, the oral assertion made
in 2009 that the appellant did not carry out deception.  Without following
the correct approach as set out in Devaseelan to Judge Ross' decision and
without proper analysis and reasoning that decision of Judge James was
flawed on the finding of lack of dishonesty.  A mere reference to 'similar
facts' to Younas cannot suffice in the circumstances.

I find that the circumstances in this instance are far from the
circumstances in PAA (FtT: Oral decision - written reasons) Iraq [2019]
UKUT 00013 (IAC).  The circumstances are wholly different, not least the
decision was the conflict between an oral and written decision by the same
First-tier Tribunal judge and there was no question that Devaseelan
principles were engaged.   The position of Judge Hussain was that he had to
consider both decisions in the light of Devaseelan and he was obliged as
per Devaseelan to commence with the decision of Judge Ross.  Applying
Devaseelan, Judge Hussain could do no more and when the decision of Judge
James is analysed there is no material error in Judge Hussain's decision.
He could not follow her decision for the reasons given above. Judge Hussain
identified that the injustice was said to have arisen for the respondent's
decision of 4th February 2009, which it said wrongly accused the appellant
of deception but he accurately reasoned at paragraph 29 that "as I will
demonstrate below the finding of Judge James does not undermine the
Secretary of State's conclusion that the appellant was engaged in deception
and the subsequent finding of Judge Ross".

Judge Hussain proceeded to cite from Judge James's conclusion and although
he identified that paragraph 322(1A) catches those who submit false
documents without actual knowledge and Judge James had made the decision in
relation to paragraph 322(2), the underpinning decision as he had
identified was that of Judge Ross (made on both paragraphs 322 (1A) and
322(2) and it was entirely open to him for the reasons given above to find
at paragraph 33:

         "The findings of Judge James does not show that the allegation of
         deception made against the appellant in the refusal letter of 4th
         February 2009 is now proven to be wrong."

For the reasons outlined above that must be correct.  Mr Malik submitted
that the refusal decision of the Secretary of State dated 2011 assisted the
appellant. This decision, however, post-dated the underpinning decision of
Judge Ross and cannot be used to assist the appellant in the circumstances
as set out.

I turn to a consideration of Devani [2020] EWCA Civ 612 and whether the
Secretary of State should have appealed Judge James's decision, which in
fact dismissed the appellant's appeal in 2017, in relation to the finding
on dishonesty or lack of it.  Mr Malik submitted that the Secretary of
State should have appealed on a point of law.  Paragraph 27 of Devani
refers to Section 11 (2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,
which reads, "any party has a right of appeal, subject to subsection (8)"
but Underhill LJ continues:

"Subsection (1) defines a right of appeal, so far as relevant, as a right
of appeal to the UT on a point of law.  I accept that on a literal reading
subsection (2) could be construed as giving a right of appeal not only to a
party against whom an order has been made but also to a party who has
obtained, as regards that order, the exact outcome that they sought:
although usually the winning party would have no wish to appeal,
occasionally they may be dissatisfied with particular findings made by the
Court or with aspects of its reasoning (the present case, if the slip rule
were unavailable, would be an example albeit of a very specific kind).  But
for the winning party to have a right of appeal in such a case would be
contrary to well-established case-law governing the position in the common
law courts, which reflects important policy considerations; the authorities
are well-known, and I need only refer to the commentary in para. 9A-59.3 of
the White Book.  It was not suggested to us that there was any reason why
Parliament should have intended a different approach in the case of appeals
to the Upper Tribunal.  Ms Broadfoot sought to support DUTJ Latter's
conclusion by reference to the decision of the UT in EG and NG (Ethiopia)
[2013] UKUT 000143 (IAC), but that was not concerned with the present point
at all.  I am sure that section 11 (2) of the 2007 Act is intended to
confer a right of appeal only against some aspect of the actual order of
the FTT, and that the phrase 'any party' must be read as referring only to
a party who has in that sense lost."

I therefore do not find that the Secretary of State can be criticised for
not appealing Judge James's decision in relation to dishonesty because the
Secretary of State was in fact the winning party in that instance.

My focus, however, is the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain and
I find that there was no material error of law in his reasoning as to the
dishonesty.  As such, the arguments in relation to historical injustice
only bite if the findings in relation to dishonesty are set aside, and they
are not.  In CI (Nigeria) the court noted the racially discriminatory
nature of policies previously considered have led to consideration of
historic injustice by the superior courts but reliance was not permitted
where there would be a major extension in a wholly different class of case.
 That is the position here.  Further, I can understand the argument that
should the appellant have suffered historical injustice that he might be
put in a similar position but the appellants in Ahsan were arguing that
they should be entitled to an in country right of appeal and this is what
this appellant has already had.

However, for the reasons I have given the question of historic injustice
does not arise or a factor in the Article 8 proportionality and the judge
himself found at paragraph 34 that it was unnecessary to explore further
because he had not found that the appellant was a victim of any injustice.
He accepted that the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom since 2005
and his aspirations had not progressed in the way he expected since 2009
but there was no reason why he could not return, retrain and resume his
practice in Pakistan and re-establish himself there.  As such, the decision
will stand and I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  will   stand.   The
appellant's appeal remains dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed           Helen Rimington                   Date 27th October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


