
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/09198/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 August 2019                             |On 27 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                    D M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the case touches on the welfare of children who are  entitled
to privacy and may be harmed by publicity.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of  Kenya  against  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
respondent to refuse him leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
appellant is subject to  deportation  because,  as  a  consequence  of  his
criminal record, the Secretary of State has decided that  his  presence  in
the United Kingdom is not conducive to  the  public  good.   Permission  to
appeal was given by a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge on a very limited  basis.
He said:

  "It may be argued that  the  Judge  failed  to  follow  the  law  as  now
  expressed in KO (Nigeria).  Leave is given  only  on  the  basis  of  the
  ground at paragraph 8."

3. The "ground at paragraph 8" refers to the decision of the  Supreme  Court
in KO (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  That decision was handed
down on 24 October 2018 and so clearly could not have been in the  mind  of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge when he dismissed the appeal on 26  September
2018.

4. In the renewed grounds Counsel said:

  "In addition to the material errors of law identified above  since  those
  grounds were drafted  and  submitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
  Supreme Court has recently given judgment in KO (Nigeria)  and  others  v
  SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  It has been confirmed that the statutory scheme  is
  such that if all the elements of an exception are  met  then  the  public
  interest is outweighed by the breach of the Appellant's human rights.  At
  paragraph 112 the Judge comments that when assessing the public interest,
  he  notes  that  between  2010  and  2017  the  Appellant  had  seventeen
  convictions for 23 offences and has had one previous  deportation  appeal
  and that the other two offences which led to this deportation order being
  made were serious and put his family and the  public  at  risk  of  harm.
  Following KO it has been clarified that the Judge does not need to assess
  the public interest in this way.  The fact that the Appellant  meets  the
  criteria for deportation means that there is a  public  interest  in  his
  deportation and the  question  for  the  Judge  is  whether  or  not,  in
  accordance with the statutory scheme, all the elements  of  an  exception
  are met and if they are, then the public interest is  outweighed  by  the
  breach to the Appellant's human rights."

5. The concern implicit in the grant of permission is  that  the  First-tier
Tribunal wrongly considered the need for deportation in determining whether
the relevant criteria had been met and in particular, in this case, if  the
effects on the children was unduly harsh whereas the assessment of what  is
"unduly harsh" should have  made  without  reference  to  the  interest  in
deportation but to the needs of the children.

6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge clearly cannot  be  blamed  for  expressing
himself in a way that leant itself to this criticism.  Before the  decision
in KO it is  unlikely  that  anyone  would  have  been  concerned  by  that
approach.

7. That said, I must now look at the decision  and  decide  what  the  judge
actually did.  The Decision and Reasons notes that the appellant  was  born
in 1991 and came to the United  Kingdom  when  he  claimed  asylum  as  the
dependant of his mother in March 2002.  The  application  was  unsuccessful
but he was given indefinite leave to remain when his mother was given  such
leave in November 2005.

8. In March 2012 he was convicted  of  burglary  and  sentenced  to  sixteen
months' imprisonment.  A  deportation  was  made  but  the  appeal  against
deportation was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal in February 2013.

9. In April 2017 he was convicted at the Crown Court sitting at  Warwick  of
possessing a bladed article in a public place and  was  sentenced  to  nine
months' imprisonment.  He was sentenced to  a  consecutive  term  of  three
months for an arson offence and the decision to deport was  made  following
these convictions.

10. He had established a private and family life with a  partner  and  their
three children.  The children are British nationals under the age of 18 but
the Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant had a "genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with the children".  It was accepted  that
there was some contact between him and the children but  not  that  he  was
involved in any decision making.

11. The Secretary of State did not accept that it would  be  "unduly  harsh"
for the children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  the  appellant.
This was based on his not having established a parental relationship and on
the children being in the day-to-day care of their mother.   Indeed,  there
were concerns about their safety in the  home  if  the  appellant  were  to
return there.

12. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant had a  "genuine  and
subsisting" relationship with the partner.  She was the victim  of  one  of
his more recent offences and the appellant's  licence  conditions  required
that he did not approach her or communicate  with  her  without  the  prior
approval of the supervising officer.  She  had  visited  the  appellant  in
prison but had not supported him by giving evidence in the appeal.

13. The Secretary of State accepted that the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life but  not  that  he  was
fully socially and culturally integrated into  the  United  Kingdom.   That
would be at odds with his having been convicted of a total of  21  offences
on, I think, seventeen occasions.

14. It was not accepted that there were very significant  obstacles  to  the
appellant's integration into Kenya.   It  was  thought  that  he  has  some
cultural and linguistic ties to the country from his having lived there  as
a boy.

15. The judge then considered the evidence before him.

16.  Of  particular  relevance  was  the  decision  after  a  Review   Child
Protection Conference that the appellant be allowed to return to the family
home of his partner and children  and  reside  there  from  Thursday  until
Sunday every week.  He had also benefitted from a  meeting  with  the  West
Midlands Fire Service who had helped him  understand  the  consequences  of
uncontrolled  fire  and  had  helped  him  appreciate  the  seriousness  or
potential seriousness of the offence described generically as "arson".

17. The appellant  explained  that  although  he  had  successfully  avoided
deportation on an earlier occasion he had not then reordered his life.   He
had kept the same bad friends  and  had,  unsurprisingly,  offended  again.
However, much had happened in his life to cause him to rethink.   Not  only
had he been to prison and was again the subject of deportation  proceedings
but he had been stabbed after release from custody and had  been  diagnosed
with  tuberculosis.   Both  of  these  things  were  described   as   "life
threatening" and he claimed they had had an enormous impact upon him.

18. The appellant said he had been to Kenya on  two  occasions.   One  visit
was for a holiday in 2007.  He never had proper employment  in  the  United
Kingdom but he had done some "cash in hand work" working for a mosque.   He
had helped arrange parking.

19. He had no family in Kenya and would be an outsider.

20. The appellant's partner supported  him  and  gave  oral  evidence.   She
would be "very sad" if he was returned to Kenya and missed the  support  he
gave in managing the children.

21. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  described  him  as
an "intelligent and articulate young man".  However, the judge did not find
him reliable.  Rather he found he was telling again the story that had been
successful when his case was last heard following a deportation order.  The
judge said of the evidence of the partner that  her  evidence  was  treated
with caution.  He said:

  "The sad fact is that since the arson attack in 2016,  for  long  periods
  she has had to cope without the appellant being present in  the  home  to
  support her.  The appellant has not even been able to  provide  financial
  help as he does not work.  All the witnesses have underplayed the  extent
  to which K... S... has had to be a single parent mother as  a  result  of
  the appellant's behaviour."

22. The judge described the more  recent  child  protection  plan  as  "more
encouraging".  The judge accepted that the appellant does enjoy a  "genuine
and subsisting relationship with both his partner and  his  children".   He
then directed himself to the public interest.

23. I set out below all that the judge said because it was  important  given
the nature of the appeal before me.  The judge said at paragraph 111:

  "(a) Public interest in removing the appellant: the  appellant  is  a  27
  year old man who has never held any meaningful employment  and  has  been
  committing offences since he was a teenager (for which  he  has  been  in
  custody on three separate  occasions).   Having  persuaded  the  previous
  Tribunal at his first deportation appeal hearing several years  ago  that
  he had reformed and changed his ways and that  he  was  at  low  risk  of
  reoffending, he has continued to offend.  The two convictions  which  led
  to his last period of imprisonment in 2017 had put at risk  of  harm  his
  own family and the wider public.  The details of the arson  incident  are
  alarming.  I am not persuaded  by  the  account  which  he  gave  in  his
  statement to Mr Cooper (social worker) about why he was carrying a  knife
  on the day that he was arrested by the police.  I simply do  not  believe
  the appellant when he says that he  was  somehow  unlucky  to  have  been
  encountered by the police on the one day that he was  caught  carrying  a
  knife for protection related purposes."

24. The judge did not believe that the appellant told the  truth  about  his
personal circumstances.  He did not believe that the  appellant  no  longer
associated with the people who were with him when he got into trouble.   He
did not believe there had been material change in the  circumstances  since
he was last subject to deportation.

25. At paragraph 117 the judge said:

  "Looking at everything in the round, I  find  that  the  appellant  still
  continues to be at risk of reoffending and the public are still  at  risk
  of harm.  I am far from persuaded that he  no  longer  poses  a  risk  of
  reoffending or poses a risk of harm to others.  He has been given chances
  by both this Tribunal and by  the  criminal  courts  to  reform  himself.
  However, his offending is getting more serious and this is  reflected  in
  his last two convictions.  There is  a  significant  public  interest  in
  deporting him."

26. The judge then considered the appellant's "Article 8 rights"  and  those
close to him.  The judge  noted  that  it  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
appellant enjoyed family life with his partner and children.  The  ages  of
the children were given.  The eldest, T M, was born in October  2014.   The
second, T A, was born in September 2015 and the youngest, T Y, was born  in
May 2017.  The judge noted the appellant had not been a continuous presence
in their  lives  and  there  had  been  local  authority  involvement.   He
concluded that the children "are therefore used  to  living  without  their
father being a presence in the family home".

27. The judge also found that the appellant's partner would be supported  by
her close-knit family in the United Kingdom and given help in raising three
children as a single parent mother.  The  judge  noted  that  some  contact
could be preserved even if the appellant was in Kenya.  The judge concluded
that deportation would not be "unduly harsh".

28. I note the judge was very aware that the significance  of  the  decision
and reached his conclusions carefully.

29. I have considered Ms Rutherford's appropriately pithy.

30. On this occasion I agree with Mrs Aboni that when the Decision  is  read
carefully it is quite apparent that the judge has not  misdirected  himself
materially when applying the "unduly harsh" test.  Although the  judge  did
look at the history, the conclusion that the appellant's deportation was in
the public interest is unremarkable.  It is impossible to look at this  and
say that the judge has raised the standards required to satisfy the  unduly
harsh test because of the severity of the  offending.   That  approach,  we
know, would be wrong if allowing the decision in KO but it is just not what
the judge did.

31. It has taken rather a long way to reach this conclusion but it is  plain
to me that the wholly justifiable concerns of  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
Judge when granting permission are not realised when the case  is  examined
properly.

Notice of Decision

32. I dismiss the appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 November 2019               |



