
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10655/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2019                       |On 26 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 STEPHEN [U]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

In a decision promulgated on 20 February 2019 I set aside the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal and adjourned the appeal to be re-made by me in the
Upper Tribunal. A copy of my decision on error of law is attached as an
appendix to this decision.

The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 10 February 1947. On 1
December 2015 he applied for indefinite leave to remain, relying on his
long residence in the UK of eleven years and his relationship with his
British wife, Ms [MN] ("the sponsor"). The application was refused on 5
April 2016 because the respondent considered that the appellant had only
resided lawfully in the UK for 5 months and that there were no
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria. There were
not very significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration in Nigeria.
There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside
the Immigration Rules.

The appellant appealed against the decision on article 8 grounds.

The appeal was adjourned on 4 April 2019 because the sponsor was under the
effects of alcohol and Ms Jaquiss had been unable to take instructions. Ms
Everett indicated she wished to cross-examine the sponsor. It was noted
that there was a "tension" between the sponsor's extensive medical problems
and care needs and her ability to work 48 hours per week as a cleaner.

The appellant and sponsor attended the adjourned hearing on 8 July 2019 and
both gave oral evidence in English, which I have recorded in full in my
record of the proceedings. The appellant's solicitors filed no fewer than
six bundles of documentary evidence without making any effort to present
the documents in a coherent fashion and including many pages of evidence
which have no bearing on the issues in this appeal, such as documents
relating to the appellant's political activities. To compound problems,
almost all of page numbering is illegible.

This is a case in which I have had to be selective in my references to the
evidence in order to avoid my decision becoming unduly lengthy.

After hearing the oral evidence, I heard closing submissions from both
representatives which I have recorded and taken note of.

Ms Jaquiss helpfully provided a skeleton argument. She acknowledged that
the only issue for consideration was family life under Article 8. Whilst
her skeleton argument focuses on the application of Article 8 outside the
rules, it was agreed that the appellant's lack of immigration status did
not bar him from relying on the rules because of the provision in paragraph
E-ELTRP.2.2[1].

The appellant bears the burden of establishing the factual matters on which
he relies to the civil standard of a balance of probabilities.

I approach my evaluation of Article 8 by reference to the five questions to
be asked as set out in paragraph 17 of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The appellant
must show that he currently enjoys protected rights and that there would be
a significant interference with his human rights as a result of the
decision. It is for the respondent to show that the interference is in
accordance with the law and in pursuit of a legitimate aim. I must then
assess whether the decision is necessary in a democratic society, including
whether it is disproportionate to the legitimate aim identified.

Appendix FM of the rules states in relevant part as follows:

             "EX.1. This paragraph applies if


                  (a)  ... or


                  (b)   the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                  relationship with a partner who is in  the  UK  and  is  a
                  British Citizen, settled in the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with
                  refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and  there  are
                  insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  partner
                  continuing outside the UK.


             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner."


Section 117B of the 2002 Act reads as follows:

             "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.


             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-


                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-


                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


             (4)  Little weight should be given to-


                  (a)  a private life, or


                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


             (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.


             (6)  ..."


I make the following findings of fact.

The appellant is now 72 years of age. His immigration history is not a
matter of dispute. He entered the UK as a visitor on 14 May 2005 and his
leave to enter expired 14 October 2005 since when he has remained in the UK
unlawfully as an overstayer. He has remained in the United Kingdom for 14
years and has not returned to Nigeria.

The sponsor is a British citizen, having naturalised on 17 February 2011.
She was born in Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of Congo on 31 July
1961. In her witness statement, dated 20 July 2017, she states that she
arrived in the United Kingdom in 1991 without entry clearance with her ex-
partner and her son, Mana Kati. She goes on to state that the family
claimed asylum and that, in May 2002, she was granted indefinite leave to
remain.

The appellant and the sponsor gave consistent evidence that they met in
2008 and that they started a relationship in February 2010, when they began
to live together. They married on 11 July 2012.

There are no children of the relationship.

The appellant has three children from a previous relationship in Nigeria.
He said the youngest was around the age of 14. The sponsor's son, Mana
Kati, has children of his own and resides with his partner and children in
the United Kingdom. I was told the sponsor had 13 other children, all of
whom are deceased. I have no records from her asylum claim. I note the
records from gynaecology clinics which have been provided only refer to, at
most, five past pregnancies.

In 2015 the appellant was diagnosed with type II diabetes for which he is
treated with medication.

The sponsor has also been diagnosed with various medical problems. The
latest letter from her family doctor, Dr Anya Kabakova, is dated 15 March
2019. I shall set out most of her letter because it lies at the heart of
this aspect of the appellant's case:

             "I can confirm that [the sponsor] is a patient here. She was
             last seen in the surgery on 27/2/19. She has severe low back
             and leg pain, and was previously under the musculoskeletal
             team who diagnosed left S1 nerve root impingement, which is
             where a nerve becomes trapped on coming out of the spinal
             canal and is irritated all the way along its length down into
             the leg. This is also known as sciatica. She also has a
             diagnosis of osteoarthritis. She has had physiotherapy and is
             taking amitriptyline and co-codamol, with omeprazole to
             protect her stomach. She is currently having acupuncture at
             the surgery for it too.

             In January this year she was admitted and treated for
             suspected malaria. She then had an episode of one-off wheezing
             requiring nebulisers, likely secondary to a viral chest
             infection.

             We have also seen her in the past with neck pain radiating
             down into her right shoulder and arm, and burns to her arm.
             There had been concerns about the amount of alcohol she was
             consuming, though when last asked she had not been drinking
             since she burnt her arm on 10/5/17.

             She has a diagnosis of diffuse idiopathic skeletal osteosis
             and has had problems with back and foot pain in the past.

             She also has a history of fibroids and had a hysterectomy and
             oophorectomy in September 2012 for very heavy bleeding. ..."

The sponsor currently works 48 hours per week as a cleaner. I can find
nothing in her employment records or the GP notes to suggest she has
regularly needed to take time of work due to ill-health. I was not told
that she claims or receives a personal independence payment. I was told she
sometimes looks after her grandchildren. I do not accept therefore that the
sponsor's various illnesses are serious enough to prevent her living an
active life and I reject the claim made by the appellant that he has to
provide care for her other than very occasionally when she falls ill.

I accept the sponsor has been referred for an X-ray but the results are not
yet known.

There is no independent or medical evidence suggesting the sponsor has any
diagnosis of mental health conditions, although there are references in the
notes to alcoholism and to the sponsor being distressed, as when her
partner was reported to have disappeared in June 2017.

Evidence has been submitted purporting to show that the sponsor would not
be able to receive medical treatment in Nigeria. The strongest evidence is
the respondent's CPIN Nigeria: Medical and Healthcare issues (28 August
2018), which Ms Jaquiss provided. This document gives an overview of the
healthcare system in Nigeria. The public healthcare system is under-
resourced and largely confined to urban areas. Many people rely on the
private system, which is expensive and beyond the reach of most. In
relation to medicines, it has been estimated that the proportion of people
with access to essential medicines required for the treatment of chronic
diseases, such as malaria and HIV, is 40%. The current drug distribution
system has been described as chaotic. Figures from different sources show
that between 15% and 75% of drugs circulating in the country are fake.

The appellant has obtained three letters purporting to represent the views
of doctors practising in Nigeria. They all state the sponsor could not be
treated in Nigeria and recommend she continue to receive treatment in the
United Kingdom. I can give these documents very little weight for the
following reasons.

The appellant was vague about how he came to obtain these letters. He said
his friend, George, got them for him but there is no evidence from this
person. The appellant insisted that the only medical evidence provided to
the authors of the letters was the letter from Dr Kabakova but that
contradicts the appellant's additional witness statement, signed on 27 June
2019, in which he said he provided his wife's "full medical reports and in
particular the letter from [her GP]". The fact the appellant knew little
about how the letters were obtained was troubling.

The letters refer to other matters not stated in Dr Kabakova's letter. None
of the letters, as might reasonably be expected of senior medical
practitioners, are couched in cautious terms given the authors have not
examined the sponsor or taken her history and have apparently relied on a
single letter from a GP as the basis for their opinions.

The letter from Dr Oluwaseyi suggests that the sponsor's main disabling
condition is diffuse idiopathic skeletal osteosis, not the nerve root
impingement/sciatica, which is the condition for which she is currently
being treated. Dr Okoroafor's letter states that treatment is unavailable
in Nigeria for any of the sponsor's conditions without stating what the
procedure which has to be undertaken is. The letter from Dr Ogundele also
refers to the "difficult procedure" for S1 nerve root impingement without
saying what the procedure is. I bear in mind Dr Kabakova is treating the
sponsor with painkillers and acupuncture. The appellant said she has
massages. It has not been suggested by Dr Kabakova that the sponsor
requires surgery and I have already noted the sponsor is able to work full-
time as a cleaner.

No effort has been made to show whether or not that medications, such as
amitriptyline and co-codamol, are available in Nigeria. They are common
medications and it is safe to assume that these or equivalent brands are
available, albeit they might have to be paid for and there is a danger that
the drugs supplied may be fake. The same might be said regarding the
medications which the appellant relies on to control his diabetes.

The appellant said that he would not be able to find employment in Nigeria
because of his age. That is probably true. However, he is not able to work
in the United Kingdom at present and the sponsor is the family breadwinner.
The sponsor said she did not think she would be able to get a job in
Nigeria. Common sense suggests this would be problematic, although she is
able to hold down a full-time job in the United Kingdom despite her back
pain and sciatica. She said she is not educated but she would not have to
find skilled or professional work to support herself and the appellant.
Given the fact the appellant sought to draw a veil over the extent of his
family and connections in Nigeria, as discussed below, I infer there may be
other sources of support in any event.

It was clarified in evidence that the sponsor became aware that the
appellant had no leave to remain in the relatively early stages of their
relationship.

The appellant confirmed he has not claimed asylum, although he maintains he
fears returning to Nigeria.

The sponsor has made at least three trips to Nigeria. The evidence was
unclear about the circumstances. The appellant confirmed his mother resides
in Nigeria. He said that, on the sponsor's first visit to Nigeria, she
stayed with his friend and he took her to "his people". It was the same on
the third visit. The appellant confirmed he has three children in Nigeria
but said he does not communicate with them very much. He said they live
with his mother but he did not say why they do not live with their own
mother. He said his mother lives in a village. The appellant denied that
the friend who helped the sponsor on two of her visits would help him if he
returned to Nigeria.

The sponsor said she could not remember how many times she had been to
Nigeria. She said she stayed in a hotel and visited the appellant's mother.
She said she did not see anyone apart from the appellant's mother and
children. She did not see any of his friends. She did not mention a
village.

I infer from the vagueness of the evidence that the appellant has sought to
minimise his links to Nigeria. I note that the sponsor's hospital discharge
letter, dated 25 December 2018, states the sponsor contracted malaria on a
recent visit to Lagos because she had not taken malarial prophylaxis. Ms
Isherwood referred me to references in the documents to the sponsor
visiting Nigeria in January 2015, April 2017 and December 2018. I proceed
on the basis the sponsor has some familiarity with Nigeria given she has
made three visits there without the appellant accompanying her.

There is plainly family life in this case and removing the appellant would
potentially lead to a significant interference with the enjoyment of that
family life. The decision is in accordance with the law and in pursuit of
the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration controls. The appeal turns on
the outcome of the proportionality balancing exercise.

On the public interest side, the maintenance of immigration controls is
important. The public expects people with no right to live in the United
Kingdom to be removed.

The appellant speaks English and is financially independent. However, these
are merely neutral factors in that they do not weigh in favour of the
appellant.

Little weight can be given to the appellant's relationship with the sponsor
because it was established at a time he was in the United Kingdom
unlawfully. Family life has always been 'precarious'.

The correct approach to Article 8 in cases of precarious family life has
been the subject of definitive guidance in the judgment of Lord Reed in R
(Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11. His Lordship explained that the test of
insurmountable obstacles, as used in paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the
rules and later defined in paragraph EX.2, was taken from the jurisprudence
of the ECtHR:

             "42. In Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber  identified,  consistently
             with earlier judgments of the court, a number of factors to be
             taken into account  in  assessing  the  proportionality  under
             article 8 of the removal of non  -  settled  migrants  from  a
             contracting state in which they have family members.  Relevant
             factors were said to include the extent to which  family  life
             would effectively be ruptured, the extent of the ties  in  the
             contracting  state,   whether   there   were   "insurmountable
             obstacles" in the way of the family living in the  country  of
             origin of the non - national concerned, and whether there were
             factors of immigration control  (for  example,  a  history  of
             breaches of immigration law) or considerations of public order
             weighing in favour of exclusion (para 107).


             43.  It appears that the  European  court  intends  the  words
             "insurmountable obstacles" to be understood in a practical and
             realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to  obstacles
             which make it literally impossible  for  the  family  to  live
             together in the country  of  origin  of  the  non  -  national
             concerned. In some cases, the court has used other expressions
             which  make  that  clearer:  for  example,  referring  to  "un
             obstacle majeur" (Sen v The Netherlands (2003) 36 EHRR 7, para
             40),  or  to  "major  impediments"  (Tuquabo  -  Tekle  v  The
             Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798 , para 48), or to  "the  test  of
             'insurmountable obstacles'  or  'major  impediments'"  (IAA  v
             United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19,  paras  40  and  44),  or
             asking itself whether  the  family  could  "realistically"  be
             expected to move (Sezen v The Netherlands (2006) 43  EHRR  30,
             para  47).  "Insurmountable  obstacles"   is,   however,   the
             expression employed by the  Grand  Chamber;  and  the  court's
             application of it indicates that it is a  stringent  test.  In
             Jeunesse, for example, there were said to be no insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the  family  to  Suriname,
             although the children, the eldest of  whom  was  at  secondary
             school, were Dutch nationals who had  lived  there  all  their
             lives, had never visited  Suriname,  and  would  experience  a
             degree of hardship if forced  to  move,  and  the  applicant's
             partner was in full-time employment in  the  Netherlands:  see
             paras 117 and 119."


In TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, the Senior
President of Tribunals emphasised the importance of tribunals following the
approach described by the Supreme Court. It was lawful for the respondent
to set a requirement within the rules that there be insurmountable
obstacles to the continuation of family life in the country of proposed
return. The respondent's policy that leave should only be granted outside
the rules where exceptional circumstances apply was lawful. Where
precariousness exists, it affects the weight to be attached to family life
in the balancing exercise. That is because Article 8 does not guarantee a
right to choose one's country of residence. The weight to be attached to
family life will depend on what the outcome of immigration control would
otherwise be. Section 117B of the 2002 act is also relevant. The
consideration of Article 8 outside the rules is a proportionality
evaluation. Some factors, such as the public policy in immigration control,
are heavily weighted. When a tribunal considers Article 8 outside the
rules, it will factor into its evaluation of whether there are exceptional
circumstances both the findings of fact that have been made and the
evaluation of whether or not there are insurmountable obstacles.

The proposed country of return is Nigeria. My task is to decide whether the
conditions which would be faced there amount to insurmountable obstacles to
the continuation of family life, recognising that the test is a stringent
one.

The appellant lived in Nigeria, as far as I know, until the age of 58. He
has three children in Nigeria and his elderly mother. It is likely that he
has friends and extended family members there as well. Given the sponsor's
visit was to Lagos, as disclosed in the medical notes, I proceed on the
basis the appellant would in fact be returning to Lagos.

The sponsor is not Nigerian but, as noted above, she has travelled there
independently on at least three occasions, including as recently as
December 2018. She speaks English and has lived with a Nigerian husband
since 2010. I see no reason she could not, with the support of the
appellant and his family members, adapt to living there over time.

The appellant is elderly and has diabetes. However, his disease is
controlled by medication and he indicated he would work but for the legal
restriction on his doing so.

The factors which Ms Jaquiss argued showed the test of insurmountable
obstacles was met were (1) the lack of employment prospects, and (2) the
unavailability of medical treatment for the sponsor. I have therefore given
these matters careful attention.

On the employment point, no background evidence about the job market in
Lagos was provided but I accept the general submission that, at their stage
of life and with no recent employment history, it might well prove
difficult for both the appellant and the sponsor to find employment. I do
not know what skills or professional qualifications the appellant has but
the point is that he is at retirement age. I do not know whether he has any
pension entitlement in Nigeria. The fact the sponsor does not currently
have Nigerian nationality might also be an impediment to finding work in
her case.

Given the stance of the appellant was to deny having family members in
Nigeria other than his elderly mother and children, there was no proper
exploration of what financial support might be available from family
members in Nigeria. In the circumstances, I infer there would be some and
that this would assist the couple to meet their needs.

The medical evidence paints a picture of a woman with disabling conditions
which would suggest significant limitations in her ability to mobilise and
which would mean she suffers discomfort. However, as noted, she holds down
a full-time job as a cleaner. The appellant told me she has been promoted
to the position of manager but that is not confirmed in the letter from the
employer and I proceed on the assumption her job involves a degree of
physical effort. I am unable to accept that her physical health problems
significantly limit her ability to mobilise. There must be some limitation
but, as matters stand at present, this is relatively minor. She does not
require care from another person.

In terms of treatment, I have rejected the three letters purporting to show
that she could not access treatment in Nigeria. She does not require the
"procedures" mentioned in those letters. She requires medication and
perhaps physiotherapy/acupuncture. I am not satisfied she could not obtain
the treatment she currently receives, albeit she may have to pay for it.

I accept the sponsor has her son and grandchildren in the UK. However, her
son is an adult and lives separately with his own family.

The circumstances of this case do not reach the threshold of
'insurmountable obstacles'.

Ms Jaquiss argued that, even if the appellant could not succeed on the
basis of showing there were insurmountable obstacles to family life being
pursued outside the United Kingdom, the decision would be disproportionate.
She relied on the principles established in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL
40.

In Agyarko, Lord Reed confirmed the principles set out in Chikwamba that
the weight to be given to the public interest in removal might be reduced
if an individual were certain to be granted leave to enter if he made an
application from outside the UK (see paragraph 51). The point has sometimes
been put in terms that there would be no sensible purpose in requiring
someone to go abroad in such circumstances (see Hayat v SSHD [2012] EWCA
Civ 1054). However, where there is a sensible reason and the interruption
to family life will only be temporary, then removal can be proportionate.

In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM - Chikwamba -
temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) it was
held that Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question
whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to return to
his home country to make an entry clearance application to re-join family
members in the UK. There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable
obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the UK but where temporary
separation to enable an individual to make an application for entry
clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the
individual to place before the Secretary of State evidence that such
temporary separation will interfere disproportionately with protected
rights.

Ms Jaquiss relied on the same evidence showing the sponsor is earning well
in excess of the minimum income threshold. I see no reason that her
employment would not continue for the foreseeable future.

As seen, the test is to consider whether the appellant would be "certain"
to be granted leave to enter and, if so, whether there is any sensible
purpose in expecting him to return to Nigeria just to make the application,
given that would involve interference with family life, albeit of a
temporary nature.

I have considered the applicable rules in Appendix FM. The appellant is the
'partner' of a British citizen because he is married to the sponsor. I
cannot see that any of the suitability grounds would catch him. The
appellant's relationship with the sponsor is clearly genuine and
subsisting. The financial requirements are met by the sponsor's salary. The
appellant is exempt from the English language requirement due to his age.
Paragraph 320(7B) cannot be applied because of paragraph A320.

Assuming then that the appellant made a paid application and produced his
passport and specified evidence, I find he is "certain" to be able to show
that the requirements for entry clearance are met.

Rather than the facts of this case showing that there is a sensible reason
to require him to return to Nigeria to make the application, the
circumstances suggest it would simply be costly, inconvenient and
unpleasant for the appellant and the sponsor to be separated after seven
years of marriage. I was not told how long the process of making an
application for entry clearance would take in Lagos. However, any lengthy
separation would be difficult for this couple. The appellant is an elderly
person and he has diabetes. The notion that he should go to Nigeria for an
extended period would, I find, be unjustifiably harsh and therefore
disproportionate.

The appeal is therefore allowed on Article 8 grounds.



Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and his
decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The following decision is
substituted:

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction made.


Signed                                  Date 17 July 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed but I do not find it is appropriate  to  make  a
fee award. The appeal was allowed as a result of  the  evidence  adduced  at
the hearing and the respondent was entitled to  refuse  the  application  on
the basis of the information provided at the time.



Signed                                  Date 17 July 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom




APPENDIX: decision on error of law

                    "DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW



      1. The appellant appeals with the permission of the Upper Tribunal
         against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie,
         promulgated on 30 August 2018, in which he dismissed the
         appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent to refuse
         his application for indefinite leave to remain.

The appellant had relied on his long residence in the UK of eleven years
and his relationship with his British wife, Ms [MN] ("the sponsor").

The respondent considered that the appellant had only resided lawfully in
the UK for 5 months and that there were no insurmountable obstacles to
family life continuing in Nigeria. There were no very significant obstacles
to the appellant's reintegration in Nigeria. There were no exceptional
circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.


The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal also found there were no
insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria. He found the
appellant and the sponsor were "relatively free of serious medical
conditions" and that both would be able to work. In assessing
proportionality, the Judge reduced the weight to be given to relationship
because it had been formed at a time the appellant was in the UK
unlawfully.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was refused by the
First-tier Tribunal because the allegation that the Judge had failed to
have regard to a letter from the sponsor's GP was not made out. The
appellant's bundle did not contain any such letter.

The application was renewed and granted by Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal Sutherland Williams. He also saw no evidence that the GP's letter
had been filed at the Tribunal in time for the hearing. In any event there
was evidence regarding the sponsor's health which the Judge considered.
Even if the GP's letter had been before the Judge it would not have made
any difference. However, he continued,

             "I am granting permission to appeal on the basis that it is
             arguable that the judge at first instance should have
             considered in more detail the nature of the appellant's
             sponsor's health (by reference to the evidence in the main
             bundle), whether it was serious, and then given reasons for
             any findings in that regard. Thereafter, and importantly, it
             is arguable that the judge should have considered whether or
             not that health issue, if made out, could have been treated in
             either the DRC or Nigeria."

The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.

Ms Jaquiss, who had only been instructed at the eleventh hour, made an
application to amend the grounds. In particular, she wished to argue that
Judge Devittie had overlooked the appellant's protection claim, failed to
make findings on the ability of the appellant to meet the financial
requirements of the Immigration Rules so as to consider the Chikwamba point
and had failed to apply section 117B in making his proportionality
assessment.

I refused Ms Jaquiss's application. The appellant had been legally
represented and these matters should have been raised earlier. The
appellant had chosen not to pursue his protection claim when his appeal was
before the First-tier Tribunal after an adjournment had been granted. It
did not appear that the Chikwamba point had been argued and Ms Jaquiss
acknowledged that the financial requirements could not have been met as at
the date of hearing. As far as section 117B was concerned, the decision
shows that Judge Devittie had the public interest factors in mind and, even
if he should have had closer regard to matters such as the fact the
appellant was financially independent and speaks English, these factors
could not have weighed I favour of allowing the appeal. They are neutral
factors.

Returning to the challenge made in the written grounds, Ms Kotas accepted
that Judge Devittie had made a material error of law in failing to have
regard to and make findings on the medical evidence which was before him.

Judge Devittie's decision is short and the reasoning concise. The following
paragraphs contain the important passages:

             "7. The appellant suffers from diabetes but is in good health
             and there is no suggestion that his medical condition would
             pose difficulties upon his returning to Nigeria. This is a
             country in which he has lived for most of his life; he has
             children in the country and no doubt would have retained
             strong family and social ties. I do not therefore consider
             that he would encounter any significant difficulties in his
             reintegration. The sponsor is from the DRC, but she is fluent
             in English, which is the official language in Nigeria and with
             his support she would be able in the fullness of time to
             integrate into life in Nigeria. They will no doubt be come
             difficulties including financial matters, but there is no
             evidence before me to show that either the appellant or the
             sponsor are not able to engage in employment.

             8. I do not accept the evidence of the sponsor that she
             suffers from any serious illness and she has failed to produce
             any report to substantiate this claim. The evidence shows that
             she has made frequent visits to the hospital and in these
             circumstances, if there was any condition which is
             debilitating, she would have had no difficulty at all in
             obtaining an expert medical report. This she has not done.

             9. I therefore come to the conclusion that the evidence
             demonstrates that there are no insurmountable obstacles to
             this couple continuing family life outside the United Kingdom.
             In consideration of the appellant's claim outside immigration
             rules I find that there are no exceptional circumstances that
             would justify the grant of leave in light of the fact that I
             have made a specific finding that they are both relatively
             free of serious medical conditions and would be able to seek
             employment in Nigeria upon their return. That is not to say
             that there would be no difficulties but I am satisfied that
             these could be overcome.

             10. In considering the public interest I shall have regard to
             the fact that this relationship commenced when both parties
             were fully aware that the appellant does not have any
             entitlement to remain in the UK. This is a significant factor
             that weighs against the appellant in relation to the interests
             of effective immigration control. This is an appellant who
             came to United Kingdom and remained in breach of the
             immigration rules. In all the circumstances I find that the
             removal of the appellant, even if it means the severance of
             ties with his spouse, would not be a disproportionate
             interference with family life."

Having considered the matter carefully and, in the light of the agreement
of both parties that the decision pays insufficiently close regard to the
evidence which was before the Judge, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal,
which shall have to be re-made. It is clear that, even without the GP's
letter, there was medical evidence before the Judge showing that the
sponsor has a number of health issues, including significant pain
potentially affecting her mobility. This evidence was either not addressed
at all or was rejected without giving reasons for doing so. Whilst I agree
with Judge Devittie that the failure to produce a medico-legal report was a
matter of concern, the appellant was entitled to know why the Judge
concluded, notwithstanding this evidence which was available, that there we
no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria.

It may well be the case that the appellant cannot show there would be
insurmountable obstacles given the high threshold to be passed. However,
the issue for me is whether the Judge's decision is adequately reasoned,
which it is not.

There is no need to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal so I
adjourned the appeal for a continuance hearing in the Upper Tribunal
reserved to myself.  The parties may file up to date evidence.

    Notice of Decision


    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The decision will be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal.


    No anonymity direction made."

-----------------------
[1]  "E-LTRP.2.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -
    (a)  ... or
    (b)  in breach of immigration laws (except that, where paragraph 39E of
    these Rules applies, any current period of overstaying will be
    disregarded), unless paragraph EX.1. applies."

