
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10860/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 July 2020 remotely              |On 22 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   T T K K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Pickthall instructed by Citywide Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the respondent (TTKK).  This direction applies to both
the appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
will refer to the parties as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

The appellant (the respondent in the Upper Tribunal) is a citizen of
Zimbabwe who was born on 13 January 1992.  He came to the UK on 6 August
2000 when he was 8 years old.  He accompanied his aunt to the UK following
the death of his parents.

Having arrived on a six-month visit visa, the appellant was subsequently
included as a dependant on a number of applications made by his aunt.  The
first was made on 15 February 2002 when his aunt applied for indefinite
leave to remain.  That application was refused on 25 June 2003 without a
right of appeal.  On 8 September 2003, an application for judicial review
was lodged and on 15 August 2005 this was refused.  The second application
was made by his aunt on 6 January 2005 when she sought leave to remain
under Art 3 of the ECHR.  That application was refused on 4 April 2005 and,
on that date, the appellant was served with a notice of his liability to be
removed.  The final application made by his aunt was made on 21 April 2005
when she again sought indefinite leave to remain.  That application was, on
that date, considered ineligible and therefore was unsuccessful.

The appellant first made his own application on 9 April 2009 when he was 17
years old.  He applied for asylum but that claim was refused on 23 February
2011.  He was granted discretionary leave for three years until 23 February
2014.

On 30 April 2014, the appellant submitted an out of time application for
further leave to remain and subsequently an additional three-year period of
discretionary leave was granted from 3 December 2014 until 3 December 2017.

On 20 November 2017, the appellant submitted a further application for
leave to remain and that application remained undecided until the Secretary
of State's decision on 4 June 2019 (which is the subject of this appeal)
and so his leave continued by virtue of s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.
Further, by exercising his right of appeal against that decision the
appellant continues to have leave under s.3 until the conclusion of these
appeal proceedings.

On 8 March 2019 at the Newport Crown Court the appellant was convicted of
conspiracy to supply a controlled drug, namely class A (crack cocaine).  On
22 March 2019, he was sentenced to 40 months' imprisonment.

As a consequence of that conviction, on 5 April 2019, the appellant was
served with a notice of a decision to deport him on the grounds that
deportation was conducive to the public good.

On 3 May 2019, the appellant's legal representatives made submissions
amounting to an Art 8 claim seeking to resist the decision to deport the
appellant.

On 4 June 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim under
Art 8 of the ECHR and, as I have already noted, his outstanding application
made on 20 November 2017.

On 30 May 2019, a deportation order was signed on behalf of the Secretary
of State. The deportation order did not have the effect of invalidating his
leave (see, Tirabi (Deportation: "lawfully resident": s.5(1)) [2018] UKUT
199 (IAC)).

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed against the refusal of his human rights claim under
Art 8 to the First-tier Tribunal.

In a determination sent on 27 January 2020, Judge B Lloyd allowed the
appellant's appeal under Art 8.  Before the judge, the appellant relied
upon the two exceptions found in s.117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality,
Immigration and asylum Act 2002 as amended ("the NIA Act 2002").  In fact,
he relied on the equivalent exceptions to deportation in paras 399A and 339
respectively of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  It is
convenient that I should refer to the statutory provisions in s.117C(4) and
(5) as was common ground before me.

As regards Exception 1 in s.117C(4), the appellant claimed that he had (a)
been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life; (b) he was socially
and culturally integrated in the UK; and (c) there were very significant
obstacles to his integration into Zimbabwe on return.  The judge accepted
that the requirements of Exception 1 were met, in particular finding that
there would be "very significant obstacles" to his integration on return to
Zimbabwe.

As regards Exception 2 in s.117C(5), the appellant relied upon his
relationship with his British citizen partner ("Ms T") and their child
("F") who is a British citizen and had been born on 10 June 2016.  Judge
Lloyd accepted that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship
both with his partner and son.  He also accepted that it would be "unduly
harsh" to expect his partner and son to return to Zimbabwe with the
appellant.  The crucial issue was whether or not the separation of the
appellant on his return to Zimbabwe leaving his partner and child in the UK
would have an "unduly harsh" impact upon them.  Judge Lloyd found that it
would and so consequently the requirements of Exception 2 were also met.

On that basis, Judge Lloyd allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of
the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
She did so essentially on two grounds.  First, the judge had failed to give
adequate reasons why there were "very significant obstacles" to the
appellant's integration on return to Zimbabwe.  Secondly, the judge had
failed to give adequate reasons why the separation of the appellant from
his son and partner would be "unduly harsh" applying the high test set out
by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

On 6 March 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McClure) granted the
Secretary of State permission to appeal.  Judge McClure granted permission
to appeal on two grounds.

First, that the judge had arguably failed properly to consider the "unduly
harsh" test in s.117C(5).

Secondly, Judge McClure gave permission to appeal on a ground which the
respondent had not raised in her grounds of appeal.  It related to
Exception 1.  Judge McClure concluded that it was arguable that the judge
had been wrong to find that the first requirement in Exception 1 was met,
namely that the appellant had been "lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
for most of [his] life".  Judge McClure reasoned as follows:

             "The appellant had entered as a visitor in 2000 when he was 8,
             and does not appear to have had lawful leave thereafter to be
             in the United Kingdom until 2011 when he was granted
             discretionary leave which was extended initially until
             December 2017 and thereafter by operation of Section 3C of the
             1971 Immigration Act.  The appellant, at the time of the
             hearing, therefore had only had leave for eight years and
             therefore did not meet all the requirements of paragraph 399A
             [mirroring Exception 1 in s.117C(4)].  In allowing the appeal
             the judge has found that the appellant has been lawfully
             resident the (sic) much of his life but that is not the
             wording of the Immigration Rule.  In the circumstances there
             is a Robinson obvious point that the judge has not applied the
             Rule as it is set out."

Following the grant of permission, without objection from the parties, the
Upper Tribunal in the light of the COVID-19 crisis, directed that a remote
hearing by Skype Business should take place in order to determine whether
the judge had erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal.

The appeal was listed for such a remote hearing on 2 July 2020.  The
hearing took place with me based in the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre with
Mr Howells, for the Secretary of State and Ms Pickthall for the appellant
taking part remotely.

The Issues

The parties raised four issues before me.

Is the Secretary of State entitled to rely upon the ground of appeal, upon
which Judge McClure granted permission, but which had not been raised by
the Secretary of State in her grounds of appeal?

If the Secretary of State was entitled to rely on that ground, did the
judge err in law in concluding that the first requirement in Exception 1
was met that the appellant had, in fact, been lawfully resident for "most"
of his life in the UK?

Did the judge give adequate reasons for concluding that the third element
of Exception 1 was met namely that there were "very significant obstacles"
to the appellant's integration in Zimbabwe on return?

Did the judge give adequate reasons for finding that it would be "unduly
harsh" upon the appellant's partner and son if the appellant were to return
to Zimbabwe?

Sections 117C(4) and (5)

Section 117C of the NIA Act 2002 sets out "additional considerations" when
applying Art 8 to "foreign criminals".  The relevant provisions for this
appeal are found in ss.117C(4) and (5).  These contain Exceptions 1 and 2
respectively which, if either is met, determines for the purposes of Art
8.2 that deportation is not in the public interest where the "foreign
criminal" has not been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 4 years or
more (see s.117C(3) and CI(Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 at [20]
citing NA(Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [23] and NE-A(Nigeria) v
SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 239).

Exception 1 in s.117C(4) provides:

            "Exception 1 applies where -

              a) C has been lawfully in the United Kingdom for most of C's
                 life,

              b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                 Kingdom, and

              c) There would be very significant obstacles to C's
                 integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                 deported."

Exception 2 in s.117(5) provides:

             "Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

The statutory phrases "qualifying partner and "qualifying child" are
defined in s.117D(1).  It is not in dispute that the appellant's partner
and child fall within the respective definitions.

Issue 1

Ms Pickthall submitted that the Upper Tribunal could not consider the
additional ground upon which Judge McClure granted permission because it
was not a Robinson obvious point and it was not a ground of importance such
that the Tribunal should otherwise consider it.  Ms Pickthall relied upon
two decisions of the Upper Tribunal.

The first is AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT
245 (IAC) (Lane J, President; and UTJ Blum).  In that case, the UT
identified the situations in which permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal could be granted on a ground not advanced by the applicant for
permission.  The UT's decision is summarised in para (3) of the headnote as
follows:

             "Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted
             on a ground that was not advanced by an applicant for
             permission, only if:

                  (a)  the judge is satisfied that the ground he or she has
                  identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:

                      (i)  for the original appellant; or

                      (ii) for the Secretary of State, where the ground
                      relates to a decision which, if undisturbed, would
                      breach the United Kingdom's international treaty
                      obligations; or

                  (b)  (possibly) the ground relates to an issue of general
                  importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address."

The UT's position, leaving aside the "general importance" category in para
(3)(b), is based upon the identification of a Robinson obvious point.  That
is where a point arises which has a "strong prospect of success" which, if
not taken and any error corrected, would place the UK government in breach
of its treaty obligations, in particular under the Refugee Convention or
the ECHR.  In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte
Robinson [1998] QB 929, Lord Woolf MR put the point succinctly (at p.946):

             "...if when the Tribunal reads the Special Adjudicator's
             decision there is an obvious point of Convention law
             favourable to the asylum-seeker which does not appear in the
             decision, it should grant leave to appeal. If it does not do
             so, there will be a danger that this country will be in breach
             of its obligations under the Convention. When we refer to an
             obvious point we mean a point which has a strong prospect of
             success if it is argued. Nothing less will do."

The 'point', therefore, must operate in favour of an appellant on which
there is a "strong prospect" of succeeding and where the individual has
been found not to be entitled to protection under the relevant Convention.


As the UT in AZ noted, in an application by the Secretary of State for
permission to appeal, the Robinson approach also applies where she seeks to
challenge a decision under the Refugee Convention where there is said to be
an erroneous application of the Exclusion Clause in the Refugee Convention
(see A (Iraq) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1438).

In this appeal, Ms Pickthall submitted that the point which the Secretary
of State now seeks to rely upon, but had only been raised by Judge McClure
in his grant of permission, is not a Robinson obvious point such that to
leave the decision standing, namely that Exception 1 applied and the
appellant's removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR, was not a decision
which would place the UK in breach of its treaty obligations. Ms Pickthall
submitted that following AZ, a judge must not grant permission on an
unarticulated ground of appeal, in the circumstances of this case, unless
there was a Robinson obvious point.  That would have to be a point in
favour of the appellant who would otherwise lose the appeal.

Ms Pickthall relied in addition upon the UT's subsequent decision, applying
AZ in Durueke (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach) [2019] UKUT 197 (IAC).  In
that case, UTJ Gill applied AZ pointing out that, if a judge were to grant
permission on a ground not raised by an applicant, then the judge should
indicate which of the bases set out in AZ was satisfied and should only do
so if the evidence necessary to establish the point in question was
apparent from the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and/or the
decision of the judge who decided the appeal and/or the documents on file.

Mr Howells, on behalf of the Secretary of State accepted that the
respondent had, in effect, conceded that the first two requirements in
Exception 1 were met in the decision letter, having only relied on the
third requirement in Exception 1, namely the "very significant obstacles"
test.  Nevertheless, he submitted that UT was now entitled to go behind
that concession because there was a plain mistake of fact and Judge McClure
was entitled to grant permission on this point.

The statement of the Upper Tribunal in AZ is both clear and strongly
expressed: permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should not be granted
by a judge on a ground not relied upon by an applicant unless either the
point is a Robinson obvious point or there is a good reason why the Upper
Tribunal should consider the legal issue.  The latter exception was stated
with some caution by the UT in AZ derived from the Court of Appeal's
decision in Bulale v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 806 where the Court of Appeal
recognised such an exception but in the context of an appeal to the Court
of Appeal.  The UT, tentatively, considered that also might apply to
appeals to the Upper Tribunal lower down in the judicial hierarchy.  It is
not suggested that could be applied in the present circumstances since
there is no issue of law of general importance raised by Judge Lloyd's
application of Exception 1 and, in particular, the first requirement that
the appellant should have spent "most" of his life in the UK with lawful
residence.  It is purely a factual issue and whether he was mistaken in
concluding that requirement was met.

It is not wholly clear from reading the Upper Tribunal's decision in AZ
whether the Tribunal was seeking to issue guidance, albeit "strong"
guidance, to judges of both the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal when
considering permissions to appeal or it intended to determine the
jurisdiction of a judge considering a permission application and, in
effect, the jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal if permission were granted
outside of the categories recognised.  Certainly, when considering AZ in
Durueke, UTJ Gill referred to the decision in AZ as giving

             "guidance on when it would be appropriate to grant permission
             to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on a ground that was not
             advanced by the applicant." (my emphasis)

When I put the jurisdictional point to Ms Pickthall, in the context of a
grant of permission which was solely upon an unarticulated ground in the
applicant's application and within one or more of the categories in AZ, she
invited me to find that the judge granting permission and, more
particularly, the Upper Tribunal, had no jurisdiction to consider the
appeal on that ground and since it would be the only ground, I suppose that
must entail, that the Upper Tribunal would not have a valid appeal before
it.

I should be very cautious in accepting that is the effect of such a grant
of permission would deny the UT jurisdiction.  However, it is unnecessary
for me to determine that issue as that is not what occurred in this case.
Undoubtedly, Judge McClure granted permission on a ground which he was
fully entitled to grant permission upon, namely whether Judge Lloyd had
failed to give adequate reasons for finding that it would be "unduly harsh"
on the appellant's partner and son if he were deported.  The Upper Tribunal
certainly, in my judgment, has jurisdiction to hear the appeal given that
ground.

In those circumstances, the better approach, in my view, is that the Upper
Tribunal may consider the additional ground even though it does not fall
within the Robinson category.  I do not read the Upper Tribunal's decisions
in AZ and Durueke as prohibiting consideration of that ground rather than
issuing strong guidance to judges that permission should not be granted
upon unarticulated grounds other than in the specified circumstances. The
origin of the Robinson obvious point is that such points of law must be
taken - because of their potential effect on the UK's Treaty obligations -
and not that other points of law may never be taken.  The UT must, in my
judgment, have a discretion to consider such points where permission has
been granted even if the guidance discourages judges when considering
permission applications identifying non-Robinson obvious points of law.

Mr Howells accepted in his submissions that, in effect, the Secretary of
State had conceded that the appellant met the requirements of Exception 1
apart from the "very significant obstacles" requirement. As Judge Lloyd
noted (at para 50), it "would appear not to be disputed that the appellant
had been lawfully resident in the UK for much of his life and that he is
socially and culturally integrated into the UK".

However, a concession made by the respondent, may be withdrawn where there
is good reason and it would be fair and reasonable to do so (see, SSHD v
Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA Civ 106 at [22]; NR(Jamaiaca) v SSHD [2009] EWCA
Civ 856 at [12] and AK(Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 999).  The
appellant will, if he cannot meet the requirement, be prejudiced in his Art
8 claim since Exception 1 will definitely not apply regardless of whether
there are "very significant obstacles" to his integration in Zimbabwe.
But, he is not prejudiced in having a full opportunity to argue its
applicability on the facts.  The judge's decision, nevertheless, as will be
clear from consideration of "Issue 2" below, proceeds on the basis of a
plain error as to the application of limb 1 in the light of the case law.
I do not consider the fact that the issue has not been disputed until this
point is, in itself, a good reason not to permit the respondent to take a
point which, as will become clear shortly, made any concession on the first
limb of Exception 1 plainly mistaken.

For these reasons, therefore, I do not accept Ms Pickthall's submission
that, in effect, the Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider the
unarticulated ground relied on by Judge McClure.  Further, I accept that
the Upper Tribunal should allow the Secretary of State to rely on that
unarticulated ground and withdraw any concession that limb 1 of Exception 1
was satisfied.

   Issue 2

Ms Pickthall submitted that, in any event, the appellant did satisfy the
"most" requirement in Exception 1. "Most" means more than half his life
(see SSHD v SC(Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 at [53]).  At the date of the
FtT hearing, the appellant was 10 days short of being 28 years old.  He had
to establish, therefore, give or take a week, 14 years lawful residence.

Ms Pickthall submitted that the appellant's periods of lawful leave were
(1) 6 months on his visit visa (6 months); (2) between 23 February 2011 and
23 February 2014 (3 years); and (3) 30 April 2014 until the date of the
judge's hearing on 23 January 2020 (5 years and 9 months). That is a total
of 9 years and 3 months of leave.

In addition, Ms Pickthall submitted, it was appropriate to take into
account period when he was granted temporary admission between 9 April
2009, when he claimed asylum, and 23 February 2011 when, although his claim
was refused, he was granted discretionary leave (1 year and 10 months).  In
addition, account could be taken of periods of "temporary admission" as a
dependant on his aunt's claims between 15 February 2002 to 23 June 2003
when her application for ILR was refused (1 year and 4 months).  Also on
the same basis when another application under Art 3 of the ECHR was made by
his aunt on 5 January 2005 until 4 April 2005 when it was refused (3
months); as well as a further unsuccessful application under the Family ILR
Exercise made on 21 April 2005 but which appears to have been deemed
ineligible the same day.  The refusal letter records that the application
was considered ineligible for the Family ILR Exercise on the date it is
made.  It appears that no period of "temporary admission", therefore, can
be relied on arising from this application.  The total period of "temporary
admission" is, therefore, 3 years and 5 months.

Adding together the periods of leave and temporary admission, the appellant
still falls short of 14 years as the total is 12 years and 8 months. Ms
Pickthall sought to make good any shortfall by arguing that the appellant's
presence in the UK from first arrival in 2000 as a minor also meant that
his residence should not be treated as anything other than "lawful
residence".

Ms Pickthall relied upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v
SC(Jamaica) in which, she submitted, the Court of Appeal held that
"temporary admission" as an asylum seeker counted as "lawful residence" for
the purposes of Exception 1 in s.117C(4).

In SC(Jamaica), the court recognised that "lawful residence" for the
purposes of Exception 1 could encompass not only period of leave but also,
at least in some circumstances, periods of "temporary admission".  In that
case, some reliance was placed upon the definition of "lawful residence" in
para 276B(b) for the purposes of the 10-year long residence rule in para
276B. Para 276A(b)(ii) provides that "lawful residence" includes:

             "temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act where
             leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted".

At [55]-[57], Sir Ernest Ryder, Senior President of Tribunals, said this:

             "55.  The Secretary of State says that if she had intended to
             apply this definition [para 276A(b)] to paragraph 399A of the
             Rules she would have said so but that simply leaves the
             question unanswered. It is also unhelpful to say that the
             definition in paragraph 276A(b) does not include lawful
             residence under EU law to which an applicant is entitled. What
             is submitted by SC is not that paragraph 276A(b) should
             directly apply but that an analogous interpretation of lawful
             residence should be applied to the wording in paragraph 399A.

             56. It appears to be common ground that a person is granted
             temporary admission from the date of their application to be a
             refugee. Temporary admission for an adult is a precarious
             status. Such a person cannot work and by the very nature of it
             being precarious, social and cultural integration cannot be
             established. It is only once the asylum claim is granted that
             the person can start to build a life in the UK. On this basis,
             a rational basis for lawful residence would be a date from
             which a person has a valid right to remain. That is the
             submission of the Secretary of State. On the other hand,
             'lawful' ordinarily has the meaning 'permitted by law' and if
             a person is permitted to remain by temporary leave that should
             be sufficient. That would at least provide internal
             consistency to the different usages of the same phrase in the
             Rules and would also reflect the fact that the concept of
             precarious status is not relevant to a child, and hence to SC,
             for part of the time under consideration on the facts of this
             case.

             57. Of the two possible interpretations put to this court, I
             prefer that which is internally consistent and which provides
             for the circumstances of both adult and children ie that
             lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph 399A(a) runs
             from the date of application for refugee status. On that basis
             the FtT took an appropriate date from which to determine
             lawful residence."

It is important to notice that the Senior President's acceptance that
"temporary admission" could count was made in the context of (a) an
application for asylum; and (b) an application which was ultimately
successful.  He does not appear to contemplate "temporary admission"
counting when the application is not an asylum application - and it was not
explored before me whether temporary admission is granted in the context of
other applications - and, crucially, when the application is ultimately
unsuccessful. Both caveats, in particular the latter one in respect of each
of the aunt's unsuccessful applications, would mean the period of
"temporary admission" relied upon by Ms Pickthall could not count as
"lawful residence".  Likewise, the appellant's own asylum application was
unsuccessful even though he was granted discretionary leave in February
2011.

Davis LJ, in his judgment, also recognised that "temporary admission" could
count as "lawful residence".  At [71]-[73], he said this:
             "71. I find the interpretation  to  be  given  to  the  phrase
             "lawfully  resident"  -  not  defined  for  the  purposes   of
             paragraph 399A - altogether more difficult.
             72. The phrase has an appearance of some  formality.  Further,
             as  Mr  Malik  pointed  out,  residence  ordinarily   connotes
             something more than presence. I see force in the argument that
             in the present context lawful residence at least requires  the
             grant of leave to enter or remain. As Mr  Malik  pointed  out,
             there are cases where those who  are  not  otherwise  lawfully
             resident - for example, an applicant whose appeal rights  have
             all been exhausted and is potentially liable to removal -  may
             still be granted temporary admission.
             73. However, for the (specific) purposes of the provisions  in
             the Immigration Rules  relating  to  long  residence,  "lawful
             residence" includes continuous residence pursuant to temporary
             admission where leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  subsequently
             granted: paragraph 276A (b). I fully accept that it  does  not
             follow that that is also necessarily then so for the  purposes
             of paragraph 399A. But it at least shows that  Parliament  was
             accepting that temporary admission is not entirely and  always
             to be excluded from notions of "lawful residence": although of
             course in many contexts it may  be  so  excluded  (cf.  R  (ST
             (Eritrea) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 12). At all events, a  person  is
             not necessarily "unlawfully" present  in  the  United  Kingdom
             simply because he has no vested right of  residence:  see  cf.
             Akinyemi v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 236. Moreover, in a case  such
             as the present the grant of leave to remain will have been  on
             the footing of acknowledging a pre-existing  status.  It  thus
             makes some sense for the lawful residence at least  to  relate
             back to the date of the application for asylum: at which  date
             (as was accepted before us on this appeal) temporary admission
             was to be deemed to be  granted.  Overall,  albeit  with  some
             hesitation, I consider that the approach  taken  in  paragraph
             276A (b) can and should be applied by analogy to  the  present
             context.  If  this  does  not  represent  the  wishes  of  the
             Government the remedy is to provide a definition of the phrase
             for the specific purposes of Rule 399A."

Davis LJ, likewise, ties the relevance of "temporary admission" to "lawful
residence" to cases where it is granted pending a successful application.
It is less clear whether he would restrict it to asylum cases - where a
recognition of status dates back to the application as in SC(Jamaica)
itself - or whether he would apply it to other applications where leave is
granted.  Certainly, the "present context" would suggest it is restricted
to asylum applications but the approach in para 276A(b) to which he refers
with approval in [73] might suggest the same approach should apply to other
successful applications where leave is granted.

Henderson LJ agreed with both judgments.

Left there, Ms Pickthall's submission finds no traction in SC(Jamaica)
except possibly for the appellant's application for asylum made on 9
February 2009 which resulted in a grant of 3 years' discretionary leave,
albeit on a different basis, on 23 February 2011.  That would fall within a
broader view, if that it be, in Davis LJ's judgment.

Any broader view has, however, subsequently been rejected by the Court of
Appeal in CI(Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 (Senior President of
Tribunal's; and Hickenbottom and Leggatt LJJ).  I was not referred to this
recent decision by the parties.  Judgment was handed down on 22 November
2019 prior to the hearing before Judge Lloyd.  It is directly relevant to
Ms Pickthall's submissions and the scope of the reasoning in SC(Jamaica).
It adopts a clear and unequivocal view.

In that case, putting the facts simply, the claimant relied up periods of
temporary admission/temporary release or whilst on bail as amounting to
"lawful residence" pending a successful application for ILR under the
"Family ILR Exercise" for the purposes of Exception 1 in s.117C(4).  The
claimant relied upon SC(Jamaica) and its adoption, it was said, of the
definition of "lawful residence" in para 276A(b)(ii) for the purposes of
the 10-year long residence rule.  The Court of Appeal unanimously rejected
that argument.  At [40]-[41], Leggatt LJ (as he then was) set out the
approach to "lawful residence":
             "40....It makes no sense to treat someone who  is  present  in
             the UK in breach of immigration laws and liable to  removal  -
             for example, because  (as  in  the  present  case)  they  have
             remained in the UK after a limited leave to  enter  or  remain
             has expired - as "lawfully resident"  in  the  UK  within  the
             meaning of section 117C(4)(a) of the 2002 Act, whether or  not
             the person has been granted  temporary  admission  or  release
             pending deportation or is on  immigration  bail.  To  describe
             such a  person  as  "lawfully  resident"  in  the  UK  is  not
             consistent with the ordinary  use  of  language.  It  is  also
             inconsistent  with  the  policy   underlying   the   statutory
             provision. The reason for focusing on the period for which the
             person concerned has not merely  been  resident  but  lawfully
             resident in the UK  must  be  that,  as  provided  in  section
             117B(4), little weight should generally be given to a  private
             life established at  a  time  when  a  person  is  in  the  UK
             unlawfully. As Underhill LJ observed in Akinyemi at  para  42,
             that in turn is because, as  a  general  principle,  a  person
             cannot legitimately expect to be allowed to stay in a  country
             on the basis of relationships formed and ties created when  he
             or she has no right to be living there in the first place.  In
             Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2014) 60 EHRR 17,  para  103,  the
             European Court made  it  clear  that  this  principle  is  not
             displaced where a state 'tolerates the presence of an alien in
             its territory thereby allowing him or her to await a  decision
             on an application for a residence permit,  an  appeal  against
             such a decision or a fresh application for a residence  permit
             ...'
             41. Furthermore, the fact that sections 117B(4) and 117C(4)(a)
             of the 2002 Act have a common rationale means  that  to  treat
             someone who is in breach of a legal obligation by being in the
             UK and is legally liable to be removed as "lawfully  resident"
             for the purpose of section 117C(4)(a)  would  be  inconsistent
             with the Akinyemi case, which treated such a person as in  the
             UK "unlawfully" for the purpose of section 117B(4).  Although,
             as Underhill LJ pointed out, the opposite is  not  necessarily
             true, it would be illogical to regard someone who is in the UK
             "unlawfully" as nevertheless "lawfully resident" here, for the
             purpose  of  the  same  exercise  of  deciding   whether   the
             interference with private life caused by deporting the  person
             on account of criminal offending is justified  in  the  public
             interest."

At [42]-[43], Leggatt LJ identified the issue of whether a person who has
successfully applied for leave should, prior to the outcome of the
application, be treated as "lawfully resident".  He concluded that they
should not.  He said:
             "42. I recognise that it is not CI's case that anyone  granted
             temporary admission or immigration bail is "lawfully resident"
             in the UK for the purpose of section 117C(4)(a). The  question
             is, however, whether there is a good reason to treat the  fact
             that such a person has made an application for leave to remain
             which is subsequently granted  as  bringing  them  within  the
             scope of the provision.
             43. In general, it seems to me that there is not. The grant of
             leave to enter or remain to someone  who  does  not  currently
             have it is not ordinarily a matter of entitlement. By the same
             token, the Secretary of State is not ordinarily under a  legal
             obligation to grant an  application  for  leave  to  enter  or
             remain. It is a matter of administrative discretion. A foreign
             national whose presence in the UK is in breach of  immigration
             law but is tolerated while such an application is pending  and
             who develops a private  or  family  life  during  this  period
             cannot claim to do so with a legitimate expectation  of  being
             allowed to stay,  even  if  the  application  is  subsequently
             granted."

 0. At [44]-[48], Leggatt LJ considered the case of SC(Jamaica) and what it
    decided.  He concluded that it did not adopt the definition in para
    276A(b) of "lawful residence" and was limited to situations where an
    individual asylum-seeker was granted temporary admission and was then
    successful in establishing their refugee status.  He said this:

             "44. I do not accept that SC (Jamaica) is authority for the
             proposition that "lawful residence" means the same in section
             117C(4)(a) of the 2002 Act as it does in paragraph 276A of the
             Immigration Rules. The definition in paragraph 276A showed
             only, as Davis LJ observed in SC (Jamaica) at para 73, that
             "Parliament was accepting that temporary admission is not
             entirely and always to be excluded from notions of 'lawful
             residence': although of course in many contexts it may be so
             excluded..." What was actually decided by the Court of Appeal
             in SC (Jamaica) was that an asylum seeker was lawfully
             resident pending the outcome of their successful application
             for asylum. As Davis LJ observed, and as Mr Irwin for the
             Secretary of State on this appeal submitted, this is
             explicable on the basis that upholding an asylum claim
             involves acknowledging a pre-existing status rather than
             exercising a discretion to grant permission to stay in the
             country. As stated in the guidelines issued by the United
             Nations High Commissioner for Refugees:
                      "A person is a refugee  within  the  meaning  of  the
                      [Refugee]  Convention  as  soon  as  he  fulfils  the
                      criteria contained  in  the  definition.  This  would
                      necessarily occur prior to  the  time  at  which  his
                      refugee status is formally determined. Recognition of
                      his refugee status does  not  therefore  make  him  a
                      refugee but declares him  to  be  one.  He  does  not
                      become a  refugee  because  of  recognition,  but  is
                      recognised because he is a refugee."
                 See  UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures   and   Criteria   for
                 Determining Refugee Status (1992) at para 28.  The  special
                 position of asylum-seekers is  also  reflected  in  section
                 77(1) of  the  2002  Act,  which  provides  that,  while  a
                 person's claim for asylum is pending, he may not be removed
                 from or required to leave  the  UK  in  accordance  with  a
                 provision of the Immigration Acts.
             45. Ms Dubinsky pointed out that in  R  (ST)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 12; [2012] 2 AC 135,
             the Supreme Court held that a  refugee  is  not  "lawfully  in
             [the] territory" of a contracting state within the meaning  of
             article 32 of the Refugee Convention unless their presence  is
             lawful under the domestic law of the  contracting  state;  and
             that under UK domestic law a refugee who has been  temporarily
             admitted to the UK  while  their  application  for  asylum  is
             determined but who has not yet been granted leave to remain in
             the UK is not lawfully present for this purpose.
             46. In the ST case, however, although the  claimant  had  been
             recognised to be a refugee  from  Eritrea,  the  Secretary  of
             State was contending that  she  could  safely  be  removed  to
             Ethiopia, and this issue had  not  yet  been  resolved.  Under
             article 33(1) of the Refugee  Convention,  contracting  states
             have an obligation  not  to  expel  or  return  a  refugee  to
             territories where their life or freedom may be  threatened  on
             account of a reason which qualifies  the  person  for  refugee
             status. However, that does not  prevent  a  contracting  state
             from expelling a refugee who is not lawfully  present  in  its
             territory and who can be removed to a safe  country.  This  is
             reflected in paragraph 334 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  under
             which an application for asylum will only be  granted  if  its
             refusal would result in the applicant being required to go, in
             breach of the Refugee Convention, to a country in which  their
             life or freedom would be threatened.
             47. In these circumstances it can be said that being a refugee
             within the meaning of the  Refugee  Convention  does  not,  by
             itself,  give  rise  to  a  legitimate  expectation  of  being
             permitted to stay in the  UK  (and  establish  a  private  and
             family life here): it is only where the  individual  concerned
             satisfies the conditions for being granted leave to remain  as
             a refugee - including the condition  that  there  is  no  safe
             country to which they can be removed - that such a  legitimate
             expectation arises. The subsequent grant of  leave  to  remain
             shows that this condition  was  met  and  that  it  would,  in
             consequence, have been a breach of  the  UK's  obligations  in
             international law to expel such an  individual  from  the  UK.
             This provides a justification for treating  an  applicant  for
             asylum who has been temporarily admitted to the UK while their
             application is determined  and  who  is  subsequently  granted
             leave to remain as a refugee as "lawfully resident" in the  UK
             during this period for the purposes of section  117C(4)(a)  of
             the 2002 Act.
             48. It is not necessary or pertinent to pursue  this  question
             further, however, as the decision in SC (Jamaica) is a binding
             precedent. What matters for present purposes is that there  is
             no warrant for extending the ratio of that case to overstayers
             whose claim for asylum has been rejected but who  later  apply
             on the basis of their continued presence in the UK for a legal
             right to remain."

Sir Ernest Ryder, the Senior President of Tribunals and Hickinbottom LJ
agreed with Leggatt LJ's judgment.  Sir Ernest Ryder, of course, gave the
leading judgment in SC(Jamaica).

It is now clear, following CI(Nigeria), that periods of temporary admission
only counts towards "lawful residence" under Exception 1 if granted pending
an asylum application which is ultimately successful.  Periods of temporary
admission prior to any other application for leave (even if successful) do
not count nor do periods of temporary leave granted pending an asylum
application which is unsuccessful. As regards the latter point, the Court
of Appeal did not demur from the claimant's concession that the UT had been
wrong to count a period of temporary admission pending the determination of
his unsuccessful asylum claim (see [34] and [54]).  As regards the former
point, on the facts of the case, the claimant could not rely upon any
temporary admission/ release/ or whilst on bail following an application
under the Family ILR Exercise even though that application was successful
(see [37] and [54]).

For all these reasons, the appellant cannot rely upon any period of
temporary admission (if that was indeed granted to him) prior to any of his
aunt's unsuccessful (though that is not crucial) applications for leave or
ILR and on which he was a dependent.  Likewise, he cannot rely upon any
temporary admission granted pending his unsuccessful asylum application
made on 9 April 2009 and refused on 23 February 2011.

What, then, of the appellant's residence as a minor which Ms Pickthall also
relied upon?  In the light of CI(Nigeria), and in particular Leggatt LJ's
reasoning at [40], residence without any legal status following overstaying
cannot be characterised as "lawful residence" even if that residence is by
a minor.

The one case that might be said to provide any support for Ms Pickthall's
submission is Akinyemi v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 236.  In the context of
s.117B(4) of the NIA Act 2002, the Court of Appeal accepted a minor's
presence in the UK would not be unlawful, despite the absence of any leave,
where that child was born in the UK and therefore had never entered
illegally or overstayed leave and also, importantly was not removeable.
But that is an unusual, and specific, instance which cannot be applied by
analogy to the appellant (see the reasoning of Underhill LJ especially at
[41]-[42]; and CI(Nigeria) at [29]-[31] per Leggatt LJ).  Here, the
appellant required leave to remain after his leave expired with his entry
visa.  He was then here unlawfully.  He would have been removable under
s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 thereafter until he was granted
leave to remain in 2009.  Whether he was at fault or not, without leave, or
temporary admission, it cannot be said as a matter of ordinary language
that his residence in the UK was lawful.

I do not think anything untoward should read into the judge's use of the
word "much" rather than "most" in para 50 of his determination when
referring to Exception 1.   I am unpersuaded that this experienced
Immigration Judge did not have in mind the requirement that the appellant
must show "most" of his life (i.e. more than half) has been spent lawfully
in the UK. The judge was, of course, led to believe it was not in issue
before him.  However,  in my judgment, the judge erred in law in accepting
that the appellant had been "lawfully resident" for "most" of his life. His
periods of leave came nowhere near establishing the necessary 14 years
"lawful residence".   On the facts, the judge could not be properly
satisfied that the appellant met the requirement in limb 1 of Exception 1
in s.117C(4).

Issue 3

Issue 3 concerns the judge's conclusion that the third element in Exception
1 was met, namely that there were "very significant obstacles" to the
appellant's "integration" in Zimbabwe on return.  Ms Pickthall did,
initially, seek to persuade me that permission had not been granted on this
ground set out in the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  The basis
for that submission is that Judge McClure made no reference to this ground.
 In my view, that is not a proper understanding of the grant of permission
in a case such as this.  Unless Judge McClure excluded or refused
permission on a ground, the fact that he only specifically referred to some
of the grounds (here one of the grounds plus the unarticulated one), did
not exclude there being a grant of permission generally on all the grounds
set out in the application for permission (see e.g. Safi and others
(permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC)).  That is the
natural and, in my judgment, proper understanding of a generalised grant of
permission where only some of the grounds are referred to.

Mr Howells referred me to the case law of Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC)
and the Court of Appeal's decision in Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932.
He submitted that there was a "high test" to be satisfied and that Judge
Lloyd in his decision had failed to give adequate reasons why that high
test was met.

In response, Ms Pickthall accepted that the test was a "high" one and
referred me to the Court of Appeal's decision in Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA
Civ 813 that the issue of "integration" had to be looked at broadly, she
submitted, Judge Lloyd had done so at paras 52-54 of his decision in
reaching a factual conclusion in the appellant's favour.

In Parveen, the Court of Appeal accepted, following Treebhawon, that the
phrase "very significant" connoted an "elevated" threshold and accepted the
UT's view that the test was not met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval"
(see [9] per Underhill LJ).  The court went on, however, not to accept all
that had been said in Treebhawon ([9]:

             "But I am not sure that saying that 'mere' hardship or
             difficulty or hurdles, even if multiplied, will not
             'generally' suffice adds anything of substance.  The task of
             the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any given case is
             simply to assess the obstacles to integration relied on,
             whether characterised as hardship or difficulty or anything
             else, and to decide whether they regard them as 'very
             significant'."

As regards the notion of "integration", the Court of Appeal in Parveen
adopted with approval what had been previously said by the Court of Appeal
in the case of Kamara to which Ms Pickthall referred me.  There, Sales LJ
(as he then was) said (at [14]):

             "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's 'integration'
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported
             ... is a broad one.  It is not confined to the mere ability to
             find a job or to sustain life while living in the other
             country.  It is not appropriate to treat the statutory
             language as subject to some gloss and it will usually be
             sufficient for a court or Tribunal simply to direct itself in
             the terms that Parliament has chosen to use.  The idea of
             'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made
             as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in
             terms of understanding how life in the society in that other
             country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so
             as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
             be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and
             to build up within a reasonable time a variety of human
             relationships to give substance to the individual's private or
             family life."

Judge Lloyd dealt with the issue of "very significant obstacles" at paras
52-54 of his determination as follows:

                  "52. Having regard to the totality of evidence I cannot as
                  such dispute that the Appellant is culturally and socially
                  integrated in the UK.  Also against such a background and
                  after such elapse of time, I do believe that there would
                  be very significant obstacles to his return to Zimbabwe.
                  Moreover, in the analysis it would be unduly harsh for [F]
                  and [Ms T] to live in Zimbabwe.  They have no direct
                  experience of life there.  It would be a wholly unknown
                  environment and culture for them.  Despite her depth of
                  feeling for the Appellant, [Ms T] makes it abundantly
                  clear that she and her son will not relocate there in any
                  circumstances.

                  53.  In 2011, the Respondent accepted that the Appellant
                  had lost contact with his family.  He has no family in
                  Zimbabwe except for a 90-year-old grandmother who is
                  frail.  The Appellant's mother died on 3rd July 1993 when
                  the Appellant was only 15 months old.  The death
                  certificate is at page 98 of the Appellant's bundle.  The
                  Appellant never knew his father.

                  54.  In all the circumstances presented by the evidence I
                  find it impossible to conclude that the Appellant can
                  reasonably face re-integration into his home country some
                  twenty years after he came to the UK as a young child."

The judge's reasons are brief but, of course, it is necessary to read his
judgment as a whole.  Nowhere does the judge set out the "elevated"
requirements of the test of "very significant obstacles".  Indeed, at para
54 the judge concludes that it would not be "reasonable" for the appellant
to integrate in Zimbabwe.  That is not the elevated test of "very
significant obstacles".  Of course, the judge was not required to 'gloss'
the statutory words, indeed that might well have been inappropriate.
However, I am unable to read the judge's brief reasons as engaging with the
"elevated" test of "very significant obstacles".  It may well be that the
appellant faces real difficulties in reintegrating but the reasons given by
the judge do not make clear why those difficulties reached the "elevated"
threshold required by Exception 1.  The only obstacles identified by the
judge are that he has lost contact with his family in Zimbabwe.  He is, of
course, 28 years old and the judge does not engage with the issue of his
prospects, in particular financial prospects on return to Zimbabwe.  The
judge makes no findings on whether the appellant, despite his social and
cultural integration in the UK, has lost his social and cultural
background, given he lived with an aunt in the UK, concerning Zimbabwe.
The judge simply observes that he has no family contacts except with his 90-
year-old grandmother.

Consequently, I accept the Secretary of State's submission that the judge
erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons as to why the appellant
met the third requirement in Exception 1.

Issue 4

This issue concerns the requirement in Exception 2 in s.117C(5) that the
impact of the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon his
partner and son.

It is accepted that the judge set out the correct law following the Supreme
Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) at paras 40 and 42 of his determination.
In particular, referring to the Court of Appeal's decision in PG (Jamaica)
v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1213, the judge noted that a degree of harshness
affecting a partner or child necessarily goes with the deportation of a
foreign criminal.  That, in itself, is not sufficient to satisfy Exception
2 on the basis that the impact is "unduly" harsh.

Mr Howells contended that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons,
particularly in paras 46-49, why the impact upon the appellant's partner
and son went beyond what would have been inevitable as a result of the
appellant's deportation.  He submitted that the judge had speculated in
para 48 when he had concluded that the separation of the appellant from his
son and partner would be permanent and that they would not see each other
again.  Mr Howells submitted that the test requires more than this as that
might well be the inevitable consequence of a foreign criminal being
deported.  He submitted that although the judge took into account that Ms T
could not currently afford to visit Zimbabwe, he should not have assumed
that that would necessarily always be the case.

Ms Pickthall submitted that the judge had correctly directed himself and
had accepted that it was a high test to satisfy in Exception 2.  She
submitted that at paras 46-49 of his determination, the judge set out
adequate reasons and had relied upon the independent social worker's report
at paras 53-56 as to the impact upon the appellant's partner and family.
She submitted, following the Court of Appeal's decision in AD Lee [2011]
EWCA Civ 348 that the judge had not erred in law, he had made findings of
facts on the evidence and had reached a proper and sustainable conclusion.

As I have said, it is accepted that the judge correctly directed himself as
to the approach to the "unduly harsh" issue under Exception 2 at [40]-[42].
 The judge's reasoning which is challenged by the Secretary of State is set
out at paras 46-49 as follows:

                  "46. However, Ms Pickthall, for the Appellant has invited
                  the Tribunal to conclude that it would be unduly harsh for
                  [F] and [Ms T] to remain in the UK without the Appellant.
                  In her evidence, by way of written statement and also her
                  live evidence at this appeal hearing, [Ms T] explained the
                  nature of the bond and relationship between the Appellant
                  and [F].  She did emphasise that even at barely 4 years
                  old, [F's] behaviour has been noticeably affected by his
                  father's absence.  I believe that she is honest and
                  credible in making that statement.  She has given her
                  evidence to this appeal in a demonstrably sincere but
                  acutely emotional manner.  I believe that she is telling
                  the truth about the difficulties for [F] in being [Ms T]
                  in being separated from his father.  I acknowledge that
                  there must inevitably be a risk that to be forcibly
                  separated from his father (probably with permanence) at
                  such a young age will inevitably emotionally scar him, for
                  his whole life.  It cannot be unexpected that he will
                  encounter significant emotional and behavioural problems
                  in later life because of such an event.  [Ms T] herself
                  leads quite a harsh life, working in a low-paid job in
                  Cardiff to support herself and her son, and to provide him
                  with nursery schooling.  It would I find be a heavy burden
                  upon her to have to look after her son in the long term
                  alone.  If he is returned to Zimbabwe the costs of keeping
                  physically in touch would be unmanageable for her.  The
                  most that she and her young son could expect would be
                  sporadic 'face time' contact with the Appellant, which is
                  hardly satisfactory for a development of a father-son
                  relationship let alone [Ms T's] relationship with her
                  chosen partner.

                  47.  It was suggested in the Reasons for Refusal Letter
                  that [Ms T] 'has a family network that she can call upon
                  for support'.  The family network is situated in London;
                  [Ms T] lives in Cardiff.  That is where the family had
                  settled before the Appellant's imprisonment.  That is
                  where [F] is receiving his early years schooling.  What is
                  clear is that given the circumstances, any support of the
                  partner and child by the maternal family is undoubtedly
                  limited.  [Ms T] would not be able to afford to live in
                  London as a single parent or afford childcare there.  I
                  have no reason to dispute that [F] has settled into his
                  nursery in Cardiff.  He has already experienced disruption
                  in his very tender years; and further upheaval would
                  inevitably lead to behavioural difficulties either
                  immediately or as he develops into adolescence and
                  adulthood.  That is not a disadvantage which should be
                  heaped upon him by virtue of misdemeanour of his father.

                  48.  I have considered the independent social worker's
                  report of [SP] (A68 - 93).  The report highlights the very
                  real difficulties that will be faced by [F] and his mother
                  if the Appellant were deported.  She emphasises that if
                  the Appellant is removed to Zimbabwe there will be no
                  opportunity for direct contact between him, his son and
                  his partner.  It cannot be expected that the Appellant
                  will garner sufficient funds in Zimbabwe to facilitate
                  visits by his partner and his child.  The harsh reality is
                  that [F] would never see his father in person again.  I do
                  not dispute that that would be an unduly harsh outcome.
                  Moreover, it was evident from the behaviour of [Ms T] at
                  the appeal, that the removal of her partner of some eight
                  years will be devastating for her.

                  49.  In financial terms, if the Appellant is deported, [Ms
                  T] would inevitably have to resort to support by the State
                  in all aspects of her life, housing, school meals, and all
                  conceivable family benefits available under the state
                  system."

Ms Pickthall drew my attention to paras 53-56 of the independent social
worker's report in support of the judge's reasons and conclusion.  There,
the independent social worker refers to the importance of attachment
between children and their carers particularly in a child's formative years
and that interference with that can "potentially be harmful to their
development and functioning as children and later as adults" (para 53).  At
para 54, the independent social worker states that the appellant's removal
to Zimbabwe means that the attachment that his son has for him "will be
disrupted".  It has been shown, the report goes on, that disruptive
attachments "can therefore be detrimental to children and young people,
particularly their mental health and social development".  At para 56, the
independent social worker concludes that it is not a viable option for the
appellant's family to go with him to Zimbabwe.  The latter, of course, is
accepted by the Secretary of State and on her behalf by Mr Howells before
me.

In my judgment, these passages to which I was referred do no more than
identify the inevitable consequences upon a parent and child relationship,
and also upon a relationship between partners. if the parent/partner is
deported.

Mr Howells referred me to paras 50, 54 and 62 of the independent social
worker's report.  Para 50, which must have featured in the judge's mind,
states that if deported then the appellant and his family would be
"separated indefinitely" as it would not be "financial viable" to
facilitate direct contact between them.  At para 54 he deals with the
disruption to the attachment relationship between the appellant and his
son.  Para 62 states that the son's maintaining a "secure attachment" with
the appellant will be "conducive for his identity, emotional and
behavioural development".

Reading these provisions together, I do not accept that Judge Lloyd's
reasons properly found a conclusion that the impact upon the appellant's
son and partner would be "unduly harsh" in that they would go beyond the
inevitable consequence of separation between parent and child and partners
affected by an individual's deportation.  The reasons are inadequate, in my
judgment, to sustain a finding that Exception 2 is met.  The judge's
reliance upon the financial impact upon the appellant's partner is, with
respect, not an unusual consequence (however unfortunate) upon a single
mother who is separated from her partner as a result of his deportation.
The financial consequences identified by the judge, and Ms T's need to rely
upon state support, are not adequate reasons, in my view, to sustain a
finding that the consequences to her (and through her their son) would be
unduly harsh.  The issue of separation and interference with the
"attachment" between the appellant and his son reflects no more than would
inevitably be caused by an individual's deportation leaving behind in the
UK a son with the appellant's partner.  The judge was speculating that the
separation would be permanent which, in any event, might be a usual
incidence of deportation and not something that equates to "undue
harshness".  For these reasons, therefore, I accept Mr Howells' submission
that the judge erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons why
Exception 2 was met.

Decision

Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That decision
cannot stand and is set aside.

Following some discussion as to the potential disposal of the appeal, both
representatives accepted that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal in order for the decision to be remade.  On remaking the
decision, the judge will need to make fresh findings in relation to
Exceptions 1 and 2 in s.117C(4) and (5) - although the appellant cannot,
for the reasons I have given, establish the first limb of Exception 1.
However, to the extent that neither Exception is found to be met, the judge
will need to make relevant findings in relation to s.117C(6) and whether
there are "very compelling circumstances" over and above Exceptions 1 and
2.

For these reasons, and given the nature and extent of fact-finding required
and having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing
by a judge other than Judge B Lloyd.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

         Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                10 July 2020

