
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11483/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2018                |On 15th January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Gbenga Sodiq Fagbire
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Record, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

For convenience purposes, I shall employ the appellations "Appellant" and
"Respondent" as at first instance.  The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria
whose appeal was allowed by Judge Khawar in a decision promulgated on 19th
September 2018.

The judge found (paragraph 32) that the Appellant's application was
properly refused under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules on the basis
that he did not meet the suitability requirements thereof (S-LTR.1.6).  The
reason for that finding (which is not challenged) is that the Appellant
used deception in the taking of an English language test and therefore
engaged in a fraud.

Having found against the Appellant on that issue, the judge considered
Article 8 ECHR outwith the Rules, referring to well-known case law.  He
found that the Appellant was involved in a genuine and subsisting
relationship with his spouse and in addition they had two young children to
whom both the Appellant and the Sponsor were the primary carers (paragraph
37).  He found in relation to the details of their family life together
that both the Appellant and Sponsor were credible witnesses (paragraph 38).
 He noted that the children were British citizens and that the Sponsor
would be earning within a week of the appeal hearing a sum of ï¿½21,000 per
annum.  Because of the fraudulent act in using a proxy test taker in
relation to the English language certificate there was a strong argument in
favour of resolving the proportionality issue in favour of the Respondent
(paragraph 48).  However, on the totality of the circumstances in the case
the judge said that this was a finely balanced one and there were a number
of mitigating features, all as set out by the judge.  In particular, they
now had two young British children.  If the Appellant was to make an
application for entry clearance it would be bound to succeed and therefore
any removal decision would be somewhat Kafkaesque.  He therefore went on to
allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

The Secretary of State lodged grounds of application, saying that the
continuing disrespect for the Immigration Rules by the Appellant was
sufficient to demonstrate a very poor immigration history.  Furthermore, it
was noted that the children had not yet entered the UK education system and
had not had an independent life outside the confines of their family unit.
Further grounds were put forward and it was said that the judge erred in
his conclusion that the case was on all fours with Chikwamba and it was
said that the Appellant's wife and children would not be prevented from
accompanying the Appellant to Pakistan if they so choose and as such their
situation was very different from the Sponsor's case in Chikwamba.

Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth in a decision dated
20th October 2018.

Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

Before me, Mr Walker for the Home Office relied on the grounds of
application.  This was a reasons challenge.  The judge had not given
sufficient reasons as to why the appeal should be granted under Article 8
ECHR and the decision should be set aside and the matter should be remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

For the Appellant, Ms Record said that the judge had been seized of all the
evidence.  He had considered all relevant matters.  It was a finely
balanced case and while the use of the word Kafkaesque may not have been
appropriate nothing turned on that.  I was urged to conclude that there was
no error in law.

I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

In allowing the appeal the judge was more than aware that this was a finely
balanced case, given the Appellant had failed under Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules.  However, as he pointed out, there was no issue that the
Appellant was involved in a genuine and subsisting relationship with the
Sponsor (paragraph 37).  As the judge put it, they had two young children
in relation to whom both the Appellant and Sponsor were the primary carers.
 They were found to be credible witnesses.  The judge noted that this was a
finely balanced case (paragraph 49).  He was satisfied that there were a
number of mitigating features which pointed to the proportionality exercise
resulting in favour of the Appellant.  He referred to these factors in
paragraphs 50 to 57 inclusive.  In particular, he noted that the Appellant
had subsequently undertaken an English language test which he passed to the
requisite standard.  The Sponsor had suffered the loss of their first baby
and he was satisfied on the basis of her oral evidence that she has been
suffering mental health problems ever since and the Appellant had supported
the Sponsor during that period.  The Sponsor was aged 28 years of age.  If
the Appellant was removed there would be a considerable impact on both the
lives of the Sponsor and the children.  There would be a considerable
impact on the family.  While he may have been using an infelicitous
expression to describe the situation as "Kafkaesque" there was nothing
material in that point and the judge was merely saying that if obliged to
do so, the Appellant would succeed in his application for entry clearance
under the Immigration Rules.

The judge's reasoning is clear and coherent.  He accepted that this was a
difficult case and he gave reasons (very clear ones) why the
proportionality and balancing exercise should go in favour of the
Appellant.  In my view, there is no error in law as the conclusions of the
judge were certainly open to him on the evidence presented to him.

It follows that the judge's decision must stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is necessary.


Signed     JG Macdonald                               Date 3rd January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
