
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12847/2019
                                                               HU/12850/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2021                     |On 04 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           Olatunji Aremu Akintoye
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                             First Appellant
                         Caroline Temitope Akintoye
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Georget, Counsel instructed by Portway
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal brought with permission from the First-tier Tribunal
against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appellants'
appeal against a decision of the respondent on 17 July 2019 refusing them
leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

2. The first appellant is a dual national of Nigeria and the United States
of America and was born in September 1950.  The second appellant is a
Nigerian national born in May 1957.  They are married to each other.

3. For the purposes of introduction only, in summary outline, it is the
appellants' case that the First-tier Tribunal's decision was skewed by
unjustified findings of fact.  Before I consider this I look at the actual
decision complained of to see why the Secretary of State refused the
applications. As indicated above, it is dated 17 July 2019. It starts at
page 81 in the hearing bundle.

4. The appellants made an application on 19 September 2018.

5. In the case of the first appellant it was noted he had last entered the
United Kingdom on 20 July 2018 with entry clearance as a visitor valid for
six months.

6. He said he had a family life in the United Kingdom with his wife and
also with his adult children.

7. The respondent said that he was "not eligible" to apply as a partner or
parent because the partner was not a qualifying partner as she was not
British or settled in the United Kingdom and he had no dependent children
under the age of 18.  The Secretary of State was only concerned with the
"private life route".

8. Paragraph 276ADE(1) of HC 395 was identified as the most relevant rule
but the Secretary of State decided that the first appellant was not
suitable because the Secretary of State had been notified by an NHS Trust
that he had failed to pay overseas visitor charges which had been incurred
on his behalf.  It was explained that ï¿½35,579 was owed to the Barking,
Havering and Redbridge University Hospitals NHS Trust.

9. The refusal letter then considered particularly the requirements of
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), which required an applicant to show "very
significant obstacles" to integration into the country to which they would
be returned, and it was not accepted such obstacles existed in this case.

10. The respondent noted that the first appellant had lived in Nigeria or
the USA for most of his life and understood the culture and could make
himself at home in either of those countries.

11. It was the first appellant's claim that his medical conditions and
reliance on his adult children would prevent him from re-adapting to life
outside the United Kingdom but the respondent said that there were
functioning healthcare systems in both countries of which he was a national
and that he had lived outside the United Kingdom without assistance and
support for most of his life and, although it was recognised that "your
circumstances have changed", it was not accepted there would be "very
significant difficulties reintegrating".  A feature of the reasoning was
that the first appellant's wife would be returning to Nigeria with him and
they could continue their life together.

12. In the case of the second appellant it was noted that she too had
entered the United Kingdom on 20 July 2018 with entry clearance valid for
six months.  She was not eligible to apply as a partner or parent for the
same reasons as her husband and her case was examined on private life
grounds.

13. Her application was not refused on grounds of suitability.

14. Plainly, she had not lived in the United Kingdom for at least twenty
years.  The Secretary of State considered the possibility of her satisfying
the requirements of 276ADE(1)(vi) and looked for "very significant
obstacles" to reintegration into Nigeria.  Again it was found that she had
lived outside the United Kingdom for most of her life and was familiar with
life in Nigeria.  She too claimed she had medical conditions and reliance
on her adult children prevented her from re-adapting to life outside the
United Kingdom but the respondent said that Nigeria had a functioning
healthcare system and she should access it in Nigeria.

15. The respondent looked for exceptional circumstances.

16. These are considered under the heading "Exceptional Circumstances" in
the letter dated 17 July 2019 starting at page 84 of the hearing bundle. I
find the third paragraph under that heading confusing and I set it out
below. It says:

  "You have told us that you suffered a stroke during a previous visit to
  the UK in 2016 which left you hospitalised for 3 months. You returned to
  Nigeria in 2017 following the loss of your mother and re-entered the UK
  on 20 July 2018. You submit that since you re-entered the UK, your health
  has deteriorated and you are no longer able to return to Nigeria where
  health care facilities are poor and you would have no one to take care of
  you. You have provided medical evidence from your GP, Dr Jason John,
  dated 05 July 2019 which states that following the stroke in 2016 you
  have been left with right sided weakness, mobility issues and are now
  bedbound and reliant on others for all aspects of care. Dr John notes
  that your daughter is currently taking care of you. You have told us that
  whilst your partner has previously provided informal care for you, she is
  suffering with health problems of her own, namely kidney problems and hog
  blood pressure, and is no longer capable or caring for you by herself."

17. It is, I find, plain from the appellants' solicitors' letter of 19
September 2018 that it is the first appellant who suffered a stroke and his
wife, the second appellant, cannot care for him because she has kidney
problems and high blood pressure.

18. The Secretary of State found the health conditions nowhere near
sufficiently severe to make removal unlawful on Article 3 grounds.  The
Secretary of State also found that specialist kidney treatment was
available in Nigeria.  The Secretary of State did not quibble with the
claim that they were supported by their children in the United Kingdom but
said that could continue in Nigeria.

19. For reasons that are not entirely clear the Secretary of State looked
at Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and
reminded herself that little weight should be given to a private life
established when a person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully or
established at a time when a person's immigration status is precarious,
which the appellants' circumstances clearly were.

20. The appellants appealed the decision and the "grounds of appeal" to the
First-tier Tribunal set out the appellants' case in detail. Perhaps the nub
of the case is set out at ground 3 where it is asserted:

  "The Respondent has also failed to adequately consider that this case
  discloses exceptional circumstances such as to mean that refusal would
  result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellants, such that
  refusal of the application would not be proportionate under Article 8 of
  the ECHR."

21. The grounds complain that the respondent found the appellants
unsuitable because of an unpaid NHS bill without acknowledging that the
appellants' family in the United Kingdom had "already set up a plan for the
payment of this amount and are paying the above amount in monthly
instalments since November 2018."

22. Paragraph 6 sets out what the exceptional circumstances might be
thought to be.  The appellants said:

  "The Respondent has failed to consider all the evidence and the real
  facts of the case.  The first appellant namely Olatunji Aremu Akintoye's
  health condition has recently deteriorated and as a result he was left
  disabled after a stroke, which resulted in paralysis of his right side,
  for which he has lost his mobility.  Since the first Appellant has
  suffered a stroke he has become fully dependent on his family for care.
  The second Appellant namely Caroline Temitope Akintoye is currently in
  dialysing 3.5 hours thrice a week via her right internal jugular line
  which is delivering good blood flows and dialysis, she also is currently
  suffering from kidney problems and high blood pressure and as a result
  both Appellants are fully reliant on their children for long-term care.
  The respondent did not fully consider both the Appellants' medical
  documents and witness statements which provided an account of their
  underlying medical condition.  The Respondent submits that a significant
  degree of hardship or inconvenience does not amount to insurmountable
  obstacles."

23. There was then reference to the relationship between the appellants and
their grandchildren in the United Kingdom and the lack of people available
to care for them in Nigeria.

24. Mr Georget had prepared a skeleton argument for the First-tier Tribunal
dated 27 November 2019.  This explains that the appellant has three adult
children and grandchildren in the United Kingdom and that they currently
live with their daughter Bukola and her family in Barking.  Paragraphs 3
and 4 set out the alleged history.  I do not think it controversial and it
explains what this is all about:

  "3.    In November 2016, the appellants entered the UK with leave to
  visit their family, as they had previously done on numerous occasions.
  On that occasion, however, the 1st appellant, who had been known to have
  diabetes and high blood pressure, tragically suffered a very serious
  stroke.  That left him partially paralysed and resulted in him being
  hospitalised for over three months.  He received extensive medical and
  physiotherapy treatment in an effort to manage the effects of the stroke
  and recover some of the affected parts of his body.  In March 2017, the
  first appellant's elderly mother sadly passed away and the appellants
  rushed to return to Nigeria from their visit.  The 2nd appellant cared
  for her husband as he continued to recover.

  4. On 20.7.18, the appellants arrived in the UK for another visit to see
  their family, again with leave, and unfortunately again there was a
  wretched turn of events.  The first appellant suffered a very bad fall
  and this time had to be hospitalised for another two and a half months.
  His condition deteriorated.  To make matters still worse, the second
  appellant was then diagnosed with advanced kidney disease and rushed into
  intensive and regular course of life-saving dialysis treatment."

25. Against this background I consider the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal.

26. At paragraph 3 the judge raises the possibility of the first appellant
having entered into a bigamous marriage at around the time he became a
citizen of the United States of America.  It is not clear what, if
anything, the judge did with this finding.  However, it was not part of the
Secretary of State's case and was never raised with the appellants.  It is
unattractive because it implies an adverse finding on the first appellant's
credibility that was not apparently of any concern to the respondent and
was never raised with the first appellant.  That said, it is not clear what
the judge did with the finding if that is what it was.

27. The judge then considered the appellants' movements.  He noted that the
first appellant suffered a stroke when he was in the United Kingdom and
then returned to Nigeria with his wife and that the second appellant (the
judge was unsure if the first appellant arrived at the same time) returned
to the United Kingdom on 13 June 2018.  The judge considered the
application and noted the claim that the appellants' family were supporting
them and there would not be adequate healthcare in Nigeria.

28. The judge considered the respondent's decision which I have outlined
above.

29. The judge made findings of fact.  It is "not disputed by the
respondent" that the first appellant had been weakened on the right side of
his body after a stroke in 2016.  The judge did not accept the first
appellant's claim to have suffered a "severe fall" leading to his admission
in hospital on arrival in the United Kingdom.  According to the judge a
medical discharge summary from the NHS Barking, Havering and Redbridge
University Hospitals shows the first appellant was admitted having a
history of headaches in the morning and having fallen from his bed on 20
July 2018 and that he "was discharged the same day".  The first appellant
arrived in the United Kingdom on 20 July 2018 and according to the judge
the evidence "confirms he must have been taken to hospital as soon as he
arrived in the country" and if he did fall from his bed he must have fallen
before he travelled.  According to the judge the evidence does not show
that the first appellant had been hospitalised for two and a half months
and the judge did not accept that he had had a severe fall.

30. The judge noted the respondent did not dispute that the second
appellant was suffering from end stage kidney disease.  The judge found it
was unclear when the second appellant was first diagnosed with kidney
disease.  She was not cross-examined on the point.

31. At paragraph 28 the judge said:

  "In answer to my questions, [the second appellant] said that she had felt
  ill before she came to the UK, but 'not too much'.  In her oral evidence,
  [her daughter] said that before coming to the UK her mother had felt
  tired and was taking vitamins for this.  She said that her mother became
  very ill whilst in the UK and was taken to hospital, and it had been a
  shock to them when she was diagnosed as suffering from kidney disease.
  Based on the evidence, I find that [the second appellant] was displaying
  signs of illness before she came to the UK.  But because of the absence
  of evidence of when she first sought treatment from the NHS, I am unable
  to make a finding on when she was first diagnosed as suffering from end
  stage kidney disease."

32. The judge then considered evidence and found that the appellants could
be looked after in a care home in Nigeria or arrange for care at their
home.  The judge accepted the first appellant lived with his daughter and
the second appellant split her time between their daughter and their son.
The judge accepted they both required help with their everyday lives as a
result of their medical problems and their children provided support
including quite personal care for the first appellant.

33. The judge then looked at the possibility of care in Nigeria.  The judge
was critical of the scant detail in the witness statements but concluded
that the first appellant, who had been a church pastor in Nigeria, could
look to the congregation for emotional support.  This was based in part on
considering the evidence of the appellants' son John, who reported what he
understood had been happening in Nigeria.  The judge did not accept that in
their twelve months away they had lost contact with friends and family in
Nigeria.

34. The judge noted that it was not denied that the first appellant owed
money to the NHS following his treatment for a stroke in 2016.  The judge
found that the appellants' daughter was currently making payments towards
the bill but the sums were nominal and unless things changed the bill was
not going to be repaid for a very long time.  The judge concluded that the
appellants' presence in the United Kingdom would add to bills on the health
service that would not be paid.

35. The judge found that any interference with private and family life
would be proportionate.  Paragraph 52 is significant.  The judge said:

  "The question, therefore, is whether the interference is proportionate.
  I have had regard to s.117B of the 2002 Act, including subsection (1):
  that the maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public
  interest.  I take into account that the appellants do not meet the
  requirements of the Rules, which is a weighty but not determinative
  consideration.  Mr Georget does however submit that the appellants
  arrived in the UK as visitors and not as 'health tourists' and had never
  been overstayers.  He said that while they have sought to remain in the
  UK, it was a result of unforeseen circumstances, i.e. the deterioration
  of their health, and that it should not be held against them.  It does,
  however, seem peculiar that given her frail [the first appellant]
  condition apparently was before his stroke in 2016, that he would go
  through the arduous journey of returning to the UK for a holiday only a
  year after he had left.  Furthermore, the evidence was that [the second
  appellant] felt ill before coming to the UK (although she claims that she
  was not so ill, and her kidney disease was undiagnosed at the time), and
  while the NHS letters do not say when she first sought treatment from the
  NHS it would appear that investigations into her condition began on 11
  September 2018 (AB/25) and therefore only a few weeks after she arrived
  in the UK.  In the normal course of events, I would likely be unconvinced
  by the claims that the appellants did not come to the UK for medical
  treatment and that their plan was to return to Nigeria before their visit
  visas expired.  However, I accept Mr Georget's submission that these
  questions were not put to them by Miss Patel in cross-examination and I
  therefore proceed on the basis that the appellants did not come to the UK
  as 'health tourists' or to bypass the requirements for leave to enter as
  dependent relatives under the Rules.  Nevertheless, when they arrived in
  the UK, the appellants would have had no expectation they would be able
  to remain in the UK with their children or benefit from medical treatment
  on the NHS indefinitely."

36. The judge found that their ill health would frustrate integration into
British society.  They had only been in the United Kingdom for a short
period of time.  The judge was required by statute to attach "little
weight" to any private life established while their status was precarious.
The judge found that their decline of health was not unforeseeable because
they had been poorly before they arrived.  The judge found they had no
expectation of being allowed to remain.  The judge found that any
difficulties in maintaining family life were a consequence of choosing to
live in different countries and not something that was particularly weighty
in a balancing exercise.

37. The judge rejected any contention that the decision interfered with the
appellants' rights or the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 3 of
the European Convention on Human Rights.  They are simply not that
seriously ill.

38. It is rather difficult to work out quite what happened leading to the
first appellant's admission to hospital.  As the First-tier Tribunal
indicated, it seems clear that the appellants arrived in the United Kingdom
on 20 July 2018.  The appellant's account in this interview is entirely
straightforward.  He said: "On my arrival, I had a severe fall for which I
was admitted to hospital".  His wife's evidence is not exactly similar but
wholly consistent.  She said: "On arrival, my husband had a fall which
resulted in a further deterioration of his physical health."

39. The bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at page 244 included a
"medical discharge summary" but it was incomplete.  Only the odd-numbered
pages were provided.  This shows the appellant was admitted to hospital on
20 July 2018 but does not show when he was discharged.  The discharge date
is left open.  The explanation for admission states:

  "A 67 year old male, attended with history of headache in the morning.
  This was followed by a fall from bed.  Patient had no recollection of
  events.  He also reported weakness in his right arm."

40. I find this extremely ambiguous.  On one reading the fall from bed
followed his admission from hospital.  The respondent's bundle included a
letter from King Edwards Medical Group and Dr Jason John dated 17 August
2018.  This said of the first appellant that he:

  "unfortunately was admitted again recently with a worsening of his
  symptoms and he is currently still an in-patient at the local Queen's
  Hospital.  He has deteriorated in that he is now dependent on all aspects
  of daily living particularly washing and caring as well as feeding."

41. The appellants' bundle for the hearing at the First-tier Tribunal at
page 15 included a financial statement from the NHS Trust and the last item
on there is marked: "4450 - overseas visitor in-patient Queen's Hospital -
non-elective 20/07/2018 - 03/10/2018 HRG AA 35A stroke cases ..."  This was
in the context of a bill of ï¿½20,816.50 not being paid.  Whilst I accept
that I have the advantage of assistance from Counsel because the point was
drawn to everyone's attention, I can only conclude that the judge's
decision that the appellant was discharged from hospital on the day he
arrived is attributable to his misreading the papers.

42. The grounds also criticise the judge's findings in relation to the
failure to pay the health charge incurred on the appellant's last visit to
the United Kingdom when he had a stroke.  The main point taken by Mr
Georget is that the judge did not seem to appreciate that although the bill
had not been paid the family were paying a nominal sum and were actively
engaged in renegotiating a more realistic sum which had not been presented
very long before the proceedings, so the suggestion that there was no
possibility of it being paid was not examined properly.

43. Mr Melvin's position, which was presented with more subtlety than I
summarise it here, was that none of these errors mattered because the case
could not succeed because the evidence was not of sufficiently severe
illness to prevent removal and in any event the finding that it was not in
the public interest to remain incurring bills that would not be paid was a
legitimate finding open to the judge on the evidence.  I follow that
submission and it has given me cause to reflect but there are so many
inappropriate adverse findings about the first appellant may have infected
the infected the balancing exercise that I am not satisfied that the
decision is sound.

44. Further, there are two appellants here and the decision in the first
appellant's case assumed there would be continuing support from his wife,
if only emotional support and companionship in what appears to have been a
long marriage.  The appellant's wife does suffer from kidney failure.
Again there is an appearance of prejudice because although the Secretary of
State did not regard either appellant as a health tourist the judge still
found it necessary to express a degree of scepticism on that point.  He
said at paragraph 52:

  "In the normal course of events, I would likely be unconvinced by the
  claims that the appellants did not come to the UK for medical treatment
  and that their plan was to return to Nigeria before their visit visas
  expired."

45. I do not understand any need to make comments such as this.  Broadly,
parties can agree facts and whilst the Tribunal may not be bound by them as
a matter of law, it is hard to think that such agreements can be ignored
safely without notice. Further, comments of the kind I have indicated, and
there are others in the Decision and Reasons, again leave the concern that
the balancing exercise has been skewed by adverse findings that are not
justified.

46. I am not sure that the parties really appreciate how seriously ill the
second appellant appears to be.  There is a summary of the dialysis process
in the letter of Dr A James, a consultant nephrologist with the Barts
Health NHS Trust.  Dr James describes the dialysis process in the following
terms:

  "This involves blood being removed from her body, which is purified and
  re-infused into her body, continuously over a period of four hours,
  during each session of treatment.  This is a life-sustaining treatment
  and without Dialysis, she is unlikely to survive longer than a few days
  or weeks.  She is fit to travel, albeit limited by arthritis in her
  knees, she will need wheelchair assistance to travel.  If you need any
  further information, please do not hesitate to contact me, with the
  permission of [the second appellant]."

47. It may be the dialysis treatment is practicably available in Nigeria,
by which I mean not only that it is available but that the second appellant
will be able to access it and my concerns about her return are unfounded
but I have not been able to discern any clear findings in that point and
the modest change in jurisprudence following the decision of the Supreme
Court in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 17 might be very pertinent in any
redetermination.  I do appreciate that this decision was not available to
the First-tier Tribunal Judge, who certainly cannot be criticised for not
applying it because it had not been decided.

48. I agree with the contention in the grounds that the finding that
appropriate emotional support would be available in Nigeria is based on
nothing better than conjecture.  The evidence was that there was no-one who
would provide that kind of care and the judge's finding that support from
family, friends and/or congregants (the first appellant it seems was a
church pastor for a time) is based on speculation and fails to appreciate
the very marked decline in health which the second appellant has
experienced after coming to the United Kingdom.

49. I am very aware of the difficulties these appellants will face in
showing they have a human right to remain in the United Kingdom based on a
decline in their health that followed very soon after entering as visitors.
 However, I agree with Mr Georget that their case is not absolutely
helpless and the decision that has been made is shot through with findings
that are unjustified or unnecessary and which clearly may have skewed the
balancing exercise.

50. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

51. I have decided the appeals should be determined again in the First-tier
Tribunal.  This case has not been done properly and the appellants are
entitled to preserve maximum appeal rights.

52. The appellants had made an application to adduce further evidence.
This was to correct problems arising from the judge taking points that had
not been raised.  This evidence was not necessary to answer the points but
appeared to make things clearer.  I was able to resolve the issues without
reference to that evidence and did not determine the application. If the
appellant wishes to rely on further evidence the application must be
renewed, appropriately supported with documentation and explanation in
accordance with the Rules in the First-tier Tribunal.  It may well be that
the health of the appellants is something that requires further evidence
and further consideration.

53. I am also concerned that the respondent does not seem to have addressed
the problems the second appellant might face but rather seems to have
muddled her difficulties with those of the first appellant.  I have gone
through the papers, anxious that I might be doing the Home Office
misjustice by simply misreading the file.  If I am guilty of that then I
apologise profusely but as far as I can see the refusal letter referred to
the first appellant's difficulties twice rather than the first appellant's
difficulties and then the second, so if that is right the Secretary of
State might want to consider remaking her decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are allowed. They will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.







                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 April 2021                  |






