
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12185/2015
      HU/12189/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 January 2018               |On 30 January 2018              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              ms NB & MASTER WB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Malik, instructed by Whitehorse solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. Z. Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants are nationals of Uganda, born on 1.3.00 and 2.9.01
respectively. They appealed against a decision by the Respondent dated
1.10.15 refusing to grant them entry clearance as the children of a person
present and settled in the United Kingdom.

2. Their appeals came before First tier Tribunal Judge Howard for hearing
on 7 February 2017. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15 February
2017, the judge dismissed the appeal. The judge heard evidence from the
Appellants' father and a further witness and concluded that:


   (i) he was less than satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
   Appellants' mother is deceased due to anomalies viz the death
   certificate was issued more than 1 year after her death and states that
   she had a natural death without stating which illness caused death: [11]-
   [12] refer;


   (ii) he was not satisfied that the Appellants' father has sole
   responsibility for them in that he was unable to name their teachers and
   it became apparent that his brother in Uganda has been an influential
   figure in their education [13];


   (iii) there was no evidence that the Appellants' grandfather is
   suffering from dementia beyond the Sponsor's oral evidence and their
   grandmother's illness are not said to be at all debilitating [14];


   (iv) he was satisfied that the reason underlying the applications was
   that the first Appellant had behavioural problems as a girl in her mid-
   teens [14]-[15];


   (v) there is no evidence of serious and compelling family or other
   considerations which make exclusion of the Appellants undesirable [16];


   (vi) the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was proportionate,
   given that family life was enjoyed at arms' length between 2001 and 2015
   and the Sponsor's role in his children's life during this time was
   limited [22(2)].


3. An application for permission to appeal was made in time on the basis
that the judge erred materially in law in that: (i) he failed to take
account of material evidence relating to the Appellants' grandparents
health and their mother's death certificate; (ii) there was procedural
unfairness in that the judge failed to put his concerns regarding the death
certificate to the Sponsor in order to give him the opportunity to comment;
(iii) in making material errors of fact in that he failed to correctly
record the Sponsor's evidence that, whilst he had forgotten the name of the
first Appellant's current teacher as she had just started a new school, he
knew the previous teachers and headmasters of both children and could name
them; (iv) the finding relating to the first Appellant did not correlate
with the evidence before the judge and (v) the judge failed to properly
apply section 55 of the BCIA 2009 in light of the decisions in JO [2014]
UKUT 517 (IAC) and MK. Permission to appeal was granted in general terms.

4. The Respondent filed a rule 24 response on 2 November 2017 in which she
opposed the appeal and asserted that the judge of the First tier Tribunal
directed himself appropriately.

Hearing

5. I heard submissions from Mr Malik on behalf of the Appellants and Ms
Ahmad on behalf of the Respondent. Mr Malik drew my attention to the
Sponsor's statement at pages 7-9 of the Appellants' bundle where he
addressed the issue of the Appellants' mother's death certificate at [28]
that clinic where she died did not include the cause of death as there had
been no diagnosis when she had been admitted and at [29] and [30] the
Sponsor dealt with the common practice in Uganda i.e. that one cannot
travel with a corpse without the name and address of the corpse or the
police will step in and take the corpse thus it is necessary to identify
whether the person died naturally or was killed. He submitted that the
judge has failed to engage with this evidence. A copy of the death
certificate is at pages 41-42 of the Appellants' bundle.

6. Mr Malik submitted that the judge failed to engage with paragraph
297(i)(f) of the Rules and his only finding is at [16] where he found "no
evidence" of "serious and compelling family or other considerations which
make exclusion undesirable. " Mr Malik drew my attention to the evidence
regarding the grandparents' health at page 112 of the Appellants' bundle
(letter from grandfather) and page 113, a letter from Dr Okullo. He
submitted that the judge dealt with the issue of sole responsibility very
briefly and failed to take into account the evidence in the round and there
was enough evidence before him to show the Sponsor playing a central role
in children's upbringing, pursuant to 297(i)(d). Mr Malik further submitted
that the judge's finding at [14] is factually incorrect and there was no
evidence before him to support it.

7. In her submissions, Ms Ahmad submitted in respect of the death
certificate that the judge has provided reasons and it was open to him to
make the findings he did. She submitted that the letter from the council
was vague and did not provide reasons for her death or the illness that
caused the death. The death certificate was issued over a year later so the
concerns the judge refers to at [11] are justified. Judges are encouraged
to be brief in their reasoning and cannot reasonably be expected to refer
to all the evidence. Whilst the finding the judge makes at [14] that he
cannot be satisfied the mother is deceased could be better expressed, a
simple lack of reference to the evidence is not sufficient to show a
material error of law and the grounds do not identify evidence that could
have lead to a different conclusion that the judge failed to consider. In
respect of the proportionality assessment, she submitted that the judge
made an assessment at [22] which was reasonably open to him.

8. There was no reply on the part of Mr Malik.

9. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Decision

10. I have concluded that the judge gave adequate reasons for rejecting the
evidence relating to the death of the Appellants' mother. Even taking
account of the evidence of the Sponsor as set out in his witness statement,
it is apparent on the face of the death certificate that it was issued more
than 12 months after death and it does not record the cause of death, other
than natural causes. The letter of support from the local council does not
shed any further light on the reasons for the death of the Appellant's
mother. I accept Ms Ahmad's submissions on this issue.

11. However, I have concluded that the judge erred in his assessment and
reasons as to whether the Sponsor has sole responsibility for the
Appellants and whether there were serious and compelling family or other
considerations which make exclusion of the Appellants undesirable. The
judge's reasons are set out at [13]-[15] of his decision and comprise the
following: the Sponsor was unable to name the Appellants' teachers and it
became apparent that his brother in Uganda has been an influential figure
in their education [13]; there was no evidence that the Appellants'
grandfather is suffering from dementia beyond the Sponsor's oral evidence
and their grandmother's illness are not said to be at all debilitating [14]
and he was satisfied that the reason underlying the applications was that
the first Appellant had behavioural problems as a girl in her mid-teens
[14]-[15].

12. I find that the judge did fail to take material evidence and
considerations into account when reaching the findings set out above. It is
apparent from the Sponsor's statement and oral evidence and the medical and
other evidence contained in the Appellants' bundle that, contrary to the
judge's findings, the Sponsor was able to give details of both children's
former teachers and headteachers just not the first Appellant's current
teacher because at that time she had just changed schools. I further find
that there was material evidence in the Appellants' bundle concerning the
health of the Appellants' grandparents, which impacted on their ability to
continue to care for the Appellants and which was clearly relevant to the
judge's assessment of paragraphs 297(i)(e) and (f) of the Rules.

13. I further find that there was an insufficient evidential basis to
justify the finding that the reason underlying the making of the entry
clearance applications in 2015 was due to behavioural problems on the part
of the first Appellant.

14. Generally, whilst it is unnecessary for judges to give lengthy
recitations of reasons for reaching findings of fact, I find in this
particular case that the reasons provided by the judge were not
sufficiently detailed to justify the conclusions reached in respect of
paragraphs 297(i)(e) and (f) of the Rules. In light of my findings, it
follows that the judge's findings in respect of Article 8 are also
potentially infected by error of law.

Decision

15. I find material errors of law in the decision of the First tier
Tribunal as to the assessment of paragraphs 297(i)(e) and (f) of the Rules
and the assessment of Article 8. However, the judge's finding as to
paragraph 297(i)(d) and the death of the Appellants' mother was sustainable
on the basis of the evidence before him. That is not to say that there is
any positive finding of fact that the Appellants' mother is still alive,
but simply that on the balance of probabilities it has not been proved that
she is dead. However, in light of section 85(4) of the NIAA 2002 as amended
by the Immigration Act 2014, which has removed section 85A of the
aforementioned Act, it is a matter for the Appellants as to whether they
wish to adduce further or better evidence on this issue in accordance with
any directions issued by the First tier Tribunal.

16. I remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the First tier
Tribunal, to be heard by any judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Ian
Howard.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                      29 January 2018

