


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: HU/12507/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 September 2017              |On 3 October 2017                |
|                                  |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               akthar hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Richardson, Counsel instructed by Novells
Legal Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for an error of law hearing
on 5 July 2017. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 25 July 2017,
which is appended, I found errors of law in the decision of First tier
Tribunal Judge Oliver and adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing.
Hearing

2. The resumed hearing came before the Upper Tribunal on 18 September 2017.
The issues in dispute were whether the Appellant met the requirements of
paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules and if not, whether there
were compelling circumstances to justify consideration of his private life
under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

Evidence

3. The Appellant gave evidence and was subjected to a lengthy cross-
examination by Mr Melvin. His friends, Anhar Ahmed and Joynul Hoque also
gave evidence and were cross-examined. .

4. The Appellant confirmed the contents of his witness statement of 18.8.17
and his earlier statement of 2.6.15. He stated that he was taken by his
father to live with the wealthier Rashid family in Dhaka at the age of 9
when he would play with the son and carry out little jobs, fetching and
carrying. He had no contact with his birth family after this. He came to
the UK with the Rashids when he was 12. Ali Hussain tried to trace his
family for him but he does not have any details apart from their names.
This was when he was around 18 years of age. Articles have been published
in the Daily Uttorpurbo and the New Centuries Daily, Bangladeshi newspapers
and the Appellant contacted the Bangladesh High Commission himself prior to
his last appeal hearing [pages 35-39 of the appeal bundle refer]. The
newspaper article dated 5 August 2017 states, in short, that the Appellant
is looking for his family after 16 years and gives his name, his date of
birth, the fact he is from Sylhet and his parents' names. The original
letter from the High Commission was passed to Mr Melvin. This is dated 20
June 2017 and states that they are unable to verify his family details at
short notice but if he provides requisite documents they may process his
case and notify him accordingly.

5. In cross- examination, the Appellant stated that he has a brother and
sister but he does not know how old they are as there is no custom in
Bangladesh of celebrating birthdays. He said that he did not go to school
and his father was a farmer. He does not know why he was singled out to go
and live with the Rashid family in Dhaka. He said that he did not maintain
contact with his birth family when he went to live in Dhaka as he was young
at that time and did not know what means he had to contact them. He does
not know why the wealthy family did not send him to school although their
own son who was a few months old did attend school.  He said that he would
watch TV and do chores such as fetching and carrying and that he did this
for 3 years.

6. The Appellant stated that he did not know why the family should obtain a
false passport in his name to enable him to travel to the UK. The family
told him they were going to London and took him with them. He said that he
did not know why he was sent to live with someone else and that he was very
young at that time. Whilst he was living with the elderly man, to whom he
referred as sasa or uncle in Shadwell he did not attend school but he
attended evening school at a mosque where he met Anhar Ahmed. He did not
have to work, he just watched TV. Sometimes if sasa went shopping he would
take him. The Appellant said that he does not have contact with him
anymore.

7. The Appellant went to live with Anhar and his family for about 2 years.
He did not attend school during this time but just evening school, although
Anhar went to school. The Appellant said that he would watch TV and when
Anhar came home he used to play with him. He did not know why Anhar's
family did not contact the authorities on his behalf. He lived with Anhar,
his brother, sister and parents. He said that when he was 14 years of age
he went to live in Somerset with another family because there was not
enough space for him and he was sent to Weston Super Mare to live with Mr
Abdul, Anhar's father's friend. Mr Abdul had not attended the Tribunal to
support his case because he has gone abroad. The Appellant confirmed that
he lived with Mr Abdul for 6 years, during which time he played football
and went to different clubs such as pool and badminton. He said that Mr
Abdul
tried to send him to school but was unable to because he had no legal
documents so he was unsuccessful. Neither he nor Mr Abdul were able to
trace his family because he did not have the details so could not trace
them.  The Appellant stated that Mr Abdul financially supported him because
he was a child and had some sympathy for him. Mr Abdul worked in a
restaurant but the Appellant said he did not work in the restaurant but
just watched them work.

8. The Appellant confirmed that Mr Abdul went abroad at the end of 2010 and
thereafter he lived with Saeed Ahmed in Weston super Mare who had a flat in
Taunton and he did not pay rent. He said that Saeed Ahmed was not attending
the Tribunal to give evidence. The Appellant said he was financially
supported by Anhar's father, amongst others. When challenged by Mr Melvin
as to his length of residence, the Appellant maintained that he resided in
the UK continuously since 2002. When asked how he had been able to produce
a birth certificate dated 2005, the Appellant stated that he was not sure
and that it was Mr Abdul who got it to enrol him in a school but he is not
sure how he got it as he told the Appellant that he had been unable to get
in contact with his family

9. The Appellant stated that he has never learned to write in Bengali or
Sylheti although he speaks the Sylheti dialect of Bengali. The Appellant
denied working in Indian and Bengali restaurants in the UK and said that he
had seen what they do and how they work. Mr Melvin asked for details of the
job offers contained in the Appellant's bundle and he said that they were
people that he knew: "Play Castle" is a playground and "Show Spice" is an
Indian takeaway in Taunton. The Appellant maintained, when asked why such
companies would offer him a job, that it could be possible they need staff
and that they would give him a job if he had permission to work. When asked
why they would give someone with no experience a job at a restaurant, the
Appellant stated that he had seen people work; that he has that in his mind
and learns more as he goes along. He said that he had not been interviewed
by either company.

10. The Appellant confirmed that he has no family members in the United
Kingdom and that none of the people he claimed to have lived with or worked
for had any connection with his family in Bangladesh. When asked why it had
taken him until very recently to make any attempt to use the local Sylheti
newspapers to contact family members, he said that Anhar had advised him to
do so and he did not know he could contact the Bangladeshi High Commission
for help tracing his family. The Appellant stated that Anhar's father had
contacted the newspaper on his behalf and that this had been done over the
telephone through a newspaper agent and that Anhar's father had told them
what to write. He said that Anhar's father was not at the Upper Tribunal to
give evidence. The Appellant said that Anhar knew about contact with
Bangladeshi newspapers and that he did not know how much it cost and he was
not quite sure if Anhar or his father has the receipt or not.

11. In response to questions from the Upper Tribunal, the Appellant stated
that it had been necessary to place a report in the newspapers in
Bangladesh even though the details of his parents and his village are on
his birth certificate because maybe the details on the birth certificate
were not correct. It was pointed out that his parents' names are the same
as on the birth certificate and the translation of the newspaper articles.
The Appellant stated that maybe Mr. Abdul put in an address but when asked
where he had obtained that information, the Appellant said he had provided
it. The Appellant was asked if the details of the village on the birth
certificate accorded with his knowledge of the village, to which he replied
that he could not remember although he knows he lived in Sylhet, but he
really could not say from where Mr Abdul would have obtained information as
to the details as to his village. The Appellant was asked why he did not
attend school or college given that the birth certificate is dated 21.11.05
and he said that Mr Abdul got this from Bangladesh and after that he could
not get admission into school as they have spelled his name wrong. When it
was pointed out it was the same as the name given in the newspaper
advertisement and that this was irrelevant if the birth certificate was the
only identity document, he said that the college and school did not accept
it.

12. When asked if he was related to the wealthy family in Dhaka, the
Appellant said he was not as far as he knows. When asked if he had been
treated well by them he immediately answered that he had. He was unable to
give a reason as to why this family would have taken him in when he had his
own family and that he was not made to work or otherwise earn his keep.
Whilst his father had said they were poor there are many poor families in
Bangladesh and it was unclear why he was chosen, to which the Appellant
said that maybe they wanted to look after him. The Appellant also
maintained that he was well treated by sasa to whom he was not related
either.

13. There was no re-examination by Mr Richardson.

14. Anhar Ahmed gave evidence, stating that he has remained in touch with
the Appellant via text and phone and has never been out of contact since
2002. He denied being related to him. He confirmed that the Appellant has
had no contact with his parents during the time he has known him and that
his father has had difficulty in finding anything out. When cross-examined
by Mr Melvin, Mr Ahmed said he had not personally met sasa and he was a
young age at that time. He said that he had got to know the Appellant
through evening school. He said that neither his father nor anyone else
from his family had met sasa. Mr Ahmed was unable to provide a coherent
answer to Mr Melvin's question as to why his father would take in a young
boy aged 12 if he had not met the people the young boy was living with,
except to say that it was because of the situation the Appellant was in as
he was helpless and had no-one.

15. When asked why his father did not go to the local authorities, Mr Ahmed
said that he simply did not think of this or that it was the right thing to
do. He thought that his father had come to the UK in maybe the late 1980's.
Mr Ahmed was unable to say whether his father thought that depriving the
Appellant of education in the UK was a good thing or why he had not
contacted the local authorities to have the Appellant placed in care so
that he could have attended school whilst his immigration status was being
resolved. When asked by Mr Melvin why his father had not attended the Upper
Tribunal to give evidence, Mr Ahmed said that he is not well and does not
travel much and that he is a private religious tutor.

16. When asked why the Appellant was sent to Somerset to live after two
years, Mr Ahmed said that they i.e. his parents and three children plus the
Appellant lived in a two bed flat so his father made arrangements because
it was overcrowded. The witness said that it was difficult for him to
accept that the Appellant had to go away because he was used to seeing him
every day. However, it did not cross his mind to ask or question the
decision to send him to Mr Abdul. The witness said that the Appellant had
been living continuously with them again since 2015. He said that his
father does not know the Appellant's family in Bangladesh.

17. Mr Ahmed was unable to shed any light on his father's decision to place
the articles in Bangladeshi newspapers and he had not asked him how much he
paid and had not spoken to his cousin in Bangladesh who had helped organise
for this to be done. Mr Ahmed did not know anything about obtaining the
Appellant's birth certificate nor whether his father had seen it. The
witness denied that the Appellant had worked whilst in the United Kingdom
and that he had been mainly financially supported by him and his father.
The witness said that he had never met Mr Abdul and did not know anything
about him. When the Appellant moved to live with a friend in Taunton,
Somerset he would give him money in the form of cash in hand when he
visited him there, but he had only been working for the last 3-4 years so
the main support was coming from his father. There was no re-examination of
the witness.

18. Joynul Hoque then gave evidence and confirmed that the contents of his
statement of 21.2.17 were true. His attention was drawn to a photograph at
page 143 of the Appellant's bundle which the witness identified as the
Appellant with the witness' twin daughters who were 6 months old at that
time and it was taken in his house in London. He said that his daughters
are now 15 coming up 16. The witness said that he knew the Appellant when
he was in London and since he returned but lost contact with him in the
middle.

19. In cross-examination, the witness said he could not remember how many
years passed without seeing the Appellant but if he visited London he would
have seen him. He knew that the Appellant had been living out of London in
Weston super Mare then after that in Somerset and then he came back to
London. He had not been involved in any way in attempts to contact the
Appellant's parents in Bangladesh but he knew that Mr Ali Hussain made
attempts to contact the family because they had spoken about it and he was
concerned about the Appellant. There was no re-examination of the witness.

Submissions

20. Mr Melvin sought to rely on his written submissions of 8.9.17. He
submitted that the credibility of all the witnesses had been damaged by
their evidence. He submitted that the Appellant has been doing everything
in his power to show that he is not in contact with family members in
Bangladesh who thus would not be able to assist in his return to that
country. He submitted that the Appellant has been vague in the extreme in
failing to remember events that occurred in Bangladesh before coming to the
UK and events that occurred until he attained his majority in the UK and
that it was only some years after his 18th birthday that he made an attempt
to regularize his status here.

21. Mr Melvin asked that I find that it is clear that the family in
Bangladesh had facilitated his move to the UK and were funding him whilst
here and that I should not accept that the persons concerned viz Sasa, Mr
Ali Hussain or Mr Abdul from the kindness of their hearts and not bringing
him to the attention of the UK authorities would pay for his upkeep,
allegedly for many years. Mr Melvin submitted that there was no evidence
about or from the individuals with whom the Appellant was supposed to have
lived for most of his residence in the UK. In respect of the newspaper
articles, the son of Mr Ali Hussain was asked some questions about these
but was unable to shed any light on why, how or who paid other than that
his father was involved in the placing of these articles. He submitted that
I should attach no weight to the letter from the Bangladesh High Commission
in response to a request from the Appellant, given that there is no letter
to the High Commission nor what details they received as to the Appellant
and his family members.

22. Mr Melvin stated that a birth certificate had been issued in 2005 and
somehow brought or sent to the UK, yet there was little or no explanation
of how this appeared or who obtained it, although the witnesses did appear
to be aware of its existence. Mr Melvin submitted that it is clear that
those in the UK who kept the Appellant from the authorities until 2009 were
acting on behalf of the family in order to facilitate his status in the UK.

23. Mr Melvin further submitted that there were no circumstances that show
that the Appellant would not be able to return to Bangladesh and make a
life for himself there. He can speak the local language, he has worked in
restaurants and would be able to support himself should he be required to
return to Bangladesh. The Respondent did not accept he has lost all ties
with Bangladesh. The Appellant's stay in the UK has been facilitated by the
Bangladeshi community with Mr Ali Hussain the instigator of this but
without him presenting as a witness or being cross examined and he
submitted that there is insufficient evidence to show that all ties to
Bangladesh have been lost. He submitted that it is clear that the Appellant
is aware of the cultural aspects of society and would be able to return
there.

24. In respect of the length of time spent by the Appellant in the UK, Mr
Melvin submitted that this should be qualified by the fact that there are
serious gaps in the history of actual evidence of being in the UK and it
was not accepted by the Respondent that he has been in the UK continuously
since 2002. Mr Melvin submitted that there is some evidence of arrival and
that the Appellant has spent a considerable length of time in the UK but he
did not accept the Appellant has remained here under the radar for the
considerable length of time claimed. In respect of consideration of Article
8 outside the Rules, Mr Melvin submitted that there were no compelling
circumstances. With regard to section 117B of the NIAA 2002 the Appellant
gave evidence through a Sylheti interpreter and it is clear he is not
financially independent. He submitted that the Respondent's decision to
refuse leave in respect of Article 8 was proportionate in the circumstances
of this particular case.

25. In his submissions, Mr Richardson drew my attention to evidence in
support of the continuity of the Appellant's residence, in addition to the
photographs at 59 onwards of the Appellant's bundle, which comprised
evidence including attendance at the evening school, a library document
from Weston super Mare; various documents on the electoral register for
2009; various train tickets and receipts spanning the years in issue;
mobile phone documents and utility bills. Mr Richardson submitted that a
combination of this evidence and the photos tends to suggest continuity of
residence. He also made the point that it seems rather unlikely that,
having got into the UK, the Appellant would come and go, whatever his
background. He submitted that on balance of probabilities the Appellant has
remained since 2002.

26. Mr Richardson submitted that, if the Appellant has been here
continuously, the other real issue in the appeal is whether he is still in
contact with his family and that it is plain if he has been here since 2002
he will have developed significant ties in the UK. As far as contact with
his family is concerned, he was sent to live with another family and
brought to the UK and it is perfectly reasonable why he does not understand
why this decision was made. Mr Richardson submitted that people are taken
from one country to another for sometimes sinister reasons but this is not
the case here, where people have clubbed together to help somebody. It does
not follow that he was sent over to the UK by one group of family members
to another.

27. In respect of his birth certificate, the Appellant does not know much
about it but it is possible this is a genuine document and obtained on his
behalf. The Appellant does not know so cannot advance it as a firm
proposition. Mr Richardson submitted that people purport to act in the best
interests of a minor and it was notable in respect of the library ticket
that whilst the Appellant was about 17 he was reading children's books and
was not getting the education he should have, but it may be that the
community members believed they were acting in his best interests. In
respect of the newspaper articles, Mr Richardson submitted that when the
Appellant and his de facto family saw what the First tier Tribunal had said
about a lack of evidence they sought to obtain it, but this does not mean
that attempts have not been made genuinely in the past and it would be
surprising if they had not.

28. Mr Richardson submitted that someone living under the radar is not
going to get a perfect chronology and there will be gaps. He submitted that
the evidence as a whole shows an absence of ties with Bangladesh. The
Appellant has lived in the UK for such a long time and has such distant
recollection of his country that there would be serious obstacles to his
reintegration. He has not lived there independently either as an adult or a
child. It could cause significant hardship so that real obstacles can be
identified. The Appellant's lack of education would impinge on his ability
to cope with life on return. The fact that he has no literacy in Sylheti
would present real obstacles to integration. He does not have family or a
circle of friends there and would be returning as a virtual stranger thus
the test in the Rules is satisfied.

29. In the alternative, Mr Richardson submitted that there are factors to
be considered outside the Rules and that the Appellant first applied to
regularise his stay in 2009 but no final decision was taken until October
2015 which amounted to substantial delay on the part of the Respondent. The
Appellant has established a life in the UK including a pseudo family life
and he would not be able to replicate this if he left. He submitted that
little weight should be attached to the public interest in the case of a
person who has been in the UK since the age of 12. Mr Richardson concluded
by submitting that there are significant obstacles to reintegration and
additional factors which mean that the Appellant can succeed outside the
Rules.

My findings

30. I make the following findings of fact in light of the oral and
documentary evidence and the submissions made by both parties:

30.1. In light of the evidence at page 134 that the Appellant registered
with a GP's surgery on 19 December 2004 and the evidence of Anhar Ahmed
that the Appellant lived with him and his family from the end of 2002 to
the end of 2004, I accept on the balance of probabilities that the
Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 September 2002 and I accept
that he was, at that time, approximately 12 years of age, based on the
birth certificate which gives him a date of birth of 28 November 1989. Thus
I find that the Appellant is now 27 years old and I find that he has lived
continuously in the UK for 15 years.

30.2. In respect of the Immigration Rules, the only applicable Rule is
paragraph 276ADE(vi) ie. that he is aged 18 years or above, has lived
continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to his
integration into the country to which he would have to go if required to
leave the UK. There is no definition of "significant obstacles" within the
Rules but paragraph 8.2.3.4 of Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or
Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes August 2015 provides guidance to
assessing whether there would be very significant obstacles to integration,
which I summarise as follows:

(i) the starting point is to assume that the applicant will be able to
integrate into their country of return, unless they can demonstrate why
that is not the case. The onus is on the applicant to show that there are
very significant obstacles to that integration, not on the decision maker
to show that there are not;

(ii) The decision maker should expect to see original, independent and
verifiable documentary evidence of any claims made in this regard, and must
place less weight on assertions which are unsubstantiated. Where it is not
reasonable to expect corroborating evidence to be provided, consideration
must be given to the credibility of the applicant's claims;

(iii) A very significant obstacle to integration means something which
would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant from integrating into the
country of return. Very significant obstacles will exist where the
applicant demonstrates that they would be unable to establish a private
life in the country of return, or where establishing a private life in the
country of return would entail very serious hardship for the applicant;

(iv) The decision maker must consider all the reasons put forward by the
applicant as to why there would be obstacles to their integration in the
country of return. These reasons must be considered individually and
cumulatively to assess whether there are very significant obstacles to
integration. In considering whether there are very significant obstacles to
integration, the decision maker should consider whether the applicant has
the ability to form an adequate private life by the standards of the
country of return - not by UK standards. The decision maker will need to
consider whether the applicant will be able to establish a private life in
respect of all its essential elements, even if, for example, their job, or
their ability to find work, or their network of friends and relationships
may be differently constituted in the country of return;

(v) The fact the applicant may find life difficult or challenging in the
country of return does not mean that they have established that there would
be very significant obstacles to integration there. The decision maker must
consider all relevant factors in the person's background and the conditions
they are likely to face in the country of return in making their decision
as to whether there are very significant obstacles to integration.

(vi) Relevant considerations include: cultural background; length of time
spent in the country of return; family, friends and social network albeit
an absence of family, friends or social networks in the country of return
is not in itself a very significant obstacle to integration; whether the
Applicant cannot speak any language spoken in the country of return;
Applicant would have no employment prospects on return although this is
very unlikely to be a very significant obstacle to integration;

(vii) The degree of private life an individual has established in the UK is
not relevant to the consideration of whether there are very serious
obstacles to integration into the country of return. However, this will be
relevant to the consideration of whether, where the applicant falls for
refusal under the Rules, there are exceptional circumstances which would
make refusal unjustifiably harsh for the applicant.

30.3. I find that, whilst the Appellant would invariably experience
difficulty in re-adjusting to life in Bangladesh, having lived in the UK
for 15 years, there would not be very significant obstacles to his
integration within the meaning of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules. My
reasons for so finding are as follows:

(i) Whilst the Home Office guidance has not been incorporated into the
Rules, in the absence of any definition it is appropriate to consider the
factors set out in the guidance. It is clear that the threshold is a high
one and that the onus is upon the Appellant to show very significant
obstacles to his integration;

(ii) the Appellant is a Sylheti Bengali speaker and has by his own account
and those of his witnesses, resided throughout his time in the UK with
fellow Bangladeshis. In these circumstances I find that he has maintained
familiarity not only with his language but also the culture of his country
of origin. His de facto adoptive family have clearly maintained links with
Bangladesh as is clear from the fact that a birth certificate for him was
obtained in 2005 and Mr Ali Hussain arranged for newspaper articles
regarding his family to be placed in the New Centuries Daily on 10 July
2017 and the Daily Uttorpurbo on 5 August 2017. Consequently, whilst he may
have lost contact with his birth family, I find that as the Appellant is
now an adult this is not of crucial importance and that he could reasonably
expect to be assisted in re-integrating in Bangladesh by his de facto
adoptive family;

(iii) I do not accept the evidence that the Appellant has spent time in
restaurants in the United Kingdom where those with whom he lived viz Mr
Abdul and then Abdul Saeed worked, but did not work himself. This is simply
implausible, in circumstances where he had no financial means at all and I
do not accept that friends and his de facto adoptive family would provide
all his financial support and accommodation for over 15 years. The
Appellant's evidence, supported by the witness, Anhar Ahmed, is that he had
to leave their household at the end of 2004 because there was insufficient
accommodation in a 2 bedroom flat for a family of two parents and three
children plus the Appellant. It is implausible that the family had funds to
spare in order to continue to support the Appellant in respect of all his
maintenance and accommodation after he had left their household;

(iv) The Appellant has never attended school in the United Kingdom (apart
from classes at a madrassa attached to the mosque). He maintained that he
did not work from the ages of 12 to 18 but would stay in and watch TV and
in Weston super Mare he played sports. It is not plausible that this is all
the Appellant did for 6 years and that the Bangladeshi community were happy
to support him financially during this entire time. The Appellant expressly
denied any ill-treatment or being made to work. However, it is inexplicable
that a number of members of the Bangladeshi community would effectively
hide the Appellant away for 6 years, without contacting social services and
thus depriving him of an education. This was entirely contrary to the
Appellant's best interests and simply does not make sense. My suspicion is
that the Appellant was trafficked to the UK for the purposes of domestic
servitude in private households and Bangladeshi run restaurants from the
age of 12, but there is no evidence that this was the case in order to make
a finding to that effect. For reasons best known to himself I find that the
Appellant is not telling the truth as to how he came to travel to the
United Kingdom and what he has been doing since his arrival. I find that
his witnesses have colluded with him in this respect. I find that the
Appellant has been working in the restaurant trade in order to support
himself during his time in the United Kingdom and he would be able to find
employment on his return to Bangladesh.

30.4. I have given careful consideration as to whether there are compelling
circumstances to justify consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration
Rules. I have concluded that no such circumstances arise on the facts of
this case. Whilst the Appellant has formed a de facto family life with his
friend, Anhar Ahmed and his family, I am troubled that Mr Ali Hussein,
Anhar's father, did not attend the Tribunal to give evidence on the
Appellant's behalf, despite having played a pivotal role in his life,
accommodating him for 2 years from the end of 2002 to the end of 2004 and
again from 2015; arranging for him to live with Abdul from 2004 to 2010;
providing him with constant financial support and arranging the newspaper
articles in the Bangladeshi newspapers in the summer of 2017. Mr Ali
Hussein has provided a letter dated 20 February 2016 [pages 163-164 of the
Appellant's bundle] where he states that he considers the Appellant to be
like his own son and that the Appellant remains dependant on the family,
but I am not prepared to accept, absent the opportunity to hear evidence
from Mr Hussein, that the relationship the Appellant has with him and his
family is based on genuine love and affection only. I make this finding in
light of my finding above that Mr Hussein acted contrary to the Appellant's
best interests when he was a child, in failing to inform social services
that the Appellant, who was a 12 year old child, was unaccompanied in the
UK and thus the Appellant lost the opportunity to obtain an education and
to live a normal life in the UK. Had he been taken into care it is likely
that he would have been able to regularise his immigration status. For the
avoidance of doubt, I accept that the Appellant and Anhar Ahmed are genuine
friends, but I find that the relationship between them forms part of the
Appellant's private life and there is no evidence that the relationship is
one of dependency over and above normal emotional ties such as to justify a
finding that family life exists.

30.5. In light of my finding at 30.4. above, I am not required to go on to
consider whether removal of the Appellant would be proportionate. For the
sake of completeness, however, I find that whilst the Appellant has
established a private life in the UK over the last 15 years, his removal to
Bangladesh would be proportionate in light of the fact that: the entirety
of the Appellant's stay in the UK has been without leave; he is a single
man with no partner or child; he speaks the Sylheti dialect of Bengali as
his first language and some English and has worked and thus would be in a
reasonable position to find employment and support himself on his return;
he could reasonably expect receive support re-integrating from members of
the Bangladeshi community who have supported him in the UK; no issues as to
his physical or mental health were raised which would impact on his ability
to establish himself in Bangladesh. With regard to the public interest
considerations set out in section 117B of the NIAA 2002, I find that there
is no evidence that he speaks English fluently; he is not financially
independent and his private life was established when he was in the UK
unlawfully, thus little weight can be attached to it. I find that the
Appellant has not in truth integrated into society in the UK as he has
remained within the Bangladeshi community throughout and has been badly
served by the actions of those who were acting as his de facto carers.
Consequently, I find that the public interest is in favour of the
Appellant's removal.

31. For the reasons set out above, the appeal is dismissed.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

2 October 2017
