
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12977/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2020                   |On 24 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ML
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chirico, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant has appealed against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Abebrese sent on 24 March 2020, allowing ML's appeal on Article 8 ECHR
grounds against a decision dated 16 July 2019, refusing to grant him leave
to enter the UK as a child under paragraph 297 of the immigration rules.
Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia granted permission on 16 June 2020.

The hearing was held remotely. Both parties requested an oral hearing and
did not object to the hearing being held remotely. Both parties
participated by Skype for Business. I am satisfied that a face-to-face
hearing could not be held because it was not practicable and that all of
the issues could be determined in a remote hearing. Both parties confirmed
at the end of the hearing that it had been fair.

Background

ML is a citizen of Russia born on 28 May 2002.  His father SG ('the
sponsor') moved to the UK in 2007 under the self-employed lawyer
concession. He was granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK on 30
October 2014 and was granted British nationality on 7 November 2018. ML
remained in Russia living with his mother OL but has retained a close
relationship with his father.  The appellant's brother IL was granted
settlement under paragraph 298 of the immigration rules on 30 September
2016 and has also been granted British Citizenship. ML applied for entry
clearance to join the sponsor in the UK pursuant to paragraph 297 of the
immigration rules on the basis that he had a very close relationship with
his father, had a very difficult relationship with his mother in Russia and
that he would suffer emotional harm if he did not join his father and
younger brother in the UK.

The application was refused on 16 July 2019 on the basis that ML did not
meet the requirements of the 297 of the immigration rules because the
sponsor in the UK did not have sole responsibility for ML and there were no
'serious family or compelling circumstances' that would make exclusion
undesirable. The view of the ECO was also that ML did not have family life
with the sponsor or alternatively if he did, the decision is proportionate.


In his grounds of appeal to the First Tier Tribunal, ML asserted that it
would be a disproportionate breach of his Article 8 ECHR right to family
life to deny him entry to the UK.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

At the hearing, the judge heard evidence from the sponsor and the sponsor's
partner. The judge also had before him an expert report from an Independent
Social Worker, Peter Horrocks as well as written evidence from ML and ML's
mother.

At [13] the judge found that the high threshold of serious and compelling
circumstances was not met. However, the judge went on to find that there
were exceptional circumstances which would make the refusal of entry
clearance disproportionate to the interference in ML's right to family life
with his father. These included that it was in the best interests for ML to
be granted entry clearance to the come to the UK [15]; ML is at a difficult
age and needs the love and attention of his father [16] and ML has a
difficult relationship with his mother [17].  The Independent Social Worker
found that ML's emotional needs were for him to come to the UK and that ML
would suffer harm to his emotional development if he were not granted entry
clearance and would struggle to develop close and trusting attachments in
future relationships.

In conclusion the judge found that although ML could not satisfy the
requirements of paragraph 297 of the immigration rules, the decision to
deny him entry was disproportionate because it would result in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for ML, his father and older sibling.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

At the hearing Mr Melvin for the appellant relied on the original grounds
and the renewed grounds of challenge. He also sought to raise a new ground
of challenge which he submitted was 'obvious'.

               1) Misdirection in law

                  Having found that there were no serious and compelling
                  circumstances such that ML could meet paragraph 297(i)(f)
                  of the immigration rules, the judge went on to use Article
                  8 ECHR as a 'general dispensing power' to circumvent the
                  immigration rules. The judge failed to properly identify
                  any exceptional circumstances over and above the
                  requirements in the immigration rules such to make the
                  refusal of entry disproportionate and gave no or
                  inadequate reasons as to why the refusal of entry
                  clearance would result in unjustifiably harsh
                  consequences. Alternatively, the finding is irrational.

               2) Failure to have regard to relevant caselaw

                  The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal do not
                  particularise the caselaw which it is asserted that the
                  judge failed to have regard to apart from an assertion
                  that the judge "failed to adhere to the caselaw cited".

               3) Inadequate reasons for finding a violation of Article 8
                  ECHR

                  The judge failed to give adequate reasons as to why
                  despite the fact that the appellant is cared for by his
                  mother in Russia and received regular visits from his
                  father, his Article 8 right to family life would be
                  violated by the refusal of entry.  There are no obstacles
                  to family life continuing in its present form.

               4) Irrationality/Inadequate reasons for factual findings (New
                  ground - raised at hearing)

                  It was irrational for the judge to find that ML would
                  suffer emotional damage as a result of being denied entry
                  to the UK in the absence of medical evidence. The judge's
                  assessment of ML's best interests was brief and
                  inadequate. There was no proper analysis. This appears to
                  be a challenge to the judge's factual findings in respect
                  of ML's best interests.

Permission to appeal

Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia in a decision dated
1 July 2020 which is worded as follows;

           "it is at least arguable that having found the requirements for
           indefinite leave to enter are not met by the appellant and that
           there are no serious and compelling family or other
           considerations which make exclusion of [ML] undesirable, the
           judge erroneously utilised Article 8 as a general dispensing
           power without identifying any compelling circumstances over and
           above the requirements set out in the rules, that make refusal
           disproportionate in all the circumstances".

The grant of permission does not refer to the other grounds of appeal. I
will infer from this omission that all grounds are arguable.

Discussion

New Ground - Ground 4 - Challenge to factual findings

At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Melvin sought permission to
raise new grounds of appeal which he referred to as 'obvious'. He argued
that the judge's findings on the effect on ML being denied entry clearance
were irrational in the absence of medical evidence. He also sought to argue
that the assessment of the best interests of the child was inadequate.

I note and take into account that in the original written grounds of appeal
submitted on 2 April 2020 there was no reference to these asserted errors
in the judge's approach, nor was there any reference to these asserted
errors in the renewed application for permission on 30 June 2020. On 16
June 2020, the Secretary of State was provided with a further 14 days in
which to provide written submissions.  On 28 July 2020 the Secretary of
State requested the Tribunal to extend the deadline for the filing of the
further submissions to an unspecified date.  On 31 July 2020 UTJ O'Connor
refused to extend time. On 9 October 2020 further directions were sent out
directing the Secretary of State to file a skeleton argument and any rule
15(2A) notice relied on within 21 days. The Secretary of State did not
comply with the directions. The Secretary of State's written submissions
were filed at 13.55 on 3 November 2020 on the day before the hearing. It
was in these written submissions that the Secretary of State asserted for
the first time that the judge's factual findings in respect of the
emotional damage to ML were irrational and/or that the best interests
assessment was inadequate.

When deciding whether to allow the Secretary of State to argue these
grounds, I have had regard to the guidance of Lord Justice Jackson at [32]
of Latayan v SSHD [2020] EWCA 191 where he states;

         "I would however comment on the additional submissions made by Mr �
         Ceallaigh as recorded at paragraph 28. Any counsel appearing for
         the first time on an appeal will seek to refresh the arguments so
         as to present them in the most persuasive way, and I do not
         criticise counsel for his efforts on behalf of this Appellant. Nor
         should a party be penalised for drafting grounds of appeal
         concisely. However, these arguments were not pleaded at all on this
         appeal and in my view they cannot be raised now. An appeal court
         can entertain a new argument of law where that is in the interests
         of justice (though it will be slow to do so) - Miscovic v Secretary
         of State for Work and Pensions [2011] EWCA Civ 16 per Elias LJ at
         [69], Sedley LJ at [109-112] and Moore-Bick LJ at [134] - but these
         arguments relate entirely to an assessment of the facts and they
         cannot fairly be raised on the hoof. They are not Robinson-obvious
         points that the tribunals or court could be expected to appreciate
         for themselves in a case where the Appellant was represented by
         counsel. As my lord, Lord Justice Singh, said in Talpada v The
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841 at
         [69]:

           "Courts should be prepared to take robust decisions and not
           permit grounds to be advanced if they have not been properly
           pleaded or where permission has not been granted to raise them.
           Otherwise there is a risk that there will be unfairness, not
           only to the other party to the case, but potentially to the
           wider public interest, which is an important facet of public law
           litigation."

In considering whether it is in the interests of justice to permit this
amendment, I bear in mind the overriding objective, as set out in the
procedural rules. As is apparent from [13] above, the Secretary of State
has taken well over six months to raise a point without any proper
explanation for the delay. If, as is averred, the point is obvious, it begs
the question of why it was not raised until the day before the hearing. I
do not find that it is in the interests of justice to permit the Secretary
of State to raise these new grounds of appeal. When making this decision, I
give weight to the fact that these are entirely new grounds which are not
simply an enlargement of the previous grounds. Permission was not granted
in respect of these grounds. I also give weight to the fact that the new
grounds of appeal were raised very late in the day. The Secretary of State
had ample opportunity to raise these grounds in the original grounds and in
further submissions. The new grounds in essence amount to a challenge to
the judge's factual findings and the judge's assessment of the evidence,
rather than being concerned the with the interpretation of the law. They
are not 'obvious' in the Robinson sense because they do not, for the
reasons set out below, have strong prospects of success.

Even had I entertained the new grounds, I would have decided that they were
not made out in any event. Mr Melvin accepts that the Secretary of State
did not challenge the opinion or conclusions of Mr Horrocks the Independent
Social Worker before the original judge. It was not submitted by the
Presenting Officer at the appeal that the Independent Social Worker expert
evidence was deficient or that the expert evidence could not be relied on,
nor that it was necessary for there to be additional medical evidence.  Mr
Horrock's report appeared at page 158 to 177 of the original appellant's
bundle. His expertise is set out in the introduction.   I accept Mr
Chirico's submission that Mr Horrocks is well known to the Tribunal and
that he spoke to both ML and his father when preparing his report. Counsel
for ML also drew the judge's attention to the fact that ML's mother
confirmed in her statement that she had read the report and agreed with its
contents. In the report Mr Horrocks went through the 'welfare checklist'
considering the wishes and best interests of ML, his physical, emotional
and educational needs, the effect on him of any change of circumstances,
his age, sex background and any other characteristics, any harm he had
suffered and how capable each of his parents were of meeting his needs.
Having taken all of these factors into account at 5.4 the Independent
Social Worker stated that he strongly recommended that it would be in the
best interest of ML for him to be granted leave to join his father and
brother in the UK.  The conclusions and opinions of the Independent Social
Worker which the judge accepted in full were set out in detail at
paragraphs 29 to 33 of ML's skeleton argument which was before the judge.

In was manifestly open to the judge to accept the unchallenged expert
evidence before him in these circumstances. It was clearly rational for the
judge to accept the expert Independent Social Worker's opinions and
conclusions which he does at [18], [19] and [20].

The judge's factual findings from [16] onwards were based on the entirety
of the evidence before him which the judge explicitly states at [13]. There
was a large bundle of evidence before the judge including numerous detailed
witness statements as well as the ISW report. The judge also heard oral
evidence.

I have had regard to the various authorities in relation to the adequacy of
reasons and interference with factual findings. I refer to the words of
Dingemans LJ in Terghazi v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2017 at [45];

           "A further principle which it is relevant to note is that, even
           if an appellate court is entitled to hear an appeal because of
           an error of fact (because the appeal court has jurisdiction to
           hear appeals on facts) appellate courts should be very cautious
           in overturning findings of fact made by a first instance judge.
           This is because first instance judges have seen witnesses and
           take into account the whole "sea" of the evidence, rather than
           indulged in impermissible "island hopping" to parts only of the
           evidence, and because duplication of effort on appeal is
           undesirable and increases costs and delay. Judges hearing
           appeals on facts should only interfere if a finding of fact was
           made which had no basis in the evidence, or where there was a
           demonstrable misunderstanding of relevant evidence, or a
           demonstrable failure to consider relevant evidence so that the
           decision could not reasonably be explained or justified".

I am not satisfied that there was a demonstrable misunderstanding by the
judge of the evidence nor that there was a failure to consider relevant
evidence. The findings cannot be said to be either inadequately reasoned,
nor can they be said to be "perverse" or "irrational" which is a a
demanding concept with a high threshold.

I am satisfied that the judge was properly able to make the findings that
ML had a difficult and fraught relationship with his mother, was close to
his father and brother,  that he suffered emotional development following
the break-up of his parents relationship and these early emotional
difficulties appear to have continued into his adolescence and impacted on
his relationship with his mother, that he will "suffer harm to his
emotional development" if he is not allowed to join his father and brother
in the UK and that he will "struggle to develop close and trusting
emotional attachments in his future relationships in those circumstances".

I am not satisfied that the judge's assessment of the best interests of ML
was inadequate. The judge was entitled to give weight to the opinion of the
expert who had taken into account a large range of factors prior to
concluding that it was in ML's best interests to be granted entry clearance
to join his father in the UK. I find that the new grounds of appeal raised
by Mr Melvin were an attempt to re-argue the appeal.

Ground 1 - Misapplication of the law - general dispensing power

Mr Melvin's submission is that the judge has misapplied the law and used
Article 8 ECHR as a 'general dispensing power'.  The ground is poorly
particularised and does not identify any specific error of law in line with
R(Iran) [2015] EWCA Civ 982.

Firstly, I am in agreement with Mr Chirico that the Secretary of State has
mischaracterised the judge's findings in respect of paragraph 297. The
judge did not find that there were 'no' compelling or compassionate
circumstances. The judge found that the 'high threshold of serious and
compelling circumstances under the rules was not met' and gave brief
reasons for this at [13] and [14].

I am not persuaded by Mr Melvin's argument that having found that ML could
not meet the immigration rules, that it was irrational for the judge to
find that a denial of ML's entry to the UK would be a disproportionate
breach of Article 8 ECHR. It was incumbent on the judge to go onto decide,
notwithstanding that ML did not meet paragraph 297 of the immigration
rules, whether the denial of entry would amount to a disproportionate
breach of Article 8 ECHR. In the skeleton argument the judge was referred
to the tests set out in MM(Lebanon)[2010] UKSC 10 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC
11 and the need to strike a fair balance between the strength of the public
interest and the impact on the individual's family or private life.

Having found at [13] that ML did not meet the immigration rules, the judge
went onto carry out the Article 8 ECHR proportionality exercise at [15]
where he states;

"I then went to consider whether there are any exceptional circumstances
outside the Rules".

The judge then refers to s55 of the UK Borders Act 2009 and T(Jamaica)
[2011] UKUT 483 (IAC). The judge refers to the child's best interests being
a primary consideration. The judge accepts at [16] the evidence of ML in
relation to his close relationship with his father and finds at [18] that
the appellant has grown closer to his sponsor and his sibling. It is clear
from these findings that the judge accepts that Article 8 (1) is engaged in
respect of family life between ML and his father.

The judge finds at [15] that there are exceptional reasons in this appeal
and sets them out from [16] to [20].

At [21] the judge states;

      "I am of the view that taking all of the evidence in the round that
      the decision of the respondent is not proportionate and that it would
      result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant and third
      parties such as the sponsor and his older sibling".

From this, I am satisfied that the judge was manifestly aware of the need
to carry out a proportionality balancing exercise in respect of Article 8
ECHR and that the judge has referred to unjustifiably harsh consequences
which is the wording found in GEN 3.2 of the immigration rules.

I am satisfied that the judge applied his mind to the correct legal test in
respect of Article 8 ECHR. It is not incumbent on a judge to set out the
test word by word, but to demonstrate in the decision that he has
understood the test. I agree with Mr Chiraco the that the Secretary of
State has failed to identify how the judge failed to adhere to the test.
Although the judge's wording may not be perfect, it is inconceivable that
an experienced judge would direct himself to the correct test and then fail
to adhere to the self-direction. I remind myself of the principles set out
by Lady Hale at [30] in AH (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] UKHL 49.  A considerable
degree of deference must be given to a specialist Tribunal which will be
assumed to have directed itself appropriately even if the decision is not
perfectly expressed or a judge has not expressly set out every step.
Further the judge had a detailed skeleton argument before him which set out
the relevant law in detail.

Mr Melvin's alternative submission is that it was irrational for the judge
to conclude that there were exceptional circumstances in the case of ML or
alternatively it was irrational to conclude that the exceptional
circumstances would render the denial of entry unjustifiably harsh.

In deciding that there were exceptional circumstances the judge clearly had
in mind the totality of the evidence before him and as explained above was
properly entitled to rely on the expert report and detailed witness
statements and oral evidence. This included evidence that ML had had a
serious road traffic accident which had affected his mental and emotional
health, the difficulties in his relationship with his mother and his close
relationship with his father and brother in the UK as well as the
difficulties of his father travelling to Russia in future because of his
involvement with representing high profile Russian dissidents.

The judge was properly entitled to find that it was in the best interests
of ML to live with his father and brother in the UK. The judge identified
as exceptional circumstances the harm that would be suffered by ML in terms
of his emotional development and future relationships if he were not
granted entry clearance to the UK. He gave adequate and sustainable reasons
for these findings based on the evidence. The judge's finding that there
would be unjustifiably harsh consequences for ML because of these
exceptional circumstances is adequately reasoned. The finding is perhaps
generous but was firmly rooted in the evidence and does not reach the high
threshold of perversity as alleged by the Secretary of State.

In this respect I take into account the words of Reed LJ in Henderson v
Foxworth Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41 at [62];

           "It does not matter, with whatever degree of certainty, that the
           appellate court considers that it would have reached a different
           conclusion. What matters is whether the decision under appeal is
           one that no reasonable judge could have reached."

I also remind myself of the comments of Carnworth LJ in Mukarkar approved
by the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) 2017 SC10 that;

           "The mere fact that one tribunal has reached what may seem an
           unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does
           not mean that it has made an error of law, so as to justify an
           appeal under the old system, or an order for reconsideration
           under the new... However on the facts of a particular case the
           decision of a specialist tribunal should be respected".

It may have been that another judge would have taken a less generous view
in respect of the proportionality of the denial of entry, but the alleged
generosity of this decision does not render the decision unlawful.

The grounds do not assert that the judge misdirected himself in law for
instance by failing to make reference to section 117B of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 when undertaking the proportionality
balancing exercise.  Although the judge appears to have failed to assess
these statutory factors including ML's ability to speak English and his
financial independence in accordance with the statutory scheme, the judge
is only obliged to consider the relevant factors.  The fact that ML speaks
fluent English and can be supported by his father are neutral factors and
s117(5) does not apply because ML's family life with his father was not
formed at a time when his immigration status was precarious. I am satisfied
that even if there were an error in this approach, the omission of
considering these factors would not have made a material difference to the
outcome of the appeal in these circumstances.

    Ground 2 - Failure to have regard to relevant caselaw

This ground was not particularised in the original application for
permission. In the renewal application it is said that the judge has
"failed to adhere to the caselaw cited".  This ground is not expanded on in
the respondent's written submissions which were produced the day before the
hearing and Mr Melvin did not expand on this ground of appeal in his oral
submissions. The ground is lacking in specificity. Elsewhere in this
decision, I have explained why the judge did not misapply the caselaw in
respect of Article 8 ECHR. This ground is not made out.

    Ground 3 - Inadequate reasons as to why ML's Article 8 ECHR rights
    would be violated

The Secretary of State asserts that Article 8 ECHR would not be violated
because ML is cared for by his mother in Russia and can continue to receive
regular visits from the sponsor.

The judge was manifestly aware that ML had grown up in Russia in the care
of his mother after his parents separated when he was 8 years old. This is
explicitly referred to at [13].

The judge turned to the relationship between ML and the sponsor at [16] and
[18]. The judge had before him consistent evidence including witness
statements, passport entries, course details and the Independent Social
Worker report that the sponsor has visited ML in Russia on a regular basis,
that ML has visited his father in the UK and undertaken courses in the UK
and that there was regular contact between ML and his father by skype and
email. The judge was manifestly entitled to find at [16] that regular
visits have taken place and at [18] that ML has a close relationship with
his father.

The judge accepted that ML had a fraught and difficult relationship with
his mother at [16]. At [18] the judge accepted that his emotional needs
were to live with his father and at [20] and that he would suffer emotional
harm if that did not occur. The judge also had before him evidence that the
sponsor was living with ML's older brother in the UK and that his visits to
Russia were likely to become less frequent because of his work in the UK
undertaking high profile human rights cases in relation to Russian
nationals critical of the regime in Russia.  The Secretary of State does
not challenge these findings.

ML was at the date of the hearing a minor child of the sponsor.  The judge
was referred in the skeleton argument to the authorities for the
proposition that family life is presumed to be engaged between a parent and
a minor child.

The judge was manifestly entitled to find on the consistent evidence before
him that Article 8 (1) is engaged in respect of family life.

The judge also had evidence before him that the sponsor had a partner in
the UK, was responsible for ML's older sibling and was running a law firm
employing 17 lawyers and that many of his clients actively criticise the
Russian government.

It is not irrational in these circumstances for the judge to find that the
exclusion of ML from the UK was an interference in his right to family life
and that his task was to decide whether the refusal of admission of ML to
the UK to join his father was a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR.
The judge was referred to the authorities of T(Jamaica) [supra] and Mundeba
(s55 & paragraph 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) in the skeleton argument
and the judge refers to these authorities at [12] and [15].

I am satisfied that there was no error in the judge's approach to the
engagement of Article 8 ECHR.

    Alternative submission - Appeal upheld on alternative reasoning

ML also submits in the alterative, both in the rule 24 response and in the
further note and oral submissions that, the judge erred in law by failing
to allow ML's  appeal under paragraph 297(i)(f) of the immigration rules on
the basis that the judge has construed the rules too constrictively,
wrongly omitting from his consideration all of the best interests of the
child evidence which the judge refers to in the analysis of exceptionality.
Mundeba [supra] is proposition for the principle that consideration of
paragraph 297(i)(f) should involve an analysis of the best interests of the
child. I am invited to set aside the finding at [14] that there were no
serious and compelling family and other circumstances which would make the
exclusion of the child undesirable because had the judge taken a lawful
approach to this issue and incorporated his analysis of the best interests
of the child into his assessment, he would have, taking all the factors
cumulatively into consideration, reached a different conclusion.

In accordance with Smith (appealable decisions; PTA requirements;
anonymity) [2019] UKUT 00216, I am satisfied that ML was not required to
apply for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal because the
determination of this ground in the appellant's favour does not confer on
the appellant any material benefit compared with the benefit flowing from
the ground or grounds on which the appellant was successful in the First-
tier Tribunal. Either way the appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.
Further I am satisfied that the rule 24 notice was filed and served in
accordance with the procedural rules and the Upper Tribunal's directions.

I am satisfied that the judge's analysis of "serious and compelling family
or other considerations" failed to address the best interests of the child
and the findings of the Independent Social Worker report, thereby failing
to take into account relevant material factors which should have been
considered cumulatively when considering this issue.  I have set out these
findings and considerations at length above. I am accordingly satisfied
that the judge erred in his approach to paragraph 297(i)(f) of the
immigration rules and had he taken these factors into account may well have
made a different decision in respect of whether ML met the immigration
rules.  The error however, it not material because it is corrected by the
adequately reasoned decision on exceptional circumstances which I have
upheld for the reasons set out above.w

    Conclusion

It follows that none of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are made
out and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal is upheld.


Signed                                       Date

UTJ Owens
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens                         24 February 2021

