

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/12715/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 5 December  2017                   |              On 22 December 2017    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE MORRIS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                    R A S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Chelvan, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13 February  1949,
      arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 December 2014, then aged  65,  and
      was admitted as a visitor. Although in applying  for  entry  clearance
      she had said that she intended a visit of just three weeks,  she  was,
      in the usual way, in fact granted leave to remain for six months.

   2. On 16 June 2015, which was a few  days  before  her  leave  to  remain
      expired, she made  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
      "outside the immigration rules", explaining that since her arrival  in
      the United Kingdom she had been staying with her son and  daughter-in-
      law and that she wished to remain because she suffered  from  physical
      and mental ailments and she had no one to care for her in Pakistan. In
      a covering letter, the appellant's  solicitors  made  clear  that  the
      application was made on the basis of rights  protected  by  Article  8
      ECHR. There was no  suggestion  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
      requirements of any immigration rule nor that her medical condition or
      need for treatment was such to demand the protection of Article 3.

   3. Evidence submitted in support of that application  included  a  report
      from Dr Kottalgi, a consultant forensic psychiatrist, who confirmed  a
      diagnosis of recurrent depressive disorder and expressed  the  opinion
      that  her  condition  was  likely  to  deteriorate  further   "without
      appropriate treatment and support increasing the risk to herself".  He
      said that an important factor contributing to her stability  has  been
      the support she had received from her son  being  "around  her".  That
      report was dated 23 October 2015. That was, of course, after the  date
      of the application, the appellant's solicitors having said  that  they
      would forward further medical evidence as soon as it was available.

   4.  The  appellant's  application  was  refused  by  a  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 19 November 2015. Because  of  the  nature  of  the
      challenge being pursued by Mr Chelvan in his oral submissions,  it  is
      necessary to discuss in some detail and at some length the reasons for
      the respondent's decision and the  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for dismissing the appeal.

   5. As we shall see, it is part of the challenge to that decision that the
      respondent, and indeed the judge who dismissed  the  appeal,  did  not
      properly appreciate the  nature  of  the  submission  that  was  being
      advanced on behalf of the appellant. Therefore,  it  is  important  to
      establish what the respondent made of the nature of  the  application,
      which was summarised in the decision letter as follows:

           "... It is stated that you wish to remain in the  UK  with  your
           son and daughter in law because you  have  physical  and  mental
           ailments and no-one to return to  in  Pakistan.  It  is  further
           stated that since your late husband became severely ill in  2011
           you have been suffering from severe depression and that this has
           worsened after your husband died in January 2014.  In  addition,
           it is also stated that you have a number  of  physical  ailments
           including  arthritis,  sight  problems  following  a   bilateral
           cataract operation and hypothyroidism."

The respondent then referred to evidence from  a  General  Practitioner  the
appellant had been taken to see by her son, who provided a  letter  dated  9
October 2015:

           "The General Practitioner states that you  have  been  suffering
           from hypothyroidism, gout,  hypertension  and  depression  since
           2010. It is also stated that your general anxiety comes  from  a
           fear of being alone and that you  asserted  a  large  degree  of
           reliance on your son. You showed typical depressive symptoms and
           medication had been prescribed."

Next, the respondent considered the report from Dr Kottalgi, the  consultant
forensic psychiatrist:

           "The Consultant Psychiatrist has diagnosed recurrent  depressive
           disorder with current episode  being  moderate  to  severe.  The
           prognosis is that if your mental illness is left  untreated  you
           are at high risk of further deterioration of your mental  health
           and of self-neglect and causing harm to  yourself  through  your
           negative  cognitions.  It  is  stated  that  you  have  been  on
           antidepressant medication prescribed by a  private  GP  for  the
           previous 10 months and had responded to some extent."

Although no assertion had been made that requiring the appellant  to  return
to Pakistan would bring  about  an  infringement  of  Article  3  ECHR,  the
respondent addressed that possibility anyway, saying:

           "Although it is accepted from your medical  evidence,  that  you
           suffer from recurrent depressive disorder, hyperthyroidism, gout
           and hypertension, it is not accepted that you  have  established
           that there is a sufficiently real risk that your  removal  would
           be a breach of article 3 medical...."

The respondent went on to explain why the circumstances of  the  appellant's
case did not meet the high threshold to engage protection of Article  3.  As
it is no part of the appellant's case that the respondent  was  wrong  about
that, it is not necessary to say any more about it.

   6. Similarly, although the respondent went on to discuss  at  length  the
      availability of suitable medical treatment in Pakistan that  could  be
      accessed by  the  appellant,  this  was  not  in  issue.  Indeed,  the
      appellant had been able to access a wide range of medical treatment in
      respect of mental and physical health issues.  In  particular,  as  is
      confirmed by a letter from Dr Zaheer-ud-din,  Senior  Psychologist  at
      the Centre for Counselling and Psychotherapy in Lahore, the  appellant
      had been under the care of medical professionals since being diagnosed
      as suffering from severe depression in January  2012,  since  when  it
      appears that she had weekly  counselling  sessions  for  nearly  three
      years. On her last visit to that centre on 10 December  2014,  a  week
      before she travelled to the United  Kingdom  for  what  she  had  said
      initially was to be a three week-long visit, Dr Zaheer-ud-din  records
      that she told him that she "won't be able to come  now  for  any  more
      sessions".

   7. In the refusal letter, the respondent noted that as  well  as  regular
      treatment in respect of her depression,  the  appellant  had  accessed
      other medical treatment:

           "... an ultrasound at the Services Hospital in  Lahore;  and  x-
           rays and medication from  the  Shaukat  Khanum  Memorial  Cancer
           Hospital and Research Centre in Lahore. It has also been  stated
           that you had a bilateral cataract  operation  in  Pakistan.  You
           have submitted receipts for medicine and other services dated 26
           May 2015 from the Shaukat Memorial Cancer Hospital and  Research
           Centre in Lahore. It is therefore believed that you will be able
           to continue to receive treatment for  your  medical  conditions,
           including depression, in Pakistan."

This led the respondent to conclude:

           "Your case has been carefully considered but it is not  accepted
           that  there  are  sufficiently   compelling   or   compassionate
           circumstances to justify  allowing  you  to  remain  in  the  UK
           outside the Immigration Rules."

That was because:

           "... when you applied in October 2014 for a visa to visit the UK
           you stated that the main purpose of  your  visit  was  to  spend
           quality time with your son and daughter-in-law and during your 3
           week stay you would be visiting historical places.  ....  It  is
           believed that you will be able to continue to receive  treatment
           for your medical conditions, including depression, in  Pakistan.
           Your son will be able to continue to provide  financial  support
           for you in Pakistan. He will also have the option of  organising
           any help you may require with your medication. You will also  be
           able to maintain contact with your son  and  daughter-in-law  by
           means of visits and various forms of communication.


           It  is  not  accepted  that  your  medical  conditions  are   so
           debilitating such that  they  would  prevent  you  doing  normal
           everyday tasks...


           Your application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the
           Immigration Rules has been refused  under  paragraph  322(1)  of
           HC395 (as amended). The Secretary of State is satisfied  that  a
           variation of leave to enter or remain  is  being  sought  for  a
           purpose not covered by the Rules."

   8. Although it had not been suggested that the  appellant  could  succeed
      under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, the respondent considered whether
      she might be able to meet those  provisions  but  concluded  that  she
      could not. As we shall see, in his oral submissions, Mr Chelvan argued
      that the respondent should have  accepted  that  the  requirements  of
      276ADE(vi) were met. In that respect the respondent had said this:

           "In order to meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
           an applicant must show that... there would be  very  significant
           obstacles to their integration into the country  to  which  they
           would have to go if required to leave the UK.


           It  is  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant
           obstacles to your reintegration  into  Pakistan...  because  you
           will have spent the vast majority of your life in  Pakistan  and
           were last  resident  there  in  December  2014.  You  have  also
           obtained treatment for your medical  conditions  from  hospitals
           and medical practitioners in Pakistan


           Consequently, you fail to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
           276ADE of the Immigration Rules."

   9. Finally, the respondent looked to see if anything had  been  disclosed
      that demanded a grant of leave outside the rules to secure an  outcome
      compliant with Article 8 but, for reasons similar to  those  discussed
      above, concluded that nothing was.

  10. The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters who, by a  determination
      promulgated on 27 February 2017, dismissed her appeal. Because of  the
      nature of the challenge now pursued against the decision of the judge,
      it is necessary to examine both the grounds upon which  the  appellant
      appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and the  reasoning  that  led  the
      judge to his conclusions.

  11. The key point made in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
      was this:

           "... while it is  accepted  that  Pakistan  does  in  fact  have
           medical treatment both for the appellant's physical as  well  as
           psychological ailments, it is submitted that the  primary  point
           of concern was not dealt with adequately by the SSHD. As  stated
           in the application, the appellant no longer has anyone  to  look
           after her in Pakistan following the death of her husband..., and
           her psychological wellbeing is wholly dependent on her  capacity
           to be with her son... who  is  the  only  direct  family  member
           alive. Her son is a British citizen and lives in the UK with her
           (sic) wife... and together they have been making every effort to
           ameliorate the appellant's condition since her  arrival  to  the
           UK.  It is submitted  that  the  appellant's  circumstances  are
           exceptional enough to warrant a grant of leave to remain outside
           of the Immigration Rules..."


      Two observations may be made about those grounds. First, it  is  clear
      that the refusal of leave was being challenged on the basis  that  the
      appellant should have been granted leave outside the rules, not on the
      basis that it should have been accepted that she met the  requirements
      of any rule, in particular para 276ADE. Secondly, it is not correct to
      say that the appellant's son is "the only direct family member  alive"
      because, as she confirmed  to  Dr  Kottalgi,  and  as  he  records  at
      paragraph 4 of his second report of 22 December  2016,  the  appellant
      has a younger sister who lives in Rawalpindi and a brother  who  lives
      in  Faisalabad.  She  explained  that  she  did  not  enjoy   a   good
      relationship with either but it is hard to see how  the  draftsman  of
      the grounds felt able to say that her son was her only direct relative
      still alive. Further, when the appellant's son gave  evidence  at  the
      appeal hearing, he spoke of having contacted members of  his  father's
      family "who had been there (in Lahore) since the 1960's. He said  they
      were his cousins". He had contacted them  after  the  tenancy  of  his
      mother's house ended (and was not renewed) in June 2015 so  that  they
      could dispose of his mother's belongings.


  12. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, as well as  her  son
      and daughter-in-law. Having noted that the appellant had said  in  her
      application for entry clearance:

           "Main purpose of my visit to the UK is  to  spend  quality  time
           with my son and daughter-in-law.  I  have  a  keen  interest  in
           history so during my three week stay I will be visiting historic
           places along with my son and daughter-in-law."

and that, as mentioned above, she had told the doctor who had been  treating
her depression and providing weekly counselling sessions for getting on  for
three years that she would not be able to attend any more sessions and  that
her son and daughter-in-law had arranged for her possessions in Pakistan  to
be disposed of, the judge made this clear finding of fact:

           "Having considered this evidence, I found that the appellant and
           her family intended that she used the device of a visit visa  to
           gain entry to the UK and from here to make  an  application  for
           permanent residence..."

  13. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  was  represented  by  Ms
      Bagral of counsel. At paragraph 23 of his judgment the judge  recorded
      that:


           "Ms Bagral had not produced a skeleton argument but said at  the
           commencement of the hearing that she put her case "under Article
           8 medical"."


  14. Before considering the appellant's case outside the immigration rules,
      that being the submission being pursued, the judge recognised that had
      the appellant applied for entry clearance as a dependant relative that
      was an application that could not have succeeded. The  relevant  rules
      are found at Section EC-DR: Entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependant
      relative. An applicant  for  entry  clearance  as  a  dependant  adult
      relative must meet all of the requirements of E-ECDR 2.1 to  3.2.  One
      of those requirements is  E-ECDR2.5  which  provides,  so  far  as  is
      relevant:

           The applicant...must be unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
           financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required  level  of
           care in the country where they are living because-
              a) It is not available and there is no person in that  country
                 who can reasonably provide it; or
              b) It is not affordable.

      The judge found that this is a  requirement  that  could  not  be  met
      because there  was  no  evidence  to  the  contrary.  Indeed,  as  the
      appellant, when living  in  Pakistan  was  supported  financially  and
      emotionally by her son in the United Kingdom, had been able to  obtain
      all the medical  treatment  that  she  required,  and  was  living  in
      adequate accommodation with two maids  to  assist  her  with  everyday
      tasks, that finding by the judge is  simply  unassailable.  The  judge
      concluded:


           "Of course in the present case the appellant simply wants to  be
           in the UK with her son and his immediate family.  Unfortunately,
           that  is  simply  not  possible  unless  a  person   meets   the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules."

  15. Addressing the position outside the rules, the judge accepted that the
      appellant enjoyed family life with her  son  and  daughter-in-law  and
      that she had established a private life  since  being  admitted  as  a
      visitor in December 2014. He accepted also that Article 8 was  engaged
      because if the appellant was required  to  return  to  Pakistan  there
      would be an interference with her right to respect for her private and
      family life. He concluded, though, that  such  interference  would  be
      proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  being  pursued  of  maintaining
      immigration control and so he dismissed the appeal  "on  human  rights
      grounds".

  16. The initial grounds upon which  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was sought and granted  were  drafted  by  Ms  Bagral.  Those
      grounds were  developed  significantly  by  Mr  Chelvan  in  his  oral
      submissions and those submissions navigated  a  course  some  distance
      from the destination of the original grounds. In  summary,  he  argued
      that the determination of the judge disclosed the following errors  of
      law:

        a. As the appellant was a vulnerable witness,  regard  should  have
           been had to the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  concerning
           child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance. Had it
           done so that would have generated the "safe space" in which  for
           the appellant to give evidence  effectively.  As  that  was  not
           done, everything that followed was infected by  that  procedural
           irregularity;


        b. The appellant is said to be a person who claimed  she  would  be
           unsafe  in  Pakistan.  Therefore,  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
           respondent's representative to draw  to  the  attention  of  the
           judge the respondent's own applicable policy:  "Pakistan:  Women
           fearing gender-based harm/violence". See UB (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD
           [2017] EWCA Civ 85;

        c. It was an error of law for the judge to have failed to  consider
           whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements   of   paragraph
           276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules. This, he  submits,  was  in
           play because it was considered  but  rejected  in  the  decision
           under appeal;

        d. As the appellant faced difficulties of the  type  considered  in
           that guidance, because she would be a woman living alone,  that,
           taken together with her mental health problems, amounted to  the
           very substantial obstacles to integration on return demanded  by
           paragraph 276ADE(vi) as a condition of qualifying for  leave  to
           remain;

  17. As the original grounds were adopted, and not abandoned, for the  sake
      of completeness we address first the  initial  grounds  and  then  the
      matters explored by Mr Chelvan in his oral submissions.

  18. There were two grounds. The first ground complained that:

           "At no point in the decision is there  any  express  recognition
           given to the applicant's vulnerability as a person  with  mental
           health  difficulties  as   relevant   to   the   assessment   of
           credibility."

Ms Bagral, who appeared for the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
relied  in  drafting  those  grounds  upon  paragraph  15   of   the   Joint
Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 concerning child,  vulnerable  adult
and sensitive appellant guidance:

           The decision should record whether the  Tribunal  has  concluded
           the  appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,  vulnerable   or
           sensitive, the effect the  Tribunal  considered  the  identified
           vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it  and  thus
           whether the Tribunal was satisfied  whether  the  appellant  had
           established his or her case to the relevant standard  of  proof.
           In  asylum  appeals,  weight  should  be  given   to   objective
           indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind.

This was not done by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

  19.  The first obstacle standing in the way of that ground is that  it  is
      far from clear that this issue was even raised before the judge.  This
      is important because at 5.1 of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note it
      is  made  clear  that  the  primary  responsibility  for   identifying
      vulnerable individuals lies with then party  calling  them,  something
      reinforced recently by the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v  SSHD
      [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 at paragraph 32:

           "... The Guidance at [5.1] warns representatives that  they  may
           fail to recognise  vulnerability  and  they  might  consider  it
           appropriate to suggest that an appropriate  adult  attends  with
           the vulnerable witness to give him or her assistance. That said,
           the primary responsibility for identifying vulnerabilities  must
           rest with the appellant's representatives who are better  placed
           than the Secretary of State's representatives to have access  to
           private   medical   and   personal   information.    Appellant's
           representatives should draw the tribunal's attention to  the  PD
           and Guidance and should make submissions about  the  appropriate
           directions  and  measures  to  be  considered  e.g.  whether  an
           appellant should give oral evidence or the special measures that
           are required to protect his welfare or make effective his access
           to justice. The SRA  practice  note  of  2  July  2015  entitled
           'Meeting  the  needs  of  vulnerable  clients'  sets   out   how
           solicitors  should  identify  and  communicate  with  vulnerable
           clients. It also sets out the professional duty on  a  solicitor
           to satisfy him/herself that the client either does or  does  not
           have capacity..."

  20. There is no mention, at all, made  by  the  judge  in  his  manuscript
      record of proceedings that he was addressed on this issue. Mr  Chelvan
      noted that this case was called before the judge as a  float  case  so
      that neither the judge nor the Home Office Presenting Officer had read
      into the case. The only person fully informed at the beginning of  the
      hearing was counsel for the appellant  who,  when  asked  to  make  an
      opening statement of what the case was about, said that  she  put  her
      case "under Article 8 medical".

  21. Ms Bagral, for reasons that are entirely respectable,  was  unable  to
      attend the hearing before  us  but  has  produced  a  written  witness
      statement in which she says this:

           "I have been asked to confirm whether I referred  Judge  Walters
           to the Joint Presidential Guidance No 2 of 2010. As  the  appeal
           before Judge Walters was heard approximately ten months  ago,  I
           cannot recall directly doing so. However, having referred to  my
           brief and notebook, I consider it inconceivable that I  did  not
           do so for two reasons.  First,  there  is  a  reference  to  the
           guidance in my preparation notes. ...  Second,  a  copy  of  the
           guidance which I printed is retained with my original brief.  In
           the circumstances, I am of the firm belief  that  it  is  likely
           that I referred Judge  Walters  to  the  said  guidance  at  the
           hearing."

      That approach by counsel is, of course, quite proper, as  she  has  no
      recollection of what did or did not actually occur and we are grateful
      to her for identifying all that speaks in favour of the submission now
      being made. Unfortunately, all the  evidence  points  the  other  way.
      First, Ms Bagral is recorded to have told the judge that the case  was
      about "Article 8 medical" and it is hard to accept that,  had  counsel
      raised the issue of the appellant's vulnerability at the outset, which
      would be the only rational point at which to do so,  the  judge  would
      then  have  ignored  that  issue  altogether  and  not  recorded   the
      preliminary finding on the appellant's vulnerability, one way  or  the
      other, that was required of him, had he been referred to the guidance.
      Second, there is no copy of the guidance on the Tribunal's file and so
      no evidence that the judge  did  actually  receive  such  a  document.
      Third, there is no mention in the record of proceedings  made  by  the
      judge that the issue was raised. Fourth, no request had been  made  by
      the appellant's representatives prior to the hearing for  any  special
      measures for receipt of the appellant's evidence,  section  K  of  the
      notice  of  appeal  form,   completed   by   the   appellant's   legal
      representative, which  asks  whether  any  special  requirements  were
      sought, being left blank. Fifth, even now no indication has been given
      as to what way the proceedings should have been conducted  differently
      and so it is not clear what purpose would have been served by  raising
      this issue, as the judge, plainly, was fully sighted  on  the  medical
      evidence and there was, and  is,  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant
      should not have given oral evidence.


  22. Whether or not this issue was raised before the judge, the outcome is,
      in our judgment, the same.. It appears that the only direct  reference
      to the appellant being a person of vulnerability is  to  be  found  at
      paragraph 18 of Dr  Kottalgi's  first  report  where  he  records  the
      appellant's account of one of her maids having  stolen  items  of  her
      property, an experience that left her feeling "extremely  vulnerable".
      But  it  is  not  remotely  arguable  that  such  a  manifestation  of
      vulnerability, being at risk of having possessions stolen by  domestic
      staff employed to work in the household, is  such  as  to  engage  the
      mechanisms under discussion.


  23. If the issue was raised before the judge but  simply  ignored,  it  is
      impossible to see how that gave rise to any material error of law.  It
      has not been suggested that the appellant was unable to recall  events
      or to articulate her evidence as she wished to. It is no part  of  the
      challenge now pursued that there was something  else  that  she  could
      have but did not say  in  evidence  or  that  she  said  something  in
      evidence that she  had  not  meant  to.  This  is  not  a  case  about
      credibility. The essential facts are not in dispute. The  only  matter
      that might conceivably amount to an issue of credibility is  what  the
      judge made of the evidence provided by the appellant herself that  she
      had told those who had been providing her with counselling  each  week
      because of  her  depressive  illness  that  she  would  need  no  more
      sessions, because she  was  going  to  the  United  Kingdom.  But,  as
      recorded above, that was not the only reason given by  the  judge  for
      finding that the applicant had not disclosed her  true  intentions  in
      seeking entry clearance for a three-week long family visit and whether
      or not the appellant had all along intended to remain in  the  UK  was
      not, on the facts of this case, determinative.

  24. The second of  the  grounds  drafted  by  Ms  Bagral  complains,  with
      reference to observations made by the judge at paragraphs 33 and 43 of
      his determination, that the  judge  wrongly  treated  the  appellant's
      inability to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as
      determinative of the question of  proportionality.  But  the  judgment
      must be read as a whole and, when it is, it is entirely clear that  he
      did no such thing. It was plainly open to the judge to take notice  of
      the fact that had  the  appellant  applied  from  Pakistan  for  entry
      clearance for the purpose for which she now sought leave to remain, as
      a dependant adult relative that was  an  application  that  could  not
      succeed. That was a fact that informed his assessment  of  the  public
      interest as he struck a balance between  the  competing  interests  in
      play. And nor was that assessment predicated, as the grounds  suggest,
      upon an expectation that the appellant's daughter in law  should  move
      to Pakistan, accompanied by her own child, to spend several months  of
      the year with the appellant.  When  discussing  that  possibility,  at
      paragraph 33, the  judge  is  doing  no  more  than  illustrating  the
      different solutions found by families dealing with  the  needs  of  an
      elderly relative who has no basis of stay in the United Kingdom. As he
      explained, many families in such a position seeks to  provide  support
      with their elderly relative  living  outside  the  United  Kingdom  by
      making frequent visits.

  25. Mr Chelvan, who has drawn from the grounds and the material  available
      before the judge everything that could possibly be deployed in support
      of the challenge pursued to the decision of the  judge,  raised  three
      further submissions, mentioned  briefly  above,  which  stretched  the
      scope of the grounds to, and  possibly  beyond,  their  limit  but  we
      agreed to entertain that challenge.

  26. The first of those submissions, distilled to its essence,  amounts  to
      this. As the appellant had spoken of her vulnerability in Pakistan  as
      a consequence of her possessions having been stolen by  a  maid,  that
      equated to an assertion that she did not feel safe in Pakistan. As the
      appellant would be returning to Pakistan as a widow and  so  a  single
      woman who would be living alone, therefore her safety was in issue. It
      is established by UB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD that there  is  an  obligation
      upon the  respondent's  representative  to  bring  to  the  Tribunal's
      attention her own guidance where that is relevant  to  the  issues  in
      dispute. Therefore, the  failure  of  the  respondent  to  direct  the
      attention of the judge to the respondent's own  guidance  relating  to
      risks faced by women living in Pakistan without  male  support  was  a
      procedural irregularity such as to amount to an error of law.

  27. While the legal principle relied upon is correctly  articulated,  that
      ingenious submission flounders on an examination of the facts of  this
      case and the nature of the guidance under discussion. As was  observed
      by Irwin LJ at paragraph 22 of UB:

           "The obligation is clear but must not  be  taken  beyond  proper
           bounds. There is no obligation on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
           serve policy or guidance which is not in truth relevant  to  the
           issues  in  hand  and  complaints  as  to  alleged  failures  of
           disclosure of material which is truly peripheral  or  irrelevant
           should readily be rejected."

The appellant is a 67-year-old widow. She is  a  well-educated  lady  having
obtained a bachelor's degree in Arts and  a  Master's  degree  in  Political
Science (see Dr  Kottalgi's  first  report  at  paragraph  4).  It  must  be
remembered, of course, that the  appellant  is  not  seeking  to  advance  a
protection claim, on the basis that she faces a  real  risk  of  persecution
for a reason recognised by the  Refugee  Convention,  but  the  guidance  is
concerned with that and it is relevant to see whether  it  identifies  risks
to which this appellant may be exposed, even if they are not established  to
the extent as to require the grant of international protection.  Mr  Chelvan
seeks to demonstrate no more than that  the  judge  should  have  recognised
those  risks,  taken  together  with  the  other  characteristics   of   the
appellant, amounted to very substantial obstacles to integration  on  return
so that the appellant met the requirements  of  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
Immigration Rules.


  28. Unfortunately for the appellant, scrutiny of  the  guidance  does  not
      assist her in that regard. That is because the guidance  is  concerned
      with risks of a nature than on no sensible basis this appellant  could
      be suggested  to  be  prone  to.  Thus,  it  cannot  realistically  be
      suggested that the appellant, described to be an  elderly  widow  with
      physical and mental ailments, would be  at  risk  of  rape  or  forced
      marriage or domestic violence. The guidance  draws  attention  to  the
      country guidance provided by the Tribunal in SM (lone women-ostracism)
      CG [2016] UKUT (IAC) which makes plain that  any  assessment  must  be
      fact specific and that relevant factors include whether the  appellant
      is educated and has sufficient financial resources.

  29. It follows from this  that  the  guidance  had  no  relevance  to  the
      assessment by the judge of the case being advanced on behalf  of  this
      particular appellant and so there was no  unfairness,  nor  procedural
      irregularity, in the failure of  the  respondent's  representative  to
      draws attention to the guidance.

  30. In any event, that conclusion is  reinforced  by  the  fact  that  the
      applicant  was  represented  by  counsel  instructed  by  a  firm   of
      solicitors who are highly experienced in  this  jurisdiction  and  who
      were, in these proceedings, acting for the mother of a person employed
      in a significant role within the firm and it seems inconceivable  that
      they themselves would not  have  sought  to  place  reliance  on  this
      guidance if it had been considered to be remotely relevant.

  31. There is some overlap with the next two  submissions  advanced  by  Mr
      Chelvan that the judge fell into error  by  not  addressing  paragraph
      276ADE at all and that if he had done so, he  would  have  found  that
      there were established very significant obstacles upon return for this
      appellant.

  32. As for the first of those submissions,  although  the  respondent  did
      address  each  limb  of  paragraph  276ADE  in  the  refusal   letter,
      explaining why she was satisfied that the appellant could not meet the
      requirements of any of them, there was no challenge to that aspect  of
      the refusal decision raised in the grounds of appeal or  in  the  oral
      submissions made before the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore, that was a
      matter that went unchallenged before the First-tier Tribunal and so it
      was not an error of law for the judge not to address it.

  33. So far as the second part of that submission is  concerned,  when  the
      determination of the judge is read as a whole  it  is  entirely  clear
      that it had not been established that the appellant  would  face  very
      significant obstacles to integration  on  return  to  her  country  of
      nationality where she had previously lived without  encountering  such
      difficulties.

  34. For all these reasons, and despite Mr Chelvan's efforts to persuade us
      to the contrary, we are entirely satisfied  that  the  judge  made  no
      error of law, material or otherwise.

Summary of decision:

  35. First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters made no material error  of  law  and
      his decision to dismiss the appeal is to stand.

  36. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 13 December 2017
