
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13121/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 October 2019                            |On 28 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Sabiha ali
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ballace, Counsel instructed by DS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
dismiss the appeal of the appellant against the decision of  the  Secretary
of State refusing him entry clearance as the wife  of  a  British  citizen.
The appeal was, appropriately, brought on human rights grounds.  In outline
it is  the  appellant's  case  that  refusing  her  entry  clearance  is  a
disproportionate interference with her private  and  family  life  and  the
private and family life of her husband because she does in fact satisfy the
requirements of the Immigration Rules.

2. The First-tier Tribunal disagreed and  permission  to  appeal  was  given
because the grounds made out an arguable case that the First-tier  Tribunal
Judge had misunderstood  some  of  the  evidence  and  had  consequentially
underestimated the strengths of the appellant's case.

3. The appellant asked for a review of the decision by the  Entry  Clearance
Manager and  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  reasons  for  upholding  the
decision are set out below:

 4. "The appellant was refused as  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant met  the  Relationship  Requirement.   The
    appellant and sponsor have not demonstrated that she  and  the  sponsor
    are in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   The  appellant  has
    submitted only her wedding photographs and these in  isolation  do  not
    confirm their relationship is subsisting.  The  appellant  and  sponsor
    state that they first met  in  2009  and  were  married  in  2015.   As
    evidence of the relationship the only  supporting  documents  submitted
    with the Grounds of Appeal are some wedding photos, two greeting  cards
    and a phone record.  The cards do not prove they  were  sent  from  the
    sponsor to the appellant and the phone  records  in  isolation  do  not
    satisfy me that the communication took place between the appellant  and
    sponsor.   The  appellant  has  not  provided  evidence  to   show   an
    affectionate and  supportive  relationship  exists.   The  grounds  for
    appeal are silent as to why the sponsor has not visited  the  appellant
    since their marriage."

5. For the avoidance of doubt it was confirmed that the  appellant  met  the
financial  and  English  language  eligibility  requirements  and  was  not
"unsuitable".

6. It was also accepted that a valid marriage was contracted  on  19  August
2015.

7. The appellant's husband, described as her "sponsor",  attended  and  gave
evidence.  He confirmed  that  theirs  was  an  arranged  marriage  between
cousins and the marriage was celebrated at a village in  Pakistan.   Thirty
members of his family went from the United Kingdom to the wedding.  It  was
the sponsor's evidence that he kept in contact with the appellant by way of
telephone calls, "WhatsApp" and greeting cards.  He said they  spoke  every
day, or every other day, and since the marriage he has  sent  money  abroad
every month, or every other month.

8. In support of his evidence he showed a photograph on his mobile phone  of
a  money  transfer  receipt  dated  January  2019  which  was  similar   to
documentary evidence produced in the  form  of  five  receipts  between  28
September 2016 and 4 September 2017 showing payments in total of ï¿½1,000.

9. The sponsor confirmed  that  he  had  only  seen  the  appellant  on  one
occasion over the three and half years since their wedding.  He said he did
not like the weather or the food in Pakistan.  The appellant had taken time
to pass her English language test and did not do that until 2018.   He  was
collecting documents to support her application but was busy at work.

10. There were records said to show telephone contact  between  the  sponsor
and the appellant in the bundle from December 2015 to March 2016  and  then
from August 2017 to December 2017 but nothing more recent.  The  First-tier
Tribunal Judge found the sponsor to be an unsatisfactory witness  and  said
at paragraph 17 that he found him:

    "to be a hesitant witness who at times appeared unsure of his  evidence
    - for instance whether he spoke to the appellant daily, or every second
    day, or whether he sent money monthly, or every second month."

11. He then went on to say that  for  that  reason  and  for  other  reasons
identified below he was not satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was  a  truthful
witness and the case was not made out.

12. The judge had difficulties with the evidence about telephone calls.   It
was the appellant's case, submitted by his legal representative,  that  the
critical phone number ended with the numbers "579".  That was  said  to  be
the appellant's telephone number.  There were itemised calls to that number
but the judge found no evidence at all that it was in fact the  appellant's
telephone and the judge noted it was not the contact number provided by the
appellant in her application for United Kingdom entry clearance.

13. The judge noted that between August  and  December  2017  the  sponsor's
telephone call history recorded calls to a  number  of  Pakistan  telephone
numbers including the primary contact  number  for  the  appellant  in  her
application.  The judge regarded this  as  evidence  of  telephone  contact
between the sponsor and the  appellant  but  it  was  limited.   The  judge
rejected the explanation that it was a result of  using  phone  cards  that
there was no further evidence available.   It had been his evidence that he
was collecting evidence of the extensive phone calls and the judge did  not
believe that he would have failed to obtain better  evidence  of  telephone
calls, if they in fact took place.

14. The appellant or sponsor did not produce  screenshots  to  confirm  that
there was regular contact by WhatsApp.

15. The judge was:

    "similarly unimpressed by the single card produced  to  the  respondent
    which purports to be from the sponsor to the appellant two years  after
    a significant event which I take to be their wedding."

16. The judge noted that he was given no evidence that a card  had  actually
been sent or how a card purportedly sent to Pakistan in June  2018  was  in
the possession of United Kingdom solicitors.  The judge found there was  no
evidence of correspondence between the appellant and the sponsor  which  he
would  have  expected  if  there  was  indeed  a  genuine  and   subsisting
relationship.

17. The judge did not accept as credible the explanation for not  travelling
to Pakistan between August 2015 and October 2018.  The judge noted from the
stamps in the passport that the sponsor left  Pakistan  a  week  after  his
wedding to the appellant in August 2015 and did not  return  until  October
2018 some five months after the refusal decision.  The judge did  not  find
his explanation, namely that he was busy at  work,  satisfactory.   He  was
earning good money and could have  travelled  to  Pakistan  with  ease  and
regularly if that is what he had wanted to do.

18. The judge was  also  critical  of  the  limited  evidence  of  financial
transfers given that the sponsor was  irregular  work  in  what  the  judge
described as a "buoyant financial position".

19. The judge found that he been given only five photographs and  they  were
wedding photographs.  There were no photographs from their visit in October
2018.  Again, the judge found this to be inconsistent with  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship between the appellant and sponsor.

20. The appellant had not produced a statement at all.

21. Putting all these things together the judge was not satisfied there  was
a genuine subsisting relationship  as  required  by  the  Rules  and  found
nothing of an exceptional nature that would justify a decision.

22.  The  grounds  of  appeal  are  extensive.   Although  the  grounds  try
conspicuosly to identify errors of law I do not find the cases relied on in
the grounds to be of much assistance to me or  the  appellant.   Issues  of
this kind can only be determined properly  by  a  fair  evaluation  of  the
evidence as a whole and examples of decisions that have been unsatisfactory
because they did not amount to a fair analysis of the evidence as  a  whole
are no more than illustrative of how things went wrong in another case.

23. Point 8 needs  specific  consideration  and  was  the  main  reason  for
permission being granted.  There the judge said:

    "There is further criticism of the lack of documentary evidence between
    the parties such as correspondence and greeting cards.   Again,  it  is
    respectfully submitted that this is a material error of law.  The judge
    clearly failed to properly look through the respondent's  bundle  which
    contains not only a number of photographs but  crucially  at  pages  47
    onwards, a number of anniversary greeting cards.  The judge  refers  to
    just 'one single card' at paragraph 21 of the determination.   This  is
    clearly incorrect and is a material error."

24. I can make no sense of that ground.  At page 47 of  the  bundle  is  the
financial transfer document.  There are two cards in the  bundle  which  is
consistent with the description of "a number of  anniversary  and  greeting
cards" but hardly a wholesale shift in the nature  of  the  evidence.   The
only photographs that I can see appear to be wedding photographs.

25. Ground 9 complains that if the judge was concerned  about  the  evidence
of telephone calls and greeting cards he should have put the point  to  the
sponsor.  There is merit in that point.  It  is  always  desirable  to  put
something to witness to hear the answer.  However, it is for the  appellant
to prove the case and for the appellant therefore to present  the  evidence
about contact in an accessible and digestible  way.   If,  for  example,  a
telephone number has been changed it is not difficult to say so and give an
explanation and the date when that happened.  Whilst this is true when  the
application is made it is even more the case when an appeal  is  presented.
The appellant knew what had gone wrong with the decision  and  it  was  her
business, through her legal representatives,  to  put  it  right.   If,  as
sometimes happens, the grounds were able to follow through  the  point  and
explain what would have happened if the matter had been  put  it  may  have
been possible to make a material error of law from  this  possible  mistake
but that is not what has happened here.

26. I do not agree  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of  the
financial evidence.  The appellant's  case  is  that  her  husband  was  in
regular work, I think as a pharmacy technician, earning  something  in  the
order of ï¿½30,000 a year.  However, the evidence of financial transfers  was
limited to a total sum of ï¿½1,000 over a short period in their relationship.
 If the relationship is genuine and subsisting and the  sponsor  was  in  a
position to pay more and regularly the gap is obvious and should have  been
addressed.

27. The grounds also criticise the judge  for  adverse  findings  about  the
degree of contact after the wedding.  There is no error of law  there.   It
is a matter for the judge.

28. Finally, the grounds complain that no reasons are  given  or  inadequate
reasons are given.  I do not  agree.   The  fact  is  the  parties  to  the
marriage have had little direct contact since the  wedding  and  no  better
explanation offered than the husband's dislike of living in Pakistan. There
is evidence of only  occasional  modest  financial  support  and  no  clear
evidence of telephone contact except the testimony  of  the  sponsor.   The
sponsor was not a good witness.  If a person is  in  regular  and  frequent
contact with a partner overseas it is unremarkable that  they  cannot  give
immediately clear answers about  exactly  when  they  contact  each  other.
However, the problem with the sponsor's evidence is that he did not seem to
know if he contacted his wife every day or every other day and  that  is  a
very different proposition. Neither answer is determinative of  the  appeal
but  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  draw  adverse   inferences   from   the
inconsistency.

29. Mr Ballace was as helpful as could be expected.  He pointed out that  in
the witness statement the sponsor said the telephone number had changed and
that explanation  did  not  feature  in  the  Decision  and  Reasons.   The
difficulty with this submission is the  skimpy  evidence  provided  by  the
sponsor concerning the change.  The sponsor said  at  paragraph  6  of  his
witness statement that the appellant "had changed  her  mobile  number  and
therefore the number I called  changed."  The  relevant  numbers  were  not
identified and there was no attempt to indicate the date of change  or  the
evidence that supported the  claimed  telephone  conversations  before  and
after the number had changed.

30. The witness statement went on "There is no disputing that I  called  her
even six to ten times a day sometimes" but this  contrasts  with  the  oral
evidence that he was uncertain about whether he phoned every day  or  every
other day.

31. I have considered the submissions and the Rule 24 response  prepared  by
Mr Melvin.

32. I am wholly unpersuaded that any material error of  law  has  been  made
out.  At most there was a mistake about the number of cards received.  That
should not  have  happened  and  did  not  enhance  the  Decision  but  the
difference is not between one card and a pile of cards but between one card
and two cards and that is not material.  Neither is it safe  to  move  from
there to say  that  the  judge's  overall  consideration  was  careless  or
inadequate.  The inadequacies here are in the details of the  case  not  in
the broad evaluation of the evidence.

33. Judges are not blessed  with  second  sight.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge does not know and I do not know whether this is a  genuine  marriage.
What is quite clear is the First-tier Tribunal has given lawful reasons for
finding it not proved that the marriage is subsisting.  The  appellant  and
sponsor know the truth probably better than anyone else.  If in fact theirs
is a subsisting marriage it may be that a  properly  presented  application
with more care to  the  details  of  contact  and  more  information  about
financial  transfers  and  telephone  numbers  could  support  a  different
decision.

34. Be that as it may, I am wholly unpersuaded there is any error of law  in
the decision complained of and I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

35. This appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 November 2019               |



