
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13894/2018
                                                               HU/11103/2018
                                                               HU/11104/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2019                           |On 05 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Rajasekaran [N]
                                  Padma [M]
                                    [N R]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Singhania & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondents
are as noted above.  However, for the purposes of this Decision and
Reasons, I refer to the appellants as they were before the First-tier
Tribunal where the Secretary of State was the respondent.

The three appellants are Indian nationals, father, mother and daughter, who
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent
refusing their applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
pursuant to Article 8 with reference to the UK Immigration Rules.  The
respondent had also refused the appellants' appeals pursuant to paragraph
322(5) of the Immigration Rules in respect of the desirability of
permitting the person concerned to remain in the United Kingdom in the
light of misconduct, character or associations.  This relates specifically
to the tax returns of the first appellant.

In a decision, promulgated on 29 November 2018, Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Greasley allowed the appellants' appeals (it being conceded on
behalf of the respondent at the First-tier Tribunal, that the appeals would
succeed if the judge were to find no evidence of dishonesty on the part of
the first appellant).

The Secretary of State appealed with permission on the grounds that:

         Ground 1

         The judge's assessment of paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules
         materially erred in law in incorrectly viewing the lack of punitive
         action by the HMRC as determinative of the appeal;

         Ground 2

         The judge materially erred in concluding that the HMRC had assessed
         the appellant's actions in relation to his tax affairs as not
         involving dishonesty;

         Ground 3

         It was argued that the view of the HMRC regarding the treatment of
         arrears is not relevant to assessments under paragraph 322(5) of
         the Immigration Rules and in any event does not address the
         possibility that the original tax records were correct but the
         appellant had falsified higher earnings in order to qualify under
         Tier 1.

Error of Law Discussion

Mr Jarvis conceded that ground 1 was not pursued.  His case, at the
highest, was that the judge erred in his assessment in the latter half of
[24] of the Decision and Reasons and that the judge took into consideration
the absence of proceedings by the HMRC as a weighty factor.  Mr Jarvis
argued that the absence of such proceedings was not something that can be
positively taken into consideration as rebuttal in the assessment of
dishonesty.  Mr Jarvis accepted that the judge had correctly set out the
proper approach to follow R (on the application of Khan) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department (Dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5))
[2018] UKUT 00384.  It was his submission, however, that the decision was
materially infected by the approach to the absence of HMRC proceedings.

I do not agree. As conceded by Mr Jarvis, the judge followed the correct
approach recommended in Khan.  The key issue, and the only one in dispute,
was whether the first appellant's application was correctly refused on the
basis that his presence in the UK was undesirable on the basis of there
being a mismatch between the income that the first appellant had declared
to HMRC in a number of tax years, on the one hand and that declared to the
Secretary of State when the first appellant had successfully obtained
further leave to remain on a previous occasion.

The appellant had accepted that there was a mismatch but vigorously denied
acting dishonestly and had explained, in his evidence before the First-tier
Tribunal, that he had relied upon his accountants and did not realise there
were errors for some time and pointed to specific circumstances as to why
this was the case.  The judge summarised the evidence before him, in some
detail, from [11] to [20] of the Decision and Reasons and no quarrel is
taken with that assessment.

The judge, following the approach in Khan, found that the Secretary of
State had initially produced prima facie evidence of dishonesty but found
that the appellant had rebutted such an inference and demonstrated through
"both oral and documentary evidence, that he did not in fact act
dishonestly".

The judge went on to give detailed reasons why he accepted the appellant's
innocent explanation and in light of this found that the Secretary of State
could not prove dishonesty and therefore paragraph 322(5) did not apply.

As indicated above, Mr Jarvis quite properly did not pursue ground 1 as it
is abundantly clear that the judge did not view the lack of punitive action
by the HMRC as determinative of the appeal.

In respect of ground 2, although the respondent contended that the judge
erred in concluding that the HMRC had assessed the appellant's actions in
relation to his tax affairs as not involving dishonesty this was not what
the First-tier Tribunal found, which was as follows, at [24] of the
determination:

"The appellant has, in essence, stated that he relied solely upon the
expertise and abilities of accountants.  I accept that he has no specific
direct evidence of tax affairs either in India or in the UK and that it
would be reasonable and plausible find to seek rely upon (sic)
professionals in this area.  I also accept there is credible evidence that
the appellant immediately sought to correct such details by contacting
HMRC.  It is further credible in my mind, that there is no evidence seeking
to suggest that HMRC sought to impose any financial penalty in relation to
the discrepancies highlighted, or indeed to consider any form of
prosecution.  Had there been clear evidence of dishonesty, in the
circumstances, I find it likely that HMRC would not have hesitated to
consider such proceedings."

It was not Mr Jarvis's case that there was any "clear evidence of
dishonesty" available to the HMRC, and this is the case relied on by the
appellants.  I am not satisfied that there is any error in the judge
concluding that the HMRC would have acted on "clear evidence of
dishonesty".  Indeed, as highlighted in submissions by Mr Biggs, the
respondent's own guidance indicates that HMRC will take action against an
individual or business where there is "clear evidence of dishonesty"
(Review of applications by Tier 1 (General) Migrants refused under
paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules).  No error is disclosed in
ground 2.

In respect of ground 3, I accept Mr Biggs's argument that if, for example,
the HMRC had formed the view that the first appellant was dishonest, this
would have been a relevant consideration in any assessment by the First-
tier Tribunal as the HMRC is the expert in tax regulation and had legal
authority to police tax affairs.  The same underlying principles explain
why the HMRC's views are entitled to be considered by the First-tier
Tribunal.

The judge accepted, at [24], that the HMRC would have acted on clear
evidence of dishonesty (in line with the respondent's own guidance)
regarding a tax return and observed that there was no evidence seeking to
suggest that any financial penalty had been imposed or any form of
prosecution.  It is not the case that the judge was saying that he
considered that HMRC had assessed the appellant to not be dishonest or
otherwise.

The judge reached his findings, that the appellant had provided an innocent
explanation, in the round, considering a series of factors (summarised from
[23] to [26]) the absence of proceedings by the HMRC being just one of
those factors.  Mr Jarvis' limited submission, that the judge gave undue
weight to the absence of HMRC proceedings, is not made out.  Although the
respondent relied on the judicial review cases in R (on the application of
Samant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKAITUR
JR/6546/2016 and Abbasi JR/13807/2016, both of which were considered in the
more recent judicial review of Khan, that was in relation to a different
assessment.  In essence, the judicial reviews came to the conclusion that
the fact that the HMRC had decided not to take further action, in those
cases, did not indicate that the Secretary of State's decision, to find
that those appellants had been dishonest, was irrational.

That is a different assessment to the fact finding assessment that the
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had to carry out.  Although it is correct
to say that the HMRC cannot comment on whether the respondent was lied to
and the HMRC does not address the possibility that the original tax records
were correct but the appellant had falsified higher earnings in order to
qualify under Tier 1, the judge assessed all the factors and gave adequate,
sustainable, evidence-based reasons for reaching the findings he did that
the appellant had provided an honest explanation.   The judge noted that
the respondent considered that the appellant may in the alternative have
falsified higher earnings to enable him to qualify under Tier 1 (paragraph
[7]).  The judge's findings considered holistically, including that the
judge found the appellant and his wife to be of good character with no
other evidence that they had sought to contravene criminal or immigration
laws in the UK (paragraph [27]), demonstrate that the judge had addressed
this alternative possibility but rejected it for the reasons given. No
error of law has been established in ground 3.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error of law
and shall stand.  The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
