
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13611/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 March 2021                             |On 6 April 2021                 |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               Mrs Abida Begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel instructed by Lawfare
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  Her date of birth is 1 January
1941.

On 17 April 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted permission to the
Appellant to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A
Khan (promulgated on 15 November 2020) to dismiss the Appellant's appeal
against the decision of the Respondent (on 24 July 2019) to refuse her
application for leave on Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights
grounds.

The grounds of appeal

The thrust of the grounds is that there was procedural unfairness arising
from the decision of the judge to refuse the Appellant's application to
adjourn the case.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

Mr Jafferji represented the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. At
the start of the hearing, he made an application to adjourn.  The judge
identified two reasons given by Mr Jafferji for seeking an adjournment.
First, the Appellant's granddaughter, who works for the Home Office, had
been told by her employer the that she was not allowed to give evidence in
support of her grandmother's appeal.  Secondly, the Appellant sought time
to obtain medical evidence.  The judge refused to accede to the adjournment
request. At paragraph 5 of the decision, he gave the following reason: -

"on the grounds that the Appellant's medical records have not been provided
to see what is the past history of the Appellant's medical situation.  The
Appellant's legal representatives have had sufficient time to gather all
the evidence necessary in support of the Appellant's case, including
medical evidence".

Error of law

Ms Everett at the hearing before me conceded that there was a material
error arising from the refusal by the judge to adjourn. I agree. The
judge's reasoning is factually incorrect.  There was evidence of the
Appellant's poor physical and mental health, including specifically her
medical records, in the Appellant's bundle.  In addition, the decision does
not disclose how, if at all, the judge gave effect to the overriding
objective, specifically to deal with the case fairly and justly, when
refusing the application[1].  Furthermore, the judge wholly failed to
engage with the first reason given by Mr Jafferji for seeking the
adjournment.

For the above reason, I agree with the concession made by Ms Everett that
there is a procedural irregularity giving rise to unfairness. The Appellant
in this case was deprived of a fair hearing. The judge made an error of
fact and did not apply the correct test: see Nwaigwe (adjournment:
fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418.[2]  I set aside the decision.

I find that there are problems with the substantive decision of the judge.
 At paragraph 31 the judge stated, "I find that the Appellant or someone on
her behalf has made up the evidence, which I find has been fabricated to
assist her ..."  At paragraph 34 the judge acknowledged that the Respondent
had not made an allegation of deception. He stated, "...  I certainly do
not wish to get into the realm of deception.  However, one thing is clear
from the evidence that the Appellant entered on her last visit in 2012 with
a clear decision of settling in the United Kingdom permanently."  The judge
was entitled to find that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of
proof.  However, he went further. He implied a level of dishonesty;
however, this was not an issue raised by the Respondent.

After recording parts of the Appellant's evidence, the judge inserted the
words "vague" and/or "evasive" in brackets.  At paragraph 31 the judge said
that the Appellant's evidence was "extremely vague and evasive".  There are
no reasons given in the decision to explain why the judge formed the view
that the evidence was vague, and the Appellant was evasive.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo,
properly applying paragraph 7.2 (a) of the Practice Statement of the Senior
President dated 24 September 2012[3].

In relation to the first reason given for seeking an adjournment, Ms
Everett indicated that she was unaware of any such policy preventing family
members working for the Home Office supporting or attending an appeal
hearing and giving evidence in support of an Appellant.  Mr Jafferji
indicated that he was also unaware of such a policy.

Mr Jafferji pointed out to me that the Appellant's evidence in relation to
family members in Pakistan was before the decision-maker and it had not
been challenged.  I explained to him that it was not for me to make
findings of fact or to seek to tie the hands of the Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal who will be determining the Appellant's appeal in due course.



Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 24 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

-----------------------
[1]  The Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 (Rule 2)
  Overriding objective and parties' obligation to co-operate with the
  Tribunal
  2.-    (1)  The overriding objective of these Rules is to enable the
    Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.
    (2)  Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
        (a)   dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate to the
        importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the
        anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the
        Tribunal;
        (b)   avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the
        proceedings;
        (c)   ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able to
        participate fully in the proceedings;
        (d)   using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; and
        (e)   avoiding delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration
        of the issues.
    (3)  The Tribunal must seek to give effect to the overriding objective
    when it-
        (a)   exercises any power under these Rules; or
        (b)   interprets any rule or practice direction.
    (4)  Parties must-
        (a)   help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective; and
        (b)   co-operate with the Tribunal generally.
[2]  In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418, the UT stated
the following at [7]:
    "If a Tribunal refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT  acted reasonably.   Rather,
    the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there any deprivation
    of the affected party's right to a fair  hearing?  Any  temptation  to
    review  the  conduct  and  decision  of  the  FtT  through   the   lens
    of reasonableness must be  firmly  resisted,  in  order  to  avoid  a
    misdirection  in  law.   In  a  nutshell,  fairness  is   the   supreme
    criterion".

[3]  7   Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal
    7.1  Where under section 12(1) of the 2007 Act (proceedings on appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper Tribunal finds that the making of the
    decision concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law,
    the Upper Tribunal may set aside the decision and, if it does so, must
    either remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal under section
    12(2)(b)(i) or proceed (in accordance with relevant Practice
    Directions) to re-make the decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).
    7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
    re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-(a)the effect of
    the error has been to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of
    a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case to be put to
    and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or (b)the nature or extent
    of any judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
    overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
    the First-tier Tribunal.
    7.3  Remaking rather than remitting will nevertheless constitute the
    normal approach to determining appeals where an error of law is found,
    even if some further fact finding is necessary

