

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/13396/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |              Decision & Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                              |
|On 21 November 2019                 |              On 23 December 2019        |
|                                    |                                         |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LESLEY SMITH
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                               Mustapha Jallow
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by SMA
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Welsh
('the Judge') sent to the parties on 30 July 2019 dismissing the
Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent not to grant him
leave to remain on human rights grounds and to deport him to The Gambia.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow granted permission to appeal on all six
grounds advanced by the Appellant.

Anonymity

The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and no request for a
direction was made at the hearing before us.

Background

The Appellant is a 29-year old national of The Gambia. He entered this
country as a visitor on 1 September 2000 and joined his father and mother,
who had previously entered this country in 1994 and 1995 respectively. He
was aged 9 at the date of his entry. His visit visa expired on 10 February
2001 and he overstayed. The Appellant was named as dependant on his
father's application for indefinite leave to remain ('ILR') in May 2004 and
he was granted ILR on 30 April 2008, when aged 17. He has been lawfully
present in this country since this date.

He was convicted on 5 July 2013 of using a vehicle without insurance, for
which he was disqualified from driving for six months.

On 28 April 2014, he was convicted along with a co-defendant of a number of
offences at Lewes Crown Court and sentenced by HHJ Barnes on 27 May 2014 in
relation to:

Two counts of possession within intent to supply a class A drug (crack
cocaine and heroin), for which he was sentenced to a custodial term of 44
months;


Possession of criminal property, namely ï¿½2,000, for which he was sentenced
to a term of imprisonment of 24 months, concurrent; and


Driving whilst disqualified, for which he received a custodial sentence of
six months, concurrent, and was disqualified from driving for two years.


By means of her sentencing remarks, HHJ Barnes observed, inter alia:

"These are really serious offences, and what both of you have got to
accept, I am afraid, is that deterrent sentences are required ... what you
have both done, in your individual ways, is to join a group of young men
that you tried hard not associate with for many years but then admit
yourself you did. Mr Jallow you say you didn't, but for your individual
reasons you have decided to come from London and ply the filthy trade of
drugs ... You did not have one or two wraps that you were supplying on the
streets; you had, in that home, for your use that day to sell, something
like 82 packages of crack, you had 68 packages of heroin, and this is what
you came from London to sell on the streets of Brighton, and that is what I
have to sentence you for ... Yes, you are older, Mr Jallow, yes, it was
your car, and, yes, I can see that you may have been the lead on that day,
but you knew exactly what you were doing here. And whether it is through
gambling or some other financial need, there has got to be, in a young man
with your intelligence and your success at school, some better way for you
to have made your living, for you to have made some money, and it seems to
me that this is something which I am afraid you now have to take the
consequences for, and you now have to understand we are all responsible for
our actions ... So far as you are concerned, Mr Jallow, you are clearly
more senior in this, and I can see of no reasons given the quantity of
drugs involved here, and even when one turns to the aggravating features of
... it is at that point where high purity makes it even worse, it doesn't
make it less, because street dealing with over 100 grams of class A drugs
is extremely serious indeed."

The Respondent served the Appellant with a notice of his liability to
deportation on 24 June 2014 and a deportation order was signed on 15
February 2015. The Respondent issued her decision refusing the Appellant's
human rights application on 19 September 2017 and issued a supplementary
decision on 17 April 2019.

The Appellant commenced a relationship with a Swedish national, Ms E, in
January 2016, post-dating service of the notice of liability to deportation
and the subsequent signing of the deportation order.

Hearing before the FtT

The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House on 29 May 2019 and
she heard oral evidence from the Appellant, his partner and his sister. The
Appellant sought to establish that it would not be in the public interest
for him to be deported from this country and he relied upon his genuine and
subsisting relationships with his partner, an EU citizen, and their
children. As an alternative, he asserted that very compelling circumstances
existed whereby his deportation would result in a disproportionate breach
of his protected Article 8 ECHR rights.

The Judge determined that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of
paragraphs 399(a) and 399A of the Immigration Rules or section 117C of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that no very compelling
circumstances arose in this matter.

Decision on Error of Law

We observe that during the course of the hearing Mr Gajjar withdrew three
of the grounds relied upon, accepting that even if the claimed errors were
established, they were not material errors. Submissions were made on the
three remaining grounds.

Rehabilitation

This ground is concerned with the Judge's consideration of Article 8
outside of the Immigration Rules, namely as to whether "very compelling
circumstances" exist.  The Appellant relied upon evidence as to his
rehabilitation at the hearing with the Judge noting, at [20] - [21]:

         20.      The Appellant gave evidence, supported by relevant
            documentation, that he had participated in rehabilitative work
            whilst in prison:


             (1)  Restorative Justice Program;


             (2)  Thinking Skills Programme;


             (3)  Victim Awareness course; and


             (4) A     course provided by the Samaritans, namely Listening
                and Support Skills, after which he worked as a listener
                whilst in prison supporting vulnerable inmates.


         21.      Though the Appellant is unable to participate in paid or
            unpaid work as a result of his bail conditions, he has
            undertaken some voluntary activities in the form of talks to
            children about his own personal experiences in order to
            encourage them not to commit crime.  He has completed the
            following talks:


             (1) In 2016 he participated in a talk at Arsenal Community Hub
                attended by police officers and young people who were
                visiting from Northern Ireland. Mr. Keyes, who works for
                the Hub, wrote a letter stating that he has known the
                Appellant for about seven years, that the Appellant had
                been a regular participant with the Hub and that, once the
                Appellant's immigration status is regularised, Mr. Keyes
                will help him look for employment with one of the Hub's
                partner organisations.


             (2)  He gave a talk to college students in Haringey in
                November 2017.  One of the police officers involved in
                organising the talk sent an email to the Appellant's
                probation officer stating that he had been impressed by the
                transformation that the Appellant must have undergone.


             (3)  In oral evidence, he stated that he gave a talk at his
                local mosque to two different age groups of young people,
                as part of a program designed to nurture children.

The Judge concluded as to rehabilitation, at [62]:

"I give some, though limited, weight to the fact that I find that the
Appellant has done all he could to demonstrate that he takes his
rehabilitation seriously and intends not to reoffend. I take into account
that I have accepted that the risk of re-offending is low and that the
probation officer's assessment is corroborated by the fact that he has been
out of detention for approximately four years and has not reoffended or
appeared on any police intelligence databases. I find, based on the
evidence of the courses he completed, that he did all he could whilst in
custody to make the most of his time. I also take into account that there
is positive evidence of rehabilitation following his release from custody,
in the form of his participation in programs designed to encourage young
people not to commit criminal offences. As previously stated, I find this
participation is genuine and substantial, based on the number of talks on
his given and the feedback from the professionals involved in arranging the
programs and the fact that he has maintained contact with his probation
officer after the end of his licence."

Mr Gajjar submitted that the rehabilitative activities in which the
Appellant has participated has eroded the public interest in his having to
be deported. He identified two relevant strands of rehabilitative
endeavour: 'self-betterment' and 'societal betterment'. He accepted that
the former is addressed in recent judgments including RA (s.117C: "unduly
harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC); [2019] Imm AR
780 and Binbuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA
Civ 551; [2019] Imm AR 1026. He submitted that the latter element is
different as it not only addresses risk but identifies the present state of
the appellant's mind both as to not engaging in future criminality as well
as providing societal benefit. This is explained at paragraph 13 of the
appellant's grounds of appeal:

"It is submitted to the FTJ that the Appellant was in fact, through his
rehabilitative activities, a clear mascot for deterrence and revulsion. By
attending the like of the Arsenal Hub and his local mosque and sharing his
story, he was showing the younger generations that he had tried his hand in
crime and that not only had it not paid off but that his choice had nigh on
ruined his life. With respect to and in acknowledgement of the candid
language of this submission, that was said to be far more powerful a
message than a do-gooder preaching against a life of crime."

Mr Gajjar accepted that the Judge had identified the rehabilitative work
undertaken by the Appellant in prison at [20] of her decision and further
accepted that courses aimed at rehabilitation undertaken whilst in prison
are often unlikely to bear material weight for the simple reason that they
are commonplace: Danso v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
EWCA Civ 596.

The Court of Appeal in Binbuga, at [84], recently affirmed the Upper
Tribunal decision in RA that the fact that an individual has not committed
further offences since release from prison is highly unlikely to have a
material bearing, given that everyone is expected not to commit crime.
Rehabilitation will therefore normally do no more than show that the
individual has returned to the place where society expects him, and
everyone else, to be. There is, in other words, no material weight which
ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality
balance. We find it was open to the Judge at [62] of her decision to
carefully consider the evidence before her and to decide that some weight
should be given to the appellant's rehabilitation, such weight as was
accorded was reasonable in the circumstances.

As for the Appellant's rehabilitative work in the community the Judge
appropriately considered this within her assessment of his social and
cultural integration and having observed the judgment of Hamblen LJ in
Binbuga, at [56] to [58], in particular that cultural integration refers to
the acceptance and the assumption by a foreign criminal of the culture of
the United Kingdom, its core values, ideas, customs and social behaviour,
as well as acceptance of the principles of the rule of law, she accepted at
[46] of her decision that the Appellant had made significant efforts to re-
establish his cultural and social ties with this country, including, at
[46(1)]:

         "His participation in programs designed to encourage young people
         not to commit criminal offences. I find this participation is
         genuine and substantial, based on the number of talks he has given
         and the feedback from the professionals involved in arranging the
         programs. I give this factor significant weight because it takes
         great effort to involve oneself in such activities and because of
         the beneficial effect for the wider community."


We find that the Judge then proceeded to lawfully incorporate this finding
into her assessment of the public interest at [70] of her decision where
she concluded that though the Appellant is socially and culturally
integrated into this country such evidence as demonstrates such integration
is not so remarkable, either alone or in combination with any other factor,
as to amount to very compelling circumstances. Such a decision was
reasonably open to the Judge and cannot be considered to be unlawful.

Mr Gajjar accepted, rightfully, that the issue of weight is for the Judge.
He said though that the Judge should have recognised that personal
rehabilitation generally carries little weight, rehabilitation by means of
societal betterment going towards reintegration is different in nature and
has to be distinguished and considered separately. We observe that the
Judge did separate the two elements in her consideration, being mindful of
their personal and societal attributes. The issue of rehabilitation is
relevant so far as it concerns risk.  In that sense, the two elements are
no different to each other as they address risk. The Judge rightly
considered Mr. Gajjar's "societal betterment" element as also being an
aspect of reintegration but was not required to consider it as requiring a
different approach, and weight, to that it enjoys under general
rehabilitation. Society expects its citizens to express its revulsion at a
life of crime and to encourage fellow citizens to be law-abiding. To take
such steps simply establishes that the Appellant has returned to the place
where society expects him, and everyone else, to be. The Judge therefore
did not err in law and this ground of appeal must fail.

Failure to consider the Appellant's second child

The Respondent accepts that the Judge failed to consider the Appellant's
second child, who was born six days before the hearing, and we observe that
the Respondent was correct to do so. The child's birth was detailed in the
skeleton argument before the Judge and referred to at the hearing. We
further note that at the hearing the Respondent made no objection to
reliance being placed on the child.

The Appellant asserts that the failure by the Judge to engage with the
question of the obstacles and circumstances surrounding the relocation of
his 6-days old child to a "very different country" materially affects her
decision.

The Judge noted at [27] of her decision the couple's evidence that they do
not reside with each other:

"Ms E stated that the Appellant was honest with her about his immigration
status and criminal convictions from the start of their relationship. They
undertook the Nikah on 5 May 2016. They have a son who was born in April
2017. Ms E and the child live together in a one-bedroom flat in Reading.
The Appellant visits them at the weekends and they sometimes visit him in
London during the week. They explained that they do not live together for
practical reasons. Ms E works part-time and cannot afford to live in
London; the Appellant has bail conditions which require him to live at his
parents' home in London. In cross-examination he was asked whether he had
applied to vary bail conditions so that he could live with his wife. He
said that he had spoken to his solicitor about it."

The ground advanced by the Appellant fails to engage with the Judge's
unchallenged finding at [56] that although Ms E's separation from him would
cause her distress it would not be unduly harsh for her to remain in this
country as her circumstances would be no worse than for any couple
separated as a result of deportation. Having noted that the Appellant
spends weekends with his family, during which time he shares childcare
responsibilities, the Judge concluded:

         "In terms of childcare responsibilities, their son is only two
         years old and therefore I find that he requires a great deal of
         parental care. However, I find that the Appellant's absence will
         have a limited effect on Ms E because the majority of the burden of
         childcare falls on her shoulders ..."

We find that the conclusions that the Judge drew at [56] are not materially
affected by the birth of the second child as the evidence of the couple
before the Judge was that the appellant was not residing with his partner
or their children. The failure to expressly note the birth of the second
child does not materially impact upon the Judge's consideration of
Exception 1 in the circumstances arising in this appeal. We find that it
would not be unduly harsh for Ms E and her children to remain in this
country and be separated from the Appellant for the cogent and careful
reasons given by the Judge and this ground of appeal must fail.

Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

The grounds further assert that the Judge failed to make any/any sufficient
findings under section 55 of the 2009 Act notwithstanding the duty to do so
and in light of the fact that submissions were made on the issue by means
of the Appellant's skeleton argument. The grounds assert that "it was made
plain in the skeleton argument that the Appellant's two sons' and his
younger sister's best interests were at stake and yet the FtJ has made no
findings on these issues."

Upon consideration of the decision we accept that there was no express or
implicit consideration of the Respondent's duty under section 55 of the
2009 Act. Both of the Appellant's children are British citizens as is his
sister, who is presently a minor. The existence, or otherwise, of the
Appellant's family life with his sister was expressly addressed at [25] and
[68] of the decision with the Judge concluding that the siblings have a
good relationship but for the purpose of Article 8 no more than normal
emotional ties exist between them.

As to whether the absence of a consideration of the duty existing under
section 55 is material as regard the Appellant's children, we observe that
though it will usually be in the best interests of a child to be raised by
both parents Parliament has confirmed that the issue for a Judge is whether
the impact upon a child would be unduly harsh: paragraph 399(a) of the
Rules and section 117C of the 2002 Act. In determining whether the effect
of deporting a foreign criminal would be "unduly harsh" on a foreign
national criminal's child within the 2002 Act a degree of harshness going
beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with a
parent's deportation has to be established: KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of
State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53; 1 WLR 5273. The Appellant has
advanced no meritorious argument that the Judge erred in her consideration
of undue harshness. Even if the Judge were to have found that the best
interests of the children would be for the Appellant to remain in this
country it would not undermine the Judge's reasoned, and unchallenged,
conclusion at [56] that the impact of the appellant's deportation upon the
children would not be unduly harsh. Deportation will normally be
appropriate even though children are affected, and their interests are a
primary consideration because of the impact serious criminal offending has
on the Article 8(2) balance. The Court of Appeal confirmed in Secretary of
State for the Home Department v AJ (Zimbabwe) and VH (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA
Civ 1012; [2017] Imm AR 442 that it would be rare for the best interests of
a child to outweigh the strong public interest in deporting foreign
criminals. Something more than a lengthy separation from a parent is
required even though such separation was detrimental to the child's best
interests. This ground of challenge therefore fails.

Historic Injustice

The Appellant had sought by way of his grounds to argue that save for the
delay in the Respondent's consideration of his father's application for ILR
on which he was a dependant he would have enjoyed lawful residence
satisfying Exception 1 of Section 117C (4) of the 2002 Act. However, when
identifying the timeframe within which the application would have had to
have been considered so that the Appellant could have secured lawful status
in sufficient time to now rely upon under Exception 1 Mr Gajjar accepted
before us that it was a period amounting to some seven months.  We observe
that such time as was ultimately taken to make the decision relating to
settlement was not of such delay as can be relied upon to establish the
required prejudice and in any event the taking of longer than seven months
to make a decision cannot by itself establish the basis for historic
injustice in this matter.

When withdrawing reliance upon this ground Mr Gajjar appropriately conceded
that even if he could succeed in establishing that the Appellant suffered
prejudice in meeting the lawful residence for most of his life requirement
in section 117C(4)(a) he had not appealed the Judge's findings as to there
not being very significant obstacles to his integration on return to The
Gambia under section 117C(4)(c) and so could not meet the conjunctive
requirements of section 117C (4).

Irrational and contradictory Findings of Fact

Mr Gajjar withdrew these two grounds.  We confirmed at the hearing that we
were satisfied that there was an inconsistent finding as to whether or not
the Appellant is "familiar" with The Gambia as the Judge found at [50] of
her decision that the appellant would find life in The Gambia "unfamiliar,
given he left the country when he was 9 years old", but determined at
[50(3)] that the Appellant has "some familiarity with the country" as he
left it when he was aged 9 years old.

However, Mr Gajjar accepted before us that the error is not material
because the Judge proceeded to find at [51]:

"However, in my view this lack of familiarity is not a very significant
obstacle because I find that the Appellant would be able to adapt to his
new life and form new relationships.  I reach this conclusion for the
following reasons:

             (1) English is the official language of Gambia;


             (2) He is young, educated and healthy and therefore there is
                no obvious reason why he would not be able to start a new
                life in Gambia;


             (3) His work skills, developed as a customer assistant in a
                supermarket, are the types of practical interpersonal
                skills that are transferrable in the workplace of any
                country;


             (4) I have not been presented with any evidence that he would
                be unable to find employment within a reasonable time in
                Gambia;


             (5) I infer from the fact that the Appellant has lived with
                his family since his release from immigration detention in
                October 2015 and that he has been unable to carry out any
                paid employment, that either his parents or his partner
                must have been providing him with some financial support.
                Absent any evidence to the contrary, I conclude that this
                financial support could continue on his return to Gambia,
                at least for a limited period."

The Judge gave cogent and lawful reasons after careful consideration of the
evidence before her as to why the Appellant failed to meet Exceptions 1 and
2 and could not establish very compelling reasons as to why his deportation
from this country would not be in the public interest.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of a material error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is upheld.

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


 Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 December 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 20 December 2019


