
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14370/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2018                 |On 11 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ASHRAF NOOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr D Diwncyz, Senior Home Office
                                 Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Noor):     Ms A Chowdary, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Shimmin ("the judge") who in a Decision and Reasons
promulgated on 16 March 2018, allowed Mr Noor's appeal against the
Secretary of State's decision refusing his application for leave to remain
on human rights grounds. For ease of reference I shall throughout this
decision refer to Mr Noor, who was the original appellant, as "the
claimant" and to the Secretary of State, who was the original respondent,
as "the Secretary of State".

The claimant, who was born on 12 August 1984, is a national of Pakistan. He
entered this country on 28 July 2014 with entry clearance as a spouse of a
British citizen, namely, Nadia Amreen Noor.  He was granted leave to remain
until 2 April 2017 and before this leave expired he applied for a further
extension on 16 March 2017, but this was refused on 23 October 2017.

This application was founded upon the continuing relationship which the
claimant had with his wife. The basis of the refusal was that the claimant
did not qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules ("the
Rules") because he did not meet the financial requirements or the
requirements of paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM because it had not been
shown that there were "insurmountable obstacles" (as defined within EX.2)
preventing family life from continuing in Pakistan, and further that there
were no exceptional circumstances in this case which could warrant a grant
of leave to remain outside of the Rules. It was against this decision that
the claimant appealed and, as already noted above, this appeal was allowed
by the judge.

The Secretary of State now appeals against this decision, leave having been
granted by Resident Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R C Campbell on 11
April 2018.

The Decision of the Judge

As he was obliged to, the judge first considered whether or not the
requirements set out within Appendix FM and within EX.1. were satisfied and
he did this at paragraphs 23 to 31. The judge noted that whilst the couple
claimed a joint annual income of �23,073 from salaried employment, they
could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM as the claimant did not
deposit all of his cash earnings into his bank account and so his bank
statements did not correspond with his wage slips as required. Three weeks
before the application was refused however, the claimant's wife commenced
new employment in a full-time position with an annual gross income of
�24,000 (the judge incorrectly notes that she commenced employment
following the refusal). There was no challenge to this employment and the
judge accepted the employment was genuine. By the date of the hearing
before the judge on 12 March 2018 the claimant's wife had not been with her
new employer for the six-months required under Appendix FM (she was one
month short) and so the claimant could not satisfy the requirements of
Appendix FM-SE of the Rules.

At paragraph 26 the judge concluded:

         "On the basis of the evidence before me I am satisfied that if the
         appellant reapplies next month, when his wife has been with her new
         employer for six months, he will meet all the requirements of the
         Immigration Rules".

Next the judge considered the evidence relating to the claim that the
couple were undergoing fertility treatment (IVF) in the UK which was argued
stood as an insurmountable obstacle to family life continuing outside the
UK. The situation regarding treatment before the judge was that IVF
treatment was "about to commence". The judge then proceeded to consider the
circumstances of the claimant's wife. He noted that she was British born;
most of her close family were in the UK; she had good employment and should
not be expected to leave all of this behind to live in Pakistan where she
would have difficulties in finding employment. Taking all of this into
account, the judge found as follows:

         "26.     On the basis of the evidence before me I am satisfied that
         if the appellant reapplies next month, when his wife has been with
         his new employer for six months, he will meet all the requirements
         of the Immigration Rules. I find that in the circumstances of this
         case, including those in relation to IVF treatment, which I
         consider below, it is not proportionate for the appellant to make a
         fresh application, particular a fresh application from Pakistan.

         27.      I accept ... IVF treatment is about to commence."

         28.      The appellant's wife was born in the UK. She has studied
         here and most of her close family are in the Yorkshire and Teesside
         areas. She has good employment.

         29.      I find that she should not be expected to leave all this
         to accompany her husband to Pakistan. I am satisfied that her
         husband would have to 'start at the bottom again' in respect of
         employment after three years absence from Pakistan. I accept the
         appellant's wife's evidence that she would have difficulty in
         obtaining employment in Pakistan. She is an independent and
         ambitious person and she would not be able to fulfil her employment
         wishes in that country.

         30.      Taking into account the couple's problems in respect of
         IVF treatment and the difficulty the appellant and his wife would
         have in respect of employment in Pakistan I find this amounts to
         them facing very significant difficulties in continuing their
         family together outside the UK. Such difficulties could not be
         overcome and would entail very serious hardship for the couple.

         31.      Accordingly, I find that the appellant should have been
         found to have been exempt from meeting the eligibility requirements
         because paragraph EX.1. applies."

The judge then proceeded to consider whether the claimant's removal would
be disproportionate under Article 8 of the ECHR. At paragraph 35 the judge
noted that Article 8 was engaged and at paragraphs 36 and 37 concluded that
the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law
because the claimant "satisfied the Immigration Rules at the date of
decision" or "could now satisfy those Rules if a fresh application was
made." At paragraph 37 the judge stated that he was satisfied that there
was no public interest in removing the claimant because he satisfied the
"Immigration Rules which the Secretary of State declares to be human rights
compliant."

In his omnibus conclusion the judge, as he was obliged to do, gave
consideration to section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and noted that the
maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public interest and
that this indeed together with the claimant's precariousness immigration
status weighed against him. The judge further noted neutral factors such as
the claimant's ability to speak English and the fact that he was
financially independent. Weighing all these matters into the balance the
judge concluded that the respondent's refusal was a disproportionate
interference with the claimant's right to family life and accordingly
allowed the appeal on human rights grounds on that basis.

The basis on which the Secretary of State seeks to challenge this decision
is that the judge erred in his approach to the evidence and in finding that
the requirements of the Rules might be met if an application were made
shortly after the hearing of the appeal. Moreover, there was no documentary
evidence supporting the assertion made by the claimant that IVF treatment
was about to begin, and the judge failed to consider whether it was
available in Pakistan. The judge further erred in concluding that it was
not proportionate for a fresh application for leave to be made from
Pakistan.

11.   I have had regard to the brief submissions made by the
    representatives. I conclude that the judge materially erred in law.

12.   The judge was required to consider the question of proportionality
    through the lens of the Rules. The judge did this but there is a
    fundamentally difficulty with the decision because of what I consider
    to be a dissonance between the evidence and the judge's conclusions.

13.   The Secretary of State concluded that the Rules were not met because
    the financial threshold was not satisfied. It does not appear that this
    conclusion was challenged before the judge because clearly the claimant
    was not able to show that his income met the specific requirements of
    Appendix FM-SE. At the time of the hearing before the judge, the
    claimant's wife had changed employment and in consequence the judge
    found the financial threshold could be satisfied if he reapplied next
    month when the claimant's wife would have completed six months of
    employment with her new employer.

14.   The difficulty with the judge's decision is that he was required to
    consider the appeal by reference to the circumstances at the date of
    hearing. At that date, the claimant did not satisfy the requirements of
    the Rules. The judge was incorrect to find that he did so at paragraph
    37 and this finding contradicts his findings at paragraphs 24 and 26
    namely that the Rules would be satisfied if the claimant "reapplies
    next month". There is further error at paragraph 36 where the judge
    concludes that the Rules were satisfied at the "date of decision" which
    is incorrect.  I find that the judge's findings present a confused and
    inconsistent approach to the evidence and the issues thereby raised
    under the Rules, which in my view cannot be reconciled.

15.   The fact that the claimant did not meet the requirements of the Rules
    at the date of hearing was a factor that should have carried forward
    into the proportionality assessment and given adverse weight rather
    than the determinative weight the judge attributed to it at paragraph
    37.

16.   I also agree with the Secretary of State's grounds that the judge's
    consideration of the IVF issue was inadequate. The issue of IVF is
    somewhat complex. Clearly, the ability to undertake or undergo
    fertility treatment is part of an individual's private life and it
    requires both parties to be present for some time in one place. That is
    relevant to both the issue of whether the claimant's wife could be
    expected to live in Pakistan, or whether if she remained here, the
    effect on her would be unduly harsh.
    There was no documentary evidence before the judge that IVF treatment
    was about to commence and there was no consideration of whether the
    couple could access IVF treatment in Pakistan. These were all important
    considerations that should have been factored into the assessment in
    order for a balanced consideration of the competing factors to be
    struck. This task in my judgement was inadequately undertaken by the
    judge was relevant in deciding whether the exception under the Rules
    could apply and indeed whether removal was proportionate.

17.   I am thus satisfied that the judge's approach is not consistent with
    the guidance given by the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 at
    47:

         "47.     The Rules therefore reflect the responsible Minister's
         assessment, at a general level, of the relative weight of the
         competing factors when striking a fair balance under article 8. The
         courts can review that general assessment in the event that the
         decision-making process is challenged as being incompatible with
         Convention rights or based on an erroneous understanding of the
         law, but they have to bear in mind the Secretary of State's
         constitutional responsibility for policy in this area, and the
         endorsement of the Rules by Parliament. It is also the function of
         the courts to consider individual cases which come before them on
         appeal or by way of judicial review, and that will require them to
         consider how the balance is struck in individual cases. In doing
         so, they have to take the Secretary of State's policy into account
         and to attach considerable weight to it at a general level, as well
         as considering all the factors which are relevant to the particular
         case. This was explained in Hesham Ali at paras 44-46, 50 and 53."

18.   I thus conclude that the decision is not one where an informed reader
    can, with confidence, conclude that the material issues for
    consideration were adequately addressed. For these reasons the decision
    must be set aside.

Decision

I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
rehearing (not before Judge Shimmin).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral      Date: 27 January 2019
