
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14332/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2021                       |On 24 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                               Mrs. SANA ZALID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E Griffiths, Counsel, instructed by Rahman & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr. E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant is a national of Pakistan who is married to a British
national. She is presently aged 28.

Her appeal was allowed by a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (JFtT
Dineen) sent to the parties on 3 February 2020. The respondent was granted
permission to appeal to this Tribunal and by a decision sent to the parties
on 2 October 2020 I allowed the respondent's appeal to the extent that the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside, with certain identified
findings of fact kept, and the decision to be remade by this Tribunal.

The representatives, the appellant and her husband attended the face-to-
face hearing at Field House.

Anonymity

No request was made by either party for an anonymity order at the hearing
held on 4 June 2021.

Background

The appellant married her husband, the sponsor, in Pakistan. Her husband is
a British national who was born in Pakistan but has resided in this country
since he was 6 months old.

The appellant subsequently secured entry clearance as a spouse. She arrived
in the United Kingdom on 8 April 2014 and enjoyed leave to remain until 23
December 2016.

She made an in-time application for further leave to remain on 21 December
2016. The respondent refused the application by means of a decision dated
18 January 2018, concluding that the appellant was unable to meet relevant
financial requirements. The appellant's husband had previously been
employed on a full-time basis but had been unwell and not worked for a
period of time. He then resumed employment as a self-employed taxi driver
but was only able to provide evidence of 8 months self-employment at the
date of application.

The appellant appealed against this decision and at the date of the hearing
the appellant's husband was earning in the region of �19,200 gross per
annum.

The appeal was dismissed by a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (JFtT
Trevaskis) sent to the parties on 3 July 2018. Judge Travaskis' decision is
addressed below.

The appellant submitted a human rights application based upon article 8.
The respondent refused this application by a decision dated 20 August 2019.
Reliance was placed upon the appellant's immigration status having remained
in this country upon the expiry of her previous grant of leave to enter.
Reliance was also placed upon the appellant's English language certificate
being over two years old and therefore not a document that could properly
be relied upon under the relevant immigration rule. The respondent accepted
that the appellant's application did not fall for refusal on suitability
grounds, that the relationship requirements under the relevant immigration
rule was met and that the appellant now met the relevant financial
requirement.

The appellant exercised attendant appeal rights and her appeal was
initially considered by Judge Dineen. I observe that the findings of fact
made at �18 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, namely that the couple
have lived together in this country since 2014 and that family life
subsists between them, have been preserved.

Preliminary issues

By directions accompanying my error of law decision of 2 October 2020 I
directed, inter alia:

          . Any further evidence to be relied upon by the parties was to be
            filed and served no later than 7 days before the next hearing.


          . The appellant was to file and serve a skeleton argument no later
            than 3 days before the resumed hearing.

The notice of resumed hearing was sent by email from the Tribunal to the
parties on 14 May 2021, some three or so weeks before the matter came
before me.

The appellant's legal representatives, Rahman & Co, wrote to the Tribunal
on 1 June 2021 and explained that the firm had failed to note the direction
for the filing and serving of the appellant's skeleton argument and
requested an extension of time, observing that counsel had been instructed
that day to prepare the document. Rahman & Co acted properly in identifying
their error and in making the request, and the proposed amendment
permitting filing and serving to be undertaken by 3 June 2021 was granted
by UT Lawyer Curry by means of a decision dated 3 June 2021. Ms. Griffith's
skeleton argument was filed in accordance with the amended direction.

 A supplementary bundle was filed and served at 15.57 on the day before the
hearing, with no explanation as to why the appellant was in breach of the
relevant direction. Unfortunately, Rahman & Co were in breach of the
direction as to the filing and service of further evidence and made no
request for an extension of this direction. Subsequently, a supplementary
witness statement from the appellant's husband was filed and served at
23.23 on the night before the hearing. Again, no explanation was provided
for the egregious failure to abide by directions. I observe that the
supplementary witness statement is dated 3 June 2021, though Rahman & Co
had been aware since October 2020 that a resumed hearing was to take place
and were on notice as to the hearing date from May 2021.

To compound my concern as to the approach adopted by Rahman & Co, the
supplementary bundle was not accompanied by the mandatory rule 15(2A)
application whereby in an asylum or immigration case if a party wishes the
Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was not before the First-tier
Tribunal, that party must send or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal
and any other party and indicate the nature of the evidence and explain why
it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal. In considering whether to
admit evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper
Tribunal must have regard to whether there has been unreasonable delay in
producing that evidence: rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Mr. Tufan graciously confirmed that despite the very late service of
documents, running in total to 62 pages, he was happy for the documents to
be admitted and that he was ready to proceed. I therefore admitted the
documents at the hearing.

The Tribunal can expect a firm of solicitors holding itself out as
specialising in immigration law to have knowledge of basic procedural
requirements. Rahman & Co should observe that a risk is run of a hearing
being adjourned on fairness grounds in this Tribunal if basic procedure is
not complied with and documents are filed and served late. Service at 23.23
on the night before the hearing requires, at the very least, a detailed
explanation and not the silence employed in this matter. Rahman & Co should
be aware that there are costs implications arising from such adjournments,
and professional complaint may well arise.

Evidence

The appellant relied upon her witness statement dated 30 December 2019, and
her husband's statements dated 30 December 2019 and 3 June 2021.

The couple detail the employment history of the appellant's husband, who is
presently a self-employed taxi driver and works as a part-time chef earning
in the region of �19,500 gross per annum, thereby satisfying paragraph E-
ECP.3.1. of Appendix FM.

The appellant detailed that she passed an English language test in
September 2016, equivalent to level A2. A copy of the certificate was
placed before the First-tier Tribunal. She accepted that the certificate is
no longer valid and confirmed that she had unsuccessfully sought to secure
her passport from the respondent so as to be able to undertake a further
English language test.

Reliance is also placed upon the couple's evidence as presented to Judge
Trevaskis in 2018. The appellant's husband confirmed that he has resided in
this country for all but 6 months of his life. He does not speak Urdu and
only speaks a little Punjabi. He expressed concern as to his ability to
secure employment with a lack of relevant language skills. He further
confirmed that all of his family reside in this country.

At the hearing Mr. Tufan confirmed that the respondent did not challenge
the couple's credibility and though they were tendered by Ms. Griffiths it
was agreed that this matter would proceed to submissions.


Decision

The introduction of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
2002 ('the 2002 Act') has not altered the need for a two-stage approach to
article 8 claims. Ordinarily, the Tribunal will firstly consider an
appellant's article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules ('the
Rules') that set out substantive conditions without any reference to Part
5A considerations. Such considerations only have direct application at the
second stage of the article 8 analysis, when the claim is considered
outside of the Rules.

Ms. Griffiths accepted on behalf of the appellant that she cannot meet the
requirements of article 8 under the Rules, including paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi), and so exceptional circumstances are required to establish
that removal would be a disproportionate interference with their article 8
rights. This requires the appellant to establish that her removal to
Pakistan would result in 'unjustifiably harsh consequences': R (Agyarko) v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11, [2017] 1 W.L.R.
823.

As for article 8 outside of the Rules, I am required to undertake a
proportionality evaluation. I am therefore to undertake an evaluation of
exceptional circumstances outside the Rules which requires taking into
account as a factor the strength of the public policy in immigration
control as reflected in the Rules: TZ (Pakistan) v. Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, [2018] Imm AR 1301, per the
Senior President of Tribunals at [33]. The Supreme Court confirmed in
Hesham Ali v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60,
[2017] Imm AR 484, at [46], that I am to attach considerable weight to the
respondent's policy.

Ultimately, my task is to address the test of whether a fair balance is
struck between competing public and private needs in the requirement that
the appellant return to her home country as confirmed by the Supreme Court
in R (Agyarko) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC
11, [2017] 1 W.L.R. 823, at [41]-[60].

In TZ (Pakistan) the Senior President confirmed that I am permitted to
apply principles established by the Strasbourg Court, at [28].

The parties agreed that I am to adopt the structured approach to
considering the appellant's article 8 appeal and to observe the five steps
identified by Lord Bingham in R (Razgar) v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 2 AC 368, at [17].

The respondent accepts that the appellant enjoys family and private life
rights in this country. I am satisfied that the proposed interference will
have consequences of such gravity as to potentially engage the operation of
article 8, and Ms. Griffiths accepts on behalf of the appellant that the
proposed interference is in accordance with the law.

As for stages 4 and 5 of the structured approach, I observe Lord Bingham's
confirmation at [17] of Razgar that in practice these steps are usually,
and unobjectionably, taken together. Ms. Griffiths did not assert that the
proposed restriction on the appellant's article 8 rights was plainly
unnecessary, and she was right not to. As the Court of Appeal observed in
relation to immigration matters in VW (Uganda) v. Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 5, [2009] Imm AR 436, at [23], it will
be rare that stage 4 will be answered in an appellant's favour.

I therefore proceed to consider stage 5 and undertake the proportionality
enquiry, observing that it is only possible to form a judgement about the
infringement of an individual's rights in the light of all the
circumstances of a particular case, and so my enquiry is fact specific.

As part of the adoption of the structured approach, and the consideration
of proportionality at stage 5, I am required to consider the statutory
provisions of Part V of the 2002 Act. I observe that section 117B, which is
relevant to my enquiry in this matter, must be construed to ensure
consistency with article 8 and so there must be injected into it a limited
degree of flexibility so that the application of the statutory provisions
will always lead to an end result consistent with article 8: Rhuppiah v.
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKSC 58, [2018] 1 WLR
5536, at [36], [49]. Consequently, the limited degree of flexibility may
permit an appellant to succeed in establishing exceptional circumstances
though they have been unable to satisfy the relevant provisions of the
Rules.

I am satisfied that the appellant and her husband have provided 'proper'
and detailed evidence permitting me to undertake the proportionality
enquiry.

Section 117B(1) confirms that the maintenance of immigration controls is in
the public interest. From the outset I observe that the appellant is unable
to meet the requirements of article 8 under the Rules and so cannot meet
the weight to be addressed to those identified elements.

The appellant is financially independent through her husband's employment.
I am also satisfied that though she has not taken an English language test
for some years, the appellant can speak the English language to a required
standard. She gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in the English
language, and I observe that she conversed with her husband at the hearing
before me in the English language. Whilst the appellant does not obtain a
positive right from these factors, they are not ones that count against
her: AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), [2015] Imm AR 1019.

As to section 117B(4) and (5) I observe that the appellant was lawfully
present in this country for some 4� years, and during such time her
immigration status was precarious: Rhuppiah, at [44].

I observe that the 'limited weight' provisions are confined in section 117B
to private life as established by a person at a time when their immigration
status is unlawful or precarious. This does not mean that I am to disregard
precarious family life criteria set out in established article 8
jurisprudence, such as Jeunesse v. The Netherlands (app. no. 12738/10)
(2015) 60 E.H.R.R. 17, at [108]: see Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016]
UKUT 00138 (IAC).

Section 117B(6) is not applicable in this matter as the appellant does not
have a child.

The appellant places considerable weight upon the judgment of the House of
Lords in Chikwamba v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]
UKHL 40, [2008] 1 W.L.R. 1420 where it was held that appeals should only
rarely be dismissed simply on the basis that it would be proportionate and
more appropriate for an appellant to apply for leave from abroad in
circumstances where the appellant would succeed in securing entry
clearance. The effect on other family members with a right to respect for
their family life with an appellant has to be taken into account.
Chilkwamba is expressly concerned with an appellant seeking to remain with
a spouse with settled status in the United Kingdom.

Before me Mr. Tufan accepted that on the face of the evidence the appellant
would be expected to succeed in a spousal entry clearance application.
However, in his concise and articulate submissions Mr. Tufan relied upon
the decision of this Tribunal in Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba;
Zambrano) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC), [2020] Imm. A.R. 1084 where it
was confirmed that an appellant in an article 8 human rights appeal who
argues that there is no public interest in removal because after leaving
the United Kingdom she will be granted entry clearance must, in all cases,
address the relevant considerations in Part 5A of the 2002 Act including
section 117B(1) and reliance on Chikwamba does not obviate the need to do
this.

There remains a public interest in the removal of a person from this
country even if they would succeed in an entry clearance application. The
fact specific nature of the proportionality enquiry requires me to consider
whether the personal facts arising in this matter are such as to lessen the
public interest in removal. As Lord Bridge concluded in Chikwamba it was
the particular circumstances of the appellant, and in particular the harsh
and unpalatable conditions in Zimbabwe, her husband being unable to
accompany her and the separation of a child from one of their parents which
resulted in it not being in the public interest for the appellant to be
removed.

In this matter, I am satisfied that it is not reasonable to expect the
appellant's husband to relocate to Pakistan for a period of time whilst his
wife applies for entry clearance. He is a British citizen. It is not
challenged that his close family reside in this country. He has spent all
of his life here, save for the first six months. He has rebuilt his
employment following serious illness. It is not challenged that he does not
speak Urdu and speaks limited Punjabi. I am satisfied that he would be
required to give up both his self-employment and his established part-time
work as a chef in this country and will have significant difficulties in
finding employment in Pakistan due to language difficulties, not having
family to help him find employment and not being enough of an insider in
terms of understanding how life in Pakistani society is carried on and a
capacity to participate in it so as to have a reasonable opportunity to
operate in Pakistan on a day-to-day basis. His wife will only be able to
provide limited help in respect of his language difficulties, as she will
not be present at any workplace.

I do not accept Ms. Griffiths' tentative assertion that the appellant would
be returning to a dangerous situation in Pakistan because of the current
pandemic. No evidence was filed as to the situation in Pakistan, and the
submission veered towards an article 3 complaint that would constitute a
new matter. Ms. Griffiths withdrew from this submission.

However, I am required to consider article 8 as at the date of my decision
and I am satisfied that the appellant would secure entry clearance to
rejoin her husband. She would then be required to return to this country
from what is presently identified to be a 'red list' country under present
pandemic guidance. Having been granted entry clearance, she would possess
relevant 'residence rights' to be in the cohort of persons permitted to
enter this country having travelled from a red list country and so she can
expect to be permitted to enter. She would be required to quarantine and
thereby isolate for 10 full days in a managed quarantine hotel with the day
of her arrival in England counting as day 0. The cost for such managed
quarantine is in the region of �1750, not including the costs of a Covid-19
test before travelling to this country. This sum amounts to approximately
1/10 of the net annual earnings of the appellant's husband. I am satisfied
from considering the bank statements before me that this sum, in addition
to the entry clearance application fee, would place a very significant
financial strain upon the couple. Whilst I have no doubt that the
appellant's husband would seek to meet the costs, I am satisfied on balance
that he would require time to save such a sum, and this would require the
appellant to wait in Pakistan for a considerable period before embarking
upon her entry clearance application. Whilst Mr. Tufan informed me that it
was expected that such application would take 12 weeks to process, I take
judicial note that the pandemic has significantly and adversely impacted
upon the present time taken for the consideration of entry clearance
applications.

I am therefore satisfied, upon considering the personal circumstances of
the appellant, and having found that she would succeed on a future spousal
application for entry clearance, that this is one of those exceptional
matters where the public interest identified at section 117B(1) can
properly be lessened. My finding is very much founded on the particular
facts arising in this case and is not one that can properly be transferred
to someone else's personal circumstances.

I confirm that having considered the approach to the public interest in
Chikwamba and lessened the public interest in section 117B(1), I do not
double count the same matter when considering section 117B(4): Patel
(historic injustice; NIAA Part 5A) [2020] UKUT 351 (IAC).

I proceed to consider the factors in favour of the respondent: significant
weight should usually be given to the public interest; the appellant is an
overstayer; she entered the United Kingdom with precarious leave as a
spouse and she cannot meet the article 8 requirements established under the
Rules.

In favour of the appellant I can give a little weight to the genuine and
subsisting nature of her marriage to her husband; a little weight can
properly be given to her having established a private life in this country
over 7 years upon her initially securing entry clearance, a little weight
is given to her having committed no criminal offences and a little weight
is given to the fact that I have found that she would be returning to
Pakistan in the absence of her husband with whom she is a genuine and
subsisting marriage. Importantly, I have found that the public interest in
her removal is lessened for the reasons detailed above at [40]-[46].

Having balanced the factors favourable to both parties and having concluded
that the public interest in immigration control is appropriately to be
lessened in this matter, I am satisfied that proportionality tips in favour
of the appellant with the respondent being unable to justify the proposed
interference with the appellant's family and private life rights as
protected by article 8. It would, at the present time, be Kafkaesque to
require her to return to Pakistan, delay making an entry clearance
application in which she is bound to succeed so that her husband can secure
hard pressed funds for her quarantine upon return, and then for her to
quarantine in isolation on arrival. These are unjustifiably harsh
consequences for someone who can meet the relevant entry clearance rules.
In such circumstances, I allow the appellant's appeal on article 8 grounds
outside of the Rules.

Having allowed the appellant's appeal on article 8 grounds outside of the
Rules, on exceptional circumstances grounds, I return to address an issue
relied upon by Ms. Griffiths. The appellant sought to extend her lawful
leave in December 2016 and the application was refused on the basis that
her sponsor, her husband, could not meet the relevant maintenance
requirements. The appeal therefore fell, in part, to be considered under
paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM, namely whether there were insurmountable
obstacles to family life with her husband continuing outside the United
Kingdom. I note the definition of 'insurmountable obstacles' provided at
paragraph EX.2.

The Judge made limited, and simply insufficient, findings, at [33]-[34]:

         '33. I have found that the appellant's circumstances do not engage
            article 8, and, in any event, the appellant will apparently be
            able to make a fresh application without leaving the United
            Kingdom. In those circumstances, I do not find that there are
            any insurmountable obstacles to the continues of family life
            between the appellant and the sponsor.

         34. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision by the
            respondent was a proportionate interference with the right of
            the appellant to respect for her family and private life in the
            United Kingdom. The appellant should make a fresh application
            immediately, supported by the proper evidence.'

I am satisfied that the decision of Judge Trevaskis is significantly
confused in its approach to the consideration of the appellant's article 8
appeal. It can be fairly said to be incoherent in parts and I conclude that
it is riddled with material errors of law. There is a failure to make
relevant findings of fact, nor is there any true engagement with the
substance of the appeal before the Judge. For reasons that are not clear,
the Judge decided that article 8 was not engaged, despite there being no
challenge to the genuineness of the marriage and the fact that the couple
resided together. This is clearly a material error of law. The Judge then
proceeded to consider 'insurmountable obstacles' through the erroneous
prism of the possibility of a subsequent in-country application being made,
which is a material error of law.

My reading of the decision is that Judge Trevaskis felt sympathy for the
appellant, possibly concluding that this was a 'near miss' application
which could not succeed under the Rules in circumstances where the
appellant would have satisfied the maintenance requirements if her husband
had returned to work four months earlier than he did. The Judge would have
been aware that near miss arguments and article 8 are subject to the
observations of the Supreme Court in Patel v. Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, [2014] AC 651. However, the approach
adopted is entirely unsustainable with accumulated material errors of law.
It is understood that the appellant was not legally represented and did not
appeal this decision which is unfortunate as I am entirely satisfied that
it would have been set aside by this Tribunal on appeal and a resumed
hearing directed to take place.

Considering the evidence placed before Judge Trevaskis I am satisfied that
there was a significant likelihood of the appellant having been capable of
establishing insurmountable obstacles to her family life continuing as
required by paragraph EX1(b) at a resumed hearing, being mindful of the
test identified by Sales LJ in Agyarko v. Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2015] EWCA Civ 440, [2016] 1 W.L.R. 390, at [21]-[22], approved
by the Supreme Court in the same matter. However, I am satisfied that the
appellant is successful in her present appeal for the reasons detailed
above, without my having to engage with a more detailed assessment as to
the merits of her original appeal. Consequently, I am not required to place
the inadequacies of Judge Trevaskis' decision into the balance sheet
exercise.

I conclude by thanking both Ms. Griffiths and Mr. Tufan for their very
helpful submissions.


Notice of Decision

By means of a decision sent to the parties on 2 October 2020 this Tribunal
set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 30
September 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007.

The decision is re-made, and the appellant's appeal on human rights
(article 8) grounds is allowed outside of the Immigration Rules.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 11 June 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Though the appellant has been successful before  this  Tribunal,  I  am  not
satisfied that the respondent's initial decision on  the  facts  then  known
can properly be said to have been unreasonable.

In the circumstances, no fee award is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 11 June 2021

