
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16321/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                             |On 16 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               Lai Thi Nguyen
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by Morgan Hall,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

I see no need for an anonymity order in this case and I discharge the  order
that has been made.

This is an appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 23  June
2016 refusing the application of the appellant for leave to remain on  human
rights grounds.  The appeal has been  dealt  with  unsatisfactorily  by  the
First-tier Tribunal and I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
on 13 August 2018.  I gave directions on that occasion  intending  that  the
case be fully prepared for today and I am sorry to record  that  little,  if
anything, has been done.  The evidence before me is the  evidence  that  was
before the First-tier Tribunal without the  possible  advantage  of  hearing
from the appellant directly because she does not have sufficient command  of
English to give evidence and nobody has provided an interpreter.

Nevertheless, I have other evidence before me, particularly the evidence  of
the appellant's husband, who, although clearly speaking a  second  language,
was able to  understand  the  questions  and  give  answers  that  we  could
understand if we were patient and I have documentary evidence.

If the appellant can satisfy me that she had been living  with  her  partner
for more than two years before the application was made,  on  this  occasion
that means cohabitation starting in 2 April 2012, then it is  common  ground
the appellant  would  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   For  the
purposes of an Article 8 balancing exercise, that is a  compelling,  if  not
determinative, reason for allowing the appeal.

The evidence is not  entirely  satisfactory  but  it  is  there.   Both  the
appellant and her partner said in their  statements  that  they  started  to
cohabit in October 2010.  They did not give  a  date,  but  the  appellant's
partner before me  remembered  the  date.   He  could  not  explain  why  he
remembered it and I am doubtful that he could.  I do not suggest that he  is
necessarily being dishonest; it may be that  he  is  adding  things  to  his
recollection because that is the way the mind works sometimes, but I do  not
regard his evidence about the  precise  date  the  relationship  started  as
being reliable in any way.

The evidence that the relationship started in October 2010  is  a  different
matter.  It has the advantage  of  consistency,  not  only  in  the  witness
statements, where it might be expected, but in the written  application.  It
is not a particularly obvious date  to  choose  for  someone  who  is  being
dishonest.

The documentary evidence is unhelpful.  There  is  no  documentary  evidence
tending to put them together until 2013, but Mr Khan did point out that  the
photographs tend to show the appellant and her husband  with  her  husband's
children at different stages of their lives which  might  well  support  the
idea of cohabitation starting as early as October 2010.  It is  a  pity  the
Secretary of State  in  the  refusal  letter  referred  to  there  being  no
evidence about cohabitation beginning in 2010 because  there  is;  there  is
the evidence of the appellant and the evidence of her  partner.   What  they
mean is no independent evidence but this is not really the point.

The appellant's evidence has been discredited.   She  was  not  believed  in
several respects by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I bear that  in  mind.


No such adverse finding has been made about the partner's evidence.  He  was
not criticised for being unreliable in  any  way  and  although  I  found  a
degree of unexplained exaggeration I note the consistency in  his  position.


Certain things are clear.  Theirs is a  genuine  relationship.   The  couple
seem to be very much together.  This was the finding before  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  It is evidenced by their being together today.  Mr Duffy  had  no
reason to investigate or challenge this point in  cross-examination.   I  am
satisfied that they are together.

It is also clear that this is not a case where there  is  going  to  be  any
burden on public funds.  The appellant's husband  who  came  to  the  United
Kingdom as one of the "boat people", if  I  might  be  permitted  this  very
convenient phrase, has been sufficiently industrious to buy  his  own  house
and accumulate savings, I think somewhere in excess of ï¿½50,000. Many  people
would regard as entirely commendable.

I am not allowed the luxury of indecision and  I  am  persuaded  just  about
that the couple probably did start to live together in  about  October  2010
as they always said.  There is no contrary evidence and there is  no  reason
to discount the Appellant's partner's evidence.

It follows that means that I am satisfied they do satisfy  the  requirements
of the Rules, and that, coupled with the fact that  the  relationship  still
seems to  be  entirely  genuine  and  the  couple  are  together  is,  I  am
persuaded, sufficient reason to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

I do not do this confident that I have made  the  correct  decision  on  the
facts but I hope my decision is at least rational for the reasons  given.  I
am satisfied that this is a genuine relationship which on  Article  8  terms
ought to be respected.

For those reasons, having set aside the decision on  the  last  occasion,  I
allow the appeal now.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  and  I
substitute a decision allowing the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 November 2018               |

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 16321 2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2018                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               lai thi nguyen
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Manzur-e-Mawla, legal representative from
                    Morgan Hall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                    REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW AND
                                 DIRECTIONS


1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I will  review
the need for this order when I finally  determine  the  appeal  and  invite
representations on whether such an order is appropriate.

2. This is an appeal brought by  permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Doyle against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  on  human
rights grounds the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
of State refusing him leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds.   The  short
point is  that  the  decision  is  reasoned  inadequately  and  I  have  no
hesitation in finding that claim made out.

3. It is right to say  that  the  Decision  and  Reasons  is  in  some  ways
commendably brief.  Certain points are made pithily but the decision breaks
down because of a lack  of  express  consideration  of  Part  5(A)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4. I consider in more detail the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. The central issue in  appeal  is  the  proportionality  of  refusing  the
Appellant permission to stay.  The grounds complain that the  exercise  was
"skewered" (I wonder if "skewed" was the intended word) and gave by way  of
example the alleged failure to consider the appellant's partner's  earnings
and savings.  There was also no regard for the appellant's  partner's  bank
statements and this, it was said, led to an unsustainable conclusion on the
proportionality of refusal.

6. At paragraph 6 of the decision and reasons the judge  says:  "It  is  not
contested that the appellant meets the  financial  requirements  under  the
Immigration Rules".

7. The same paragraph noted that it was "not challenged" that  there  was  a
genuine relationship between the appellant and her partner.  I have to read
paragraph 6 as the finding that the appellant did not  meet  the  financial
requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The difficulty is whilst  that  may
be strictly right because of the  way  documents  were  produced  with  the
application, there is evidence of  substantial  financial  provision  which
does not seem to have been considered.

8. Ground 2 complained that the judge had referred to the  appellant  having
made a "bogus" asylum claim.  The word  "bogus"  is  undesirable.   It  has
clear connotations of a person making a  wholly  unsustainable  claim  that
could not possibly succeed or one that should not succeed  because  it  was
entirely dishonest.  Judges should not be  reluctant  to  criticise  people
when the criticisms are justified but as the Decision and  Reasons  in  the
unsuccessful appeal was not available before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
the judge should not have used the word "bogus".   The  judge  should  have
contented himself with saying that the  application  was  unsuccessful  and
that the appeal was dismissed.  More than that was speculation and  as  the
word "bogus" has connotations which should be avoided unless  the  word  is
wholly justified.  Further the judge used the delay caused by  the  "bogus"
claim as  a  reason  to  say  that  delay  did  not  matter  and  that  was
unsustainable.

9. The third ground says, again with  some  justification,  that  the  judge
said that further delay was caused by  the  appellant  making  applications
that were unmeritorious and intended to delay.  That cannot be justified or
at least not for the reasons given.

10. Finally, ground 4 complains that delay is a relevant factor  and  should
have been considered and given some weight and ground 5 complains that  the
Tribunal did not consider that the evidence of the appellant was slanted by
her reliance on the Vietnamese interpreter.

11. I say immediately there is no point to be made there whatsoever.  If  it
was suggested that the interpreter was incompetent then  the  point  should
have been clear and supported by evidence.  Ground 5, like the use  of  the
word "bogus" in the Decision, in my judgment would have been best left out.

12. Miss Fijiwala did what she could  to  draw  attention  to  the  positive
aspects of the decision but it  is  clear  to  me  that  this  decision  is
unsatisfactory.  It does  not  delve  into  the  issues  that  need  to  be
resolved.

13. Although I had hoped to be able  to  deal  with  the  matter  without  a
further hearing I find myself in an impossible position.  It  appears  from
the face of the decision that the  appellant  accepted  that  she  did  not
satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  This is quite plain from  paragraph
7 where the judge stated: "It was conceded on the appellant's  behalf  that
she did not satisfy the requirement to demonstrate that as at the  date  of
the application, they had been living together for two  years  as  man  and
wife, she did not meet the definition of 'partner' under the provisions  of
paragraph GEN 1.2."

14. In the light of other evidence and findings this makes no  sense  to  me
at all.  The decision was made following an application  made  on  2  April
2014 (I think) but it was the evidence in the witness statement which seems
to have been accepted that cohabitation began in about October  2010.   The
recorded concession was not challenged  in  the  grounds  and  I  can  only
conclude that I have just misunderstood something  completely.   Given  the
judge's clear finding that the claimant's partner cannot be expected to  go
and live  back  in  Vietnam,  an  entirely  sensible  finding  that  I  can
understand and that has not been challenged, it is  hard  to  see  why  the
application should not have succeeded under  the  Rules  but  only  if  the
relationship was then a qualifying relationship.

15. I must ask that the matter be heard again and I direct that it be  heard
again in the Upper Tribunal before me as soon as is reasonably practicable.
 Neither party has made any application to call any further evidence and  I
draw the parties' attention to the need to make an application if  that  is
the course to take.  It may be that the case can be dealt with  by  way  of
submissions and at the moment that is all that the Rules allow.   It  is  a
matter for the parties to ensure that the case is  ready  and  it  is  next
listed.

16. For the avoidance of doubt I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal for error of law and  I  have  given  directions  for  the  future
conduct of this hearing.

                                 DIRECTIONS

1    This appeal will be listed before me on the first available date after
14 days.

2    No later than 7 days before the day fixed for  hearing  the  following
must be served on      the Tribunal and on the other party:

     (i) Copies of any  photograph,  letters,  reports  or  other  copiable
documents

     (ii)     Witness statements to stand as evidence-in-chief without  the
need for further           evidence from any witness on which a party seeks
to rely.

     (iii)    Details of any requests for interpreters.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 13 August 2018                |
|Judge                                |                                     |




