
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17846/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th August 2020                          |On 26th August 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                 George [N]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP
(Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the Appellant's bundles of 31 and 36 pages and the Respondent's  unpaginated
bundle,  the  contents of which I  have  recorded. The  order   made
is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 25 November 1987.  He
appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas dismissing
his appeal against the refusal of leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor in 2002 and has remained
here since then.  In 2010 he was detained under the Mental Health Act and
later released. His subsequent applications for leave to remain on human
rights grounds made in October and November 2011, April 2016, and January
and November 2018 were refused.

3.   On 9 January 2016 the Appellant was arrested on suspicion of sexual
touching and threats to kill. On 10 May 2019 he was sentenced to a twelve
month conditional discharge and restraining order for the offence of
harassment. Additionally, he was sentenced to a 24 month community
psychiatric order and placed on the sex offenders' register for five years
for the offence of sexual assault.

4.   The Appellant's application for leave to remain was refused under
paragraphs S-LTR.1.6, which states that the presence of the applicant in
the UK is not conducive to the public good because their conduct (including
convictions which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.),
character, associations or other reasons make it undesirable to allow them
to remain in the United Kingdom. The Appellant could not satisfy the
requirements of 276ADE, in particular there were no very significant
obstacles to integration in Cameroon.  The Appellant was 31 years of age
and had lived in the UK for sixteen years. The Respondent found there were
no exceptional circumstances and the refusal of leave did not breach
Article 8.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at [20]:

"In respect of private life under the Rules, the Appellant claims the
refusal on suitability grounds under the Immigration Rules is not made out
because his offending was committed during a period of mental illness and
does not represent an ongoing level of threat. I note as part of his
punishment the Appellant is entered on the sex offenders register for a
period of 5 years, which in my view does indicate he is a continuing threat
to society. For these reasons the refusal on suitability grounds is
substantiated."

6.   In the alternative, assuming the Appellant met the suitability
requirements, the judge then considered the other requirements of paragraph
276ADE. She applied SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 in her assessment of
whether there were very significant obstacles to integration. She stated at
[21]


         "... the idea of 'integration' called for a broad evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual would be enough of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life in the society in
         that other country was carried on and the capacity to participate
         in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there,
         to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private and family life."

7.   The judge made the following relevant findings:

"22. In this appeal, it is argued the Appellant is subject to relapse
whether or not he complies with medication and he has done so in the past
in the UK. The medical evidence indeed does support this argument, and I
accept it. The issue therefore is whether any relapse the Appellant may
suffer in Cameroon and the circumstances he finds himself in amounts to
very significant obstacles to his integration in Cameroon.  I find for the
following reasons, it does not."

"23. The Appellant has been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, which is
controlled by medication, at present aripiprazole to which he is responding
well. The background information and expert evidence identifies a level of
mental health care and treatment available in Cameroon albeit most likely
at a cost and not of the same quality as that available in the UK. There is
no evidence that as a national, this Appellant could not access any such
available treatment in Cameroon. The Appellant has his parents in Cameroon
and has financial support from his relatives here in the UK.  There is no
evidence their support could not continue to enable him to access private
medication and medical care if necessary, in Cameroon. The Appellant
essentially lives independently in the UK.  He cooks, cleans and performs
all daily routine tasks for himself. He sees a key worker weekly, primarily
for advice. There is no evidence this aspect of his care is vital to his
survival. Whilst I accept the level of mental health treatment in Cameroon
is not likely to be comparable to that in the UK, there is nonetheless
treatment available and no evidence the Appellant would not respond
positively to any such treatment. I note the medical evidence, the
Appellant has not responded well to some medications in the past but this
evidence by no means confirms there is no effective alternative treatment
available for the Appellant in Cameroon. As to the risk of relapse, it is
apparent from the evidence, the Appellant is likely to face relapse even if
he remained in the UK. Significantly, there is treatment available in
Cameroon in the event of a relapse there and to ensure continuity of the
Appellant's mental stability."

"24. The claim the Appellant's father will insist on following traditional
methods of treatment for this Appellant is not consistent with his past
actions in bringing the Appellant to the UK, clearly for a better life. It
is apparent from those actions the Appellant's father wanted the best for
the Appellant. It does not follow the Appellant faces the same fate as his
uncle, if he returns to Cameroon. The Appellant's father worked to support
his family in the past and continues to do so. He maintains an interest in
the Appellant.  Relatives in the UK assist the Appellant financially and
can continue to do so, whether he remains in the UK or returns to Cameroon.
There is no evidence the Appellant's parents and sister could not provide
accommodation, emotional and physical support for him and I believe they
would. The Appellant remains familiar with social and cultural aspects of
life in Cameroon, and despite his mental health condition, I find with the
assistance of his family and the treatment that is available in Cameroon,
he would have the capacity to participate in society and to operate daily
and develop a private life of substance there. On balance, I find there are
no very significant obstacles to integration in Cameroon for this
particular Appellant, and the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
the Immigration Rules are not met."

8.   The judge then went on to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration
Rules and concluded at [32]:

"On the totality of the evidence and balancing all relevant factors, I find
the countervailing feature of the Appellant's mental health condition, does
not amount to exceptional circumstances, and does not outweigh the public
interest in his removal. For these reasons, the Respondent's decision in
this case is proportionate and does not breach Article 8."

9.   Permission was sought on two grounds. Firstly, the judge had, by
relying solely upon notification requirements under the Sexual Offences Act
2003, unlawfully fettered her discretion on the question of suitability and
she failed to give adequate reasons for her findings thereon. Secondly, the
judge failed to consider relevant evidence on the question of integration.
The judge failed to consider the typical behaviours expressed by the
Appellant during periods of mental illness and the likely reaction of
Cameroonian society to the Appellant's behaviour evidenced in the
psychiatric report and the expert country report. Permission was granted by
First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro on both grounds.


Submissions

Ground 1: suitability

10.  Mr Holt submitted the judge's finding on suitability could be found at
[20] of the decision and the only factor referred to by the judge was that
the Appellant was listed on the sex offenders' register. Mr Holt submitted
that this was not determinative of the level of threat as it was not an
assessment of the level of risk.

11.  I asked Mr Holt why a continuing threat to society was a relevant
consideration under paragraph S-LTR 1.6? Mr Holt submitted that the
question of whether a previous conviction of sexual assault rendered the
Appellant's presence against the public interest was best analysed in
relation to the risk the Appellant poses. If the court did not look at the
level of risk then the only other value for such a suitability requirement
would be a punitive measure. The concept of deterrent effect played no part
because of the nature of the Appellant's state of mind. In assessing
whether it was conducive to the public good the question that should be
asked is,  'Does the Appellant pose a risk to the public?' Other than a
risk to the public there is no other reason why the Appellant's presence in
the UK would not be conducive to public good.  The approach to suitability
was flawed because the judge focussed on the Appellant's presence on the
sexual offenders' register.

Ground 2: integration

12.  The medical evidence showed that there was a strong genetic basis for
the Appellant's mental illness and therefore the issue before the judge was
whether the Appellant was likely to relapse and the reaction of the
Cameroonian community in the event of a relapse. These factors were
relevant to the test of whether he was an insider capable of participating
in society in Cameroon so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be
accepted there and to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
society and build relationships.  Therefore, how the Cameroonian community
would react was a crucial element of this assessment which the judge failed
to address.

13.  The judge found that the Appellant will relapse in the future even if
he continues to take medication and the judge failed to take into account
how that relapse would manifest itself.  This was set out at paragraph 74
of the psychiatric report of Dr Cornish dated 21 January 2020, which
states:

"We spoke about the support available, in particular Mr [N]'s parents. He
reported that if he were compelled to return to Cameroon then he would have
to live with them. Although they are aware of his history of mental health
problems, he reported that they have little understanding of psychiatric
illness and believe that his mental health problems arise as he is cursed
or because of witchcraft.  Again, I cannot confirm this although I would
share concerns about how effective interventions would be if he were to
become mentally unwell in Cameroon. I note that in the UK police
intervention, mental health law and the use of quiet containing
environments such as psychiatric intensive care units have been required.
His behaviour when unwell such as disinhibition, grandiosity, aggression
and hostility may well lead to him being subject to ill-treatment in
Cameroon."

14.  Mr Holt submitted that the judge also failed to consider how the
Appellant would be treated by the community in Cameroon and he referred me
to page 35 of the Appellant's supplementary bundle, the country expert
report from John Birchall dated 11 February 2020.  In particular, he relied
on the following paragraph:

"I have witnessed ridicule, constant harassment and even violence against
someone behaving in ways which in the United Kingdom would be seen as in
need of immediate specialist help. Those treating people in such ways are
simply applying their beliefs, juju, which accepts that people behaving as
Mr [N] might are possessed of spirits and they are feared.  Someone
behaving as Mr [N] can behave and has done when ill are thought to be
possessed and are treated as mad and not wanted in public places."

15.  Mr Holt submitted that people behaving as the Appellant would on
return in the event of a relapse might be perceived as possessed of
spirits. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had only considered whether the
Appellant was at risk of relapse and the availability of treatment was not
causative. At [23] the judge failed to consider the Appellant's behaviour
in the event of a relapse and reference to the comparative risk of relapse
played no part in any such assessment. In the UK the Appellant would be
hospitalised whereas in Cameroon he would be ejected from society at the
very least. The Appellant would be subject to ill-treatment and it was
irrelevant that a relapse was as likely to occur in the UK. At [24] the
judge failed to deal with how Cameroon society would treat the Appellant.
The judge only looked at what the Appellant's father would do. The judge
did not assess the likely reaction of Cameroon society and this was a
fundamental part of the Appellant's case. The assessment of very
significant obstacles to integration was unlawful and the judge failed to
give lawful reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim.

16.  Ms Everett submitted that there was no material error of law. The
suitability assessment was carried out on the basis that the Appellant's
presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good. It was not limited
to whether the Appellant posed a risk of harm. There was no suggestion that
the Appellant's presence on the sex offenders' register was sufficient to
satisfy paragraph S-LTR.1.6. There was no dispute as to why the Appellant
was on the sex offences' register and the facts of his criminal offence
were known. The Respondent's conclusion that the Appellant did not satisfy
the suitability requirements and the reasons for this were not disputed and
the judge accepted the Respondent's position. The presence on the sex
offenders register was relevant because it was a requirement imposed for
the safety of others. The judge's reasons for finding the Appellant did not
satisfy the suitability requirements were adequate.

17.  In any event, if the judge was wrong on suitability, she went on to
consider very significant obstacles to integration This was a high
threshold and the judge had considered all relevant factors at [22] to
[24].  The submission that the judge had failed to consider how the
Appellant's condition manifested itself and how Cameroonian society would
react to his behaviour was not made out. The judge was aware of the
Appellant's behaviour and found that the Appellant's father would be able
to help and support him. The judge looked at the support available to the
Appellant should he return. On the evidence before the judge he would not
be subjected to traditional medicine and, given that there was medical
treatment available, the Appellant had family to enable him to access it.
There were no very significant obstacles to integration and no error of law
in the judge's decision.

18.  In response, Mr Holt submitted that the only conduct relevant to
suitability was a sexual offence. The Appellant received a 24 month
community psychiatric order and therefore his offending was limited to his
psychiatric presentation. Without more this was not conduct or character
that was usually relied on in paragraph S-LTR.1.6. The offending behaviour
was the direct product of the Appellant's illness and that was not
sufficient to exclude somebody from the UK. The Appellant was given
treatment and not imprisoned. Even if the sex offenders' register showed
the Appellant was a threat, this was not sufficient to conclude that the
suitability requirements were not met. The judge's conclusions were
unlawful and without basis for why his presence was not conducive to the
public good. The judge had given insufficient reasons for finding the
Appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good.

19.  In relation to integration, Mr Holt submitted that the judge had
looked at support from the Appellant's father and availability of
treatment. She had not said that they were protective factors which meant
that the Appellant would not be subject to ill-treatment. This finding was
missing, but even if it was present, the judge had failed to refer to the
greater societal risk and therefore her conclusion that there were no very
significant obstacles to integration was unlawful.  The Appellant would be
shunned in a way that he could not participate in society and therefore the
refusal of leave engaged the Appellant's Article 8 rights. I asked if there
was any challenge to the judge's finding in relation to Article 8 outside
the Immigration Rules and Mr Holt indicated there was not.


Conclusions and Reasons

20.  The judge considered the Appellant's submission that the offence was
committed during a period of mental illness and therefore he was not an
ongoing threat but concluded that, notwithstanding the community
psychiatric treatment order, the Appellant was still placed on the sexual
offences' register for a period of five years and this was sufficient to
support the finding that the Appellant's presence in the UK was not
conducive to the public good.  The Appellant did not dispute his actions
which led to that criminal conviction or the fact that he was placed on the
sexual offenders' register. On the facts, it was open to the judge to find
that the suitability requirements were not met.

21.  In any event, any error in relation to suitability was not material
because the judge went on to consider very significant obstacles to
integration. It is quite clear from [21] that the judge properly directed
herself on the test for very significant obstacles to integration as set
out in Kamara. The judge applied that test at [22] to [24]. The judge's
finding that the Appellant could access treatment in Cameroon for his
bipolar disorder and that he would receive support from his father and
relatives was not challenged in the grounds of appeal or in submissions
before me. Mr Holt's challenge was based on the judge's failure to consider
the Appellant's behaviour when he relapsed and how that behaviour would be
treated by the Cameroon community.

22.  I am satisfied from [9] that the judge took into account the
consultant forensic psychiatric report of Dr Cornish and was aware of the
Appellant's behaviour in the event of relapse. The judge specifically
refers to the Appellant's behaviour as described in paragraph 74 at the end
of [9], namely disinhibition, grandiosity, aggression and hostility. I am
satisfied from [10] that the judge also took into account the country
expert report of John Birchall and of the conditions present in Cameroon.
23.  Accordingly, I am not persuaded by Mr Holt's submission that the judge
failed to consider how the Appellant's relapse would manifest itself and
that this would lead to ill-treatment on the basis that he would be
considered to be possessed by spirits and mad. The judge found that the
Appellant would not be subject to traditional beliefs and that there was no
risk that his behaviour when unwell would attract adverse attention from
the community because he would have the emotional and physical support from
his parents and sister and the assistance of his family to access
treatment.

24.  I find that there was no error of law in the judge's assessment of
very significant obstacles to integration. It is apparent that the judge
identified protective factors at [24] which would allow the Appellant to
operate on a day-to-day basis, participate in society and he would not be
at risk of being shunned by the Cameroon community.

25.  In any event, this is a human rights appeal and there was no challenge
to the Article 8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules. The judge took
into account all relevant evidence and in particular the Appellant's mental
health condition and her conclusion that this did not amount to exceptional
circumstances sufficient to outweigh the public interest was open to her on
the evidence before her. On the facts, the refusal of leave to remain was
proportionate. There was no material error of law in the judge's decision
dated 8 April 2020. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 21 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 21 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
