
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18188/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2nd August 2019                 |On 28th August 2019                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  Ms K V P
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Louis Kennedy
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, an Indian national born on 17th August 2009, and therefore a
minor, appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands,
who in a decision promulgated on 31st May 2019 dismissed the appellant's
human rights appeal.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the immigration history of the
matter.  The parent and litigation friend of the appellant came to the UK
on 11th January 2007 to study.

The appellant was born in the United Kingdom on 17th August 2009.  She is
presently studying at Barham Primary School in Wembley, London.  Her
application for leave to remain as a dependant of a student was granted
until 31st December 2010 but an application for an extension of that was
refused on 21st February 2013 and on 2nd August 2013 her application as the
dependant of her father on human rights grounds was also refused.  On 11th
October 2014 she was served with a notice concerning her removal and she
lodged an appeal on 13th November 2014 which was dismissed on 26th August
2015.  She was appeal rights exhausted on 28th January 2016 but did not
relocate from the United Kingdom.  She was served with further notice of
removal but rather than leaving the United Kingdom submitted a further
application on family and private life grounds which was refused on 29th
August 2017.  An appeal was lodged on 13th September which was withdrawn
and she became appeal rights exhausted from that date.  The present
application was made on 16th March 2018.

The judge noted that there had been a previous hearing of this appeal which
mistakenly dealt with the appeal without consideration of the appellant's
bundle and a rehearing was ordered de novo and came before First-tier
Tribunal Judge Rowlands, whose findings were as follows:

"13.  I have considered all of the evidence in the case including that to
which I do not specifically refer and reached the following conclusion.
The facts are simple and uncontested.  The Appellant is a nine-year-old
girl who has lived in the United Kingdom all her life.  To begin with she
had leave to remain here as the dependant of her father who had a student
visa but they have all i.e. her and her parents been without leave since
2010.  They have been served several times with removal notices.

14.   Her father's evidence about her schooling is supported by letters and
school reports.  I am satisfied that she is now attending primary school
having previously attended nursery school.  I don't doubt that she has made
school friends in her time and that she would miss them if she moved to
India.  She is making expected progress at school.  She is also taking part
in extra curricular activities which are linked to her culture such as Hare
Krishna and Indian Classical dance.  She does maintain links to Indian
culture.

15.   I have noted the letter for the Principle of the school in Visnagar
but do not accept that this is representative of all schools in India.  I
have also noted that in her application at Q10.4 it is stated that she
speaks English and Gujarati.  I believe that the parents are, with respect,
deliberately minimising her abilities.  The affidavits from both sets of
grandparents do not seriously reflect the situation.  They say they cannot
look after her but the suggestion that she would be removed alone is
ridiculous.  If removed it would be with her parents neither of whom have
leave either.

16.   I do not believe that, if this family were to emigrate to India
voluntarily, there would be a huge protest because of her welfare.  There
is a functioning education system there as indicated by her own father's
qualifications.  The welfare of any child is best served by being with
their parents and wider family amongst their cultural peers.  She is young
enough to adjust and pick up the language quickly even more than she
already does, children do so all the time when their families relocate.
The comments from the doctor are generalised, he hasn't even seen the
Appellant.  I believe there is no medical reason why she could not relocate
to India.  I am satisfied that her best interests lie in living with her
parents in their home country, India."

The application for permission to appeal set out the following.

The previous determination seemingly attached adverse weight to the
immigration history of the appellants and classed them as buying time when
there was no evidence to support such a finding.  The same conclusion has
been reached, in the present determination, albeit in less robust terms.
The judge seems to have overlooked the established case law in relation to
Section 117B(6).

The judge made a misdirection in law when applying the guidance in the
relevant authorities.  There was no consideration set out of the principles
in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and Treebhawon and others (section
117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 and PD and Others (conjoined family claims) Sri
Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108.  Nor had the judge considered AB (Jamaica) and
Another [2019] EWCA Civ 661 and JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK)
Turkey [2019] UKUT 72.  JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey
[2019] UKUT 72.  The judge's findings at paragraphs 13 to 15 were in
conflict with the guidance set out in recent authorities regarding
qualifying children.  "It is not in dispute that the appellant is a
qualified person as a result of residing in the UK for seven years."  The
judge set out important findings about the appellant's education and
private life but failed to take them into account and his conclusions were
muddled.  For example, there was no consideration of the current stage of
academics and the importance of her preparations for her next stage of her
academic career.  "There is reference to a primary school.  This is not
correct considering there was oral evidence given in relation to the
forthcoming 11 Plus exams and a secondary school had been selected."

MA (Pakistan) set out the proper staged test to assess Article 8 and the
judge was required to look closely at the appellant's circumstances.  The
judge significantly erred by stating that the parents are "deliberately
minimising her abilities".  The findings were difficult to follow in the
light of the established case law.

The appellant herself had provided a letter in support of her appeal which
was a handwritten note and was highlighted as an important omission when
considering procedural fairness and the judge failed to consider that.  The
father gave evidence and his oral testimony is set out in the
determination.  There was no formal assessment of his credibility.

As set out in PD (Sri Lanka),

"the longer the child has resided in the UK the more the balance will swing
in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK and
strong reasons will be required in order to refuse a case with continuous
UK residence of more than seven years".

It was submitted that the judge erred in trying to find a special or
exceptional reason to justify the appellant in remaining in the United
Kingdom.  There was no need to do so.  The test was whether the appellant
could reasonably be expected to leave the UK.  As held in JG, the court
held that Section 117B(6)(b) is a statutory question which cannot be
ignored or glossed over and the provision "is engaged whether the child
will or will not in fact or practice leave the UK."  The question is
whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  Even if the
answer is obvious the question still needs to be asked.

In AB (Jamaica) the court found the immigration history of the parent to be
irrelevant and therefore it was not reasonable to expect the applicant to
leave the country.  The judge had not properly followed MA (Pakistan).  The
appellant and her family did not have a poor immigration history.  The
reason given by the judge is that the appellant had not left the UK and
such a finding was wholly irrational and could not be sustained.  There was
nothing to suggest the appellant had a poor immigration history and this
finding tainted the overall proportionality assessment.  The sins of the
parents in any event should not be visited on the child, Kaur (children's
best interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014.  This held
that the best interests of a child were an integral part of the
proportionality assessment, must be a primary consideration, that it could
be outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations, it was
necessary to have a clear idea of a child's circumstances and child must
not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible.

There was no reference to KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and the judge had not
given adequate findings in relation to important issues.

The Upper Tribunal in Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 confirmed that judges
did not need to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case but must
identify and resolve any conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and
brief terms their reasons.

At the hearing before me Mr Bellara relied on the grounds of appeal and
submitted that the judge had focused on the sins of the parents.  The child
had never been to India and he confirmed that the child would be entering
year 6 of primary school in September, which was the 11 Plus year.  The
judge had failed to address the best interests of the child and had not
taken into account the handwritten note.  There was an error of law and the
matter should be remitted.

Mr Walker submitted that the judge had found that the child was a
qualifying child, the parents' immigration history was poor, and the judge
effectively found that there were powerful reasons for the appellant to
relocate to India.  The judge had looked at the reasonableness of leaving.

Analysis

That the determination was brief does not mean that it falls foul of MK
(duty to give reasons) and indeed Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC); reasons need not be extensive if the
decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by
the judge.  The central issues were addressed.

The judge was well aware of the circumstances of the appellant and it is
implicit in the decision that she was a qualifying child.  Indeed, the
judge acknowledged in the first line of the determination that the
appellant was born in 2009 and that she was 9 years old.

The judge recorded the immigration history at the outset of the
determination which is standard in many decisions; the appellant was
dependent on her parents, that her application for an extension of leave,
which had been previously granted to 31st December 2010, was refused on
21st February 2013.  The immigration history was set out in relation to the
appellant in neutral terms and nowhere in the determination is there any
reference to the appellant's parents as "buying time".  I am not persuaded
that the previous determination, which was set aside, was relied on or even
reference in the findings, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands and has
therefore tainted this decision.  From a careful reading of the
determination it is not evident that the judge has fallen into similar
error.  Simply, the appellant had no further leave after 2013.  The judge
recorded that the appellant had been served with notices of removal in
2014, albeit that it would be the parents who would be served with those
notices, and that permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on human
rights grounds had been refused.

That the judge recorded that the appellant did not leave the United Kingdom
at all could be said to support the position that the child was indeed a
qualifying child as she had remained in the UK for seven years rather than
as criticism.

It is not arguable that the judge failed properly to consider whether it
was reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom, albeit that she
is a qualifying child, and indeed, the judge at paragraph 12 of the
determination, in relation to submissions, notes, "I heard brief
representations on her behalf.  As a qualifying child there are no powerful
reasons for her removal as would be required by the case law.  There were
no compelling adverse reasons either."

The determination demonstrates that the judge considered all of the
evidence in the case, including that to which he did not specifically
refer, and then reached his conclusion.  As pointed out in the grounds of
appeal the judge does not need to refer to every piece of evidence
Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341: judges needed to
resolve the key conflicts in evidence and explain in clear and brief terms
their reasons for preferring one case to the other so parties could
understand why they had lost.  The judge did that.

I do not accept the judge misdirected himself.  He did consider the
reasonableness of the appellant leaving the United Kingdom in its own terms
and concentrating on the child.  That the judge referred to the immigration
history of the parents at the outset does not undermine the overall
findings on reasonableness and does not demonstrate that the judge
misdirected himself by visiting the sins of the parent on the child.  This
can be deduced from the treatment of the evidence.

As acknowledged in the application for permission to appeal, the judge made
important findings about the appellant's education and private life and
other matters including her residence in the UK and there is nothing in the
conclusions of the judge at paragraph 13 onwards which suggests that they
are muddled.  The reference to the primary school is just that because the
child is at primary school and indeed was in year 5 when the judge made the
determination.  The fact that she is going into the final year at her
primary school to do 11 Plus exams does not place her in secondary
education.   As she is not at secondary school and thus there would be no
requirement to consider her as such.  The judge did not consider the case
with regard to the appellant being in the middle of a course of study
because she is not; she is, as he recorded, at primary school.

The findings in this respect are not simply inadequate when considering the
best interests of the qualifying child.  The judge did look closely at the
appellant's circumstances and was entitled on the evidence to find that the
parents were "deliberately minimising her abilities".  The judge set out
the witness statement of the appellant's father, who asserted that she only
had very little connection with India, as follows:

"she has completely adapted with UK system and culture.  The only language
she speaks is English and she is considering this as her mother tongue.
She cannot read or write Gujarati.  Therefore, her literacy in Gujarati is
behind the level expected of a 9 year old in Gujarat State in India.  Thus,
if she was removed and returned to India, she would be behind children of
her age group and thus likely to be put behind several years at school."

As the judge concluded at paragraph 15, and which I have cited above, in
her application at question 10.4 it is specifically stated that the
appellant "speaks English and Gujarati".  It was open to the judge to place
weight on that application, which was filled in by the parents, and to
conclude that parents were deliberately minimising the appellant's
abilities and their evidence as to the reasonableness of the child leaving
was unreliable.  In the circumstances, the judge was entitled to do just
that.   As the judge also refers, the suggestion that the appellant would
be removed alone is "ridiculous".

It was asserted that the judge failed to consider the evidence of the
appellant's own handwritten note.  There is no reference to the note in the
index of the bundle supplied by the appellant's solicitors, nothing in the
file and neither representative could provide me with a copy of the said
handwritten note.  As I have already recorded, the judge alluded to having
considered all the evidence but without a copy of that note provided there
can be no criticism of the judge for having failed to address a matter
which was not on the file and could not be provided to me.

The judge noted the schooling of the child, that she was attending primary
school and that she had made friends and that she would miss them if she
was moved to India and that she was making expected progress at school.
The judge also noted that she was taking part in extra-curricular
activities which are linked to her Indian culture such as the Hare Krishna
and Indian classical dances.  This, again, contradicted the parental
submissions that the appellant had no contact to Indian culture.  The judge
made a clear finding on the best interests of the child that her welfare is
best served by being with the parents and wider family amongst their
cultural peers.  The judge specifically stated she was young enough to
adjust and pick up the language quickly even more than she did already.
There was no medical reason why she could not relocate to England and the
judge concluded and he was entitled to do so that he was satisfied that her
"best interests lie in living with her parents in their home country,
India".  As pointed out in the Secretary of State's refusal the medical
letter provided was not from a registered medical practitioner.

AB (Jamaica) & Anor [2019] EWCA Civ 661 does not specifically assist the
appellant in this case because I am not persuaded that the judge materially
departed from that which Underhill LJ reaffirmed at [59] in MA (Pakistan)
at [36]

         "Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority, I would favour the
         argument of the appellants. The focus on paragraph (b) is solely on
         the child and I see no justification for reading the concept of
         reasonableness so as to include a consideration of the conduct and
         immigration history of the parents as part of an overall analysis
         of the public interest".

KO (Nigeria), which was decided in the Supreme Court considerably after
many of the authorities cited in the grounds, confirms that a child must
not be blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as
the conduct of a parent, and which reflected Zoumbas (paragraph 15 of KO).
KO confirmed at paragraph 17 that the question again was what is reasonable
for the child and that there was nothing in the sub-section (Section
117(6)) to import reference to the conduct of the parent.  KO continues,
however, to state at paragraphs 18 and 19 the following:

"18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems to me
inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the parents, apart
from the relevant provision, are expected to be, since it will normally be
reasonable for the child to be with them.  To that extent the record of the
parents may become indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to
have a right to remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even on
that hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
provision may give the parents a right to remain.  The point was well-
expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH 117:

'22.  In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of whether it is
reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one has to address the
question, 'Why would the child be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In
a case such as this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have
no right to remain in the UK'.  To approach the question in any other way
strips away the context in which the assessment of reasonableness is being
made ...'

19.   He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
considering the "best interests" of children in the context of section 55
of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

'58.  In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
the children must be made on the basis that the facts are as they are in
the real world.  If one parent has no right to remain, but the other parent
does, that is the background against which the assessment is conducted.  If
neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the background against
which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question will be: is
it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to
remain to the country of origin?'"

In effect, the assessment of the judge in this matter was in accordance
with the guidance given in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53; the assessment of
the best interests of the children must be made on the basis that they are
facts as they are in the real world.  Neither of the parents, as the judge
set out, had leave to remain and the ultimate question will be, is it
reasonable to expect the child, in this case the child who was in primary
school with connection to India and being able to speak Gujarati, to follow
the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?

The judge specifically, as identified above, found that there was wider
family in India and that in fact the welfare of any child was best served
by being with their parents and the wider family amongst their cultural
peers.  There were no medical grounds to impede her relocation.

The judge here, however, directed himself appropriately and did
specifically consider the reasonableness of the appellant's expected
removal and separately from that of the appellant's parents' poor
immigration history.  The appellant's best interests were considered from
paragraphs 14 to 16 and the judge noted that 'if removed it would be with
her parents neither of whom have leave either'.  That is not visiting the
'conduct and immigration history of the parents' on the child.

The final reference to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and the powerful
reasons for not granting leave was after rehearsing the best interests of
the child, the reasonableness of her leaving the UK and finally the reality
of the immigration position of the parents.  Simply, the parents only ever
had precarious leave and subsequently no leave at all.

I find that the decision of Judge Rowlands contains no material error of
law and as such shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law and the decision  shall  stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 22nd August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
