
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19659/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                          Miss Boluwatife Oyebanjo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore, instructed by Aminu Aminu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

No anonymity direction was made as none was requested.

This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Raymond promulgated 2 May 2019 dismissing her appeal against the
decision of the Secretary of State dated 31 August 2018 to refuse her
application made on 26 May 2018 for entry clearance as a child of a person
settled in the UK.

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan granted permission on 1 August 2019,
setting out a number of directions in relation to the issues raised in the
grounds.  The grounds themselves are unhelpfully not paginated or paragraph-
numbered and they are somewhat confused.  As Judge O'Callaghan noted, the
author of the grounds appears to confuse the requirement that there be an
error of law with an issue of the appeal ought to be granted "in the
interests of justice."  The grounds appear to seek to rely on evidence that
was not put before the First-tier Tribunal.

Judge Raymond dealt with this case on the papers, at the express request of
the appellant and therefore could only decide the appeal on the documentary
information presented on the appellant's behalf.  The judge pointed out
that whilst there was a DNA report, it was incomplete, missing copies of
the proof of identity which would have been used to demonstrate that the
samples compared are between the relevant persons.  In the circumstances,
very little weight could be given to a report that was absent that evidence
of identity.

Also missing in terms of documentary evidence was proof that the guardian
was deceased.  Whilst Judge O'Callaghan noted that the Entry Clearance
Manager may have had the death certificate, it is not at all clear that
that document was put before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was for that
reason that, when granting permission, Judge O'Callaghan directed a
solicitor from the appellant's representatives to file and serve a witness
statement explaining why copies of the documents now relied on such as the
death certificate were not filed with the First-tier Tribunal under
circumstances where it was apparent several weeks before the hearing that
they had not been placed within the Entry Clearance Officer's bundle. Judge
O'Callaghan also directed the appellant to refile the bundle that had been
relied upon in the First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst an appellant's bundle has
been submitted, under cover of letter dated 27 August 2019, I am not
satisfied that this was the bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal.
 This bundle comprises 73 pages, indexed and paginated, but looking at the
Tribunal's case file itself, it very much appears as though there was no
actual bundle put before the First-tier Tribunal because the case file
simply contains a number of loose documents, unpaginated, unindexed and not
including either the original of the death certificate or the missing DNA
identity documents.  It is clear that the information put before the First-
tier Tribunal was not that now relied upon by the appellant.

The statement from the solicitor dated 6 September says as they were not
involved in the preparation of the paper appeal, they cannot say why some
of the documents now relied on were not before the First-tier Tribunal.  It
is not positively asserted that the documents were put before the Tribunal;
the fourth paragraph of that statement says it is the sponsor's
explanation, as contained in his witness statement, that he gave all his
documents to his friend who at the time was helping him prepare his appeal.
 He believed that his friend submitted all the documents to the First-tier
Tribunal.  I am afraid that evidence is entirely adequate to demonstrate
that the documents mentioned were in fact submitted to the Tribunal.

Issue was taken that the judge made an error as to how the sponsor came to
acquire his status in the UK.  The judge suggested at paragraph 6 that the
sponsor had arrived in the UK in March of 2008 before achieving residency
in December 2016.  The judge thought that suggested he achieved permanent
residency as a result of overstaying for twenty years.  It is said that
that is not the case; he obtained his status through being a family member
of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.  There is no merit
in the ground that this adversely affected the rest of the judge's
findings.  I accede to the submission of Mr Avery that the error, if it is
such, is not material to the determination of the issues in the appeal.
There is no evidence that this observation influenced any other part of the
decision.

The grounds also challenge the burden and standard of proof applied by the
judge, suggesting that the judge did not apply the correct standard of
proof.  The ground is confused and, in my view, unarguable.  There is
nothing to suggest that the judge applied an incorrect standard and burden
of proof.

The final issue is one of sole responsibility.  The judge concluded on the
limited evidence that was before him that even if the other problems in
relation to documents had not taken place, the judge could not be satisfied
that on the evidence there was sufficient evidence of sole responsibility.
Whilst the decision is fairly brief in relation to that issue, the judge
noted the lack of any satisfactory evidence of contact between the sponsor
and the alleged long-term carer, and the lack of any direct evidence to
show that the sponsor had been responsible for things such as the school
fees or the hospital admission, and there was no evidence in relation to
the recipient of the funds, which were themselves "episodic," as the judge
described them.  Taken together, the judge concluded that the evidence was
not of sufficient weight to establish on the balance of probabilities that
the sponsor did have sole responsibility for the appellant. On considering
the limited evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, I find that the judge
was entitled to and justified by cogent reasoning the conclusion that sole
responsibility had been made out on the balance of probabilities.

As stated above, this case has been poorly prepared throughout, from the
application through to the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and, despite
the valiant efforts of Ms Gore to persuade me to the contrary, I am not
satisfied that there is any material error of law in the decision and
therefore the decision will stand as made. Rather than appealing to the
Upper Tribunal, the appellant would have been better served to have
resubmitted her application, taking care to ensure that all the correct
evidence was with the application and if refused any appeal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error of law such as to require it to be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal remains
dismissed.








                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  9 September 2019



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no order for costs, having dismissed the appeal.








                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  9 September 2019

