
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20291/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2021                          |On 04 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Kamran Khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Singh of Shams Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He appealed to a Judge of
the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 25 November
2019 refusing an application for leave to remain made on the basis of
family life with his partner.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 3 January 2017 on a Tier 4
visa, with leave to remain as a student until 19 September 2019.  On 18
September 2019 he made the application, the refusal of which was the
subject of the appeal before the judge.

3.   The appellant and his sponsor, Mrs Bibi, had a nikah ceremony on 6
September 2019 and civil marriage on 1 October 2019.

4.   Mrs Bibi has two children by a previous marriage.  Her first husband
died on 10 September 2006.  The children were born respectively on 9 March
2002 and 20 October 2003.  Mrs Bibi had come to the United Kingdom in 2001.
 She had gone back to Pakistan in 2017 to 2018 with the children.

5.   The respondent did not accept that the marriage was genuine and
subsisting.  The judge considered the evidence carefully and accepted that
there was uncontroverted evidence that the appellant and the sponsor had
married legally and religiously, there was evidence before her that they
cohabited and they had begun to share financial commitments.  She observed
that she had little supporting evidence as to the appellant's relationship
with the sponsor's children.  In that regard she also referred, at
paragraph 63, to the fact that though the appellant acted as stepfather to
the children his level of parenting to those children, especially bearing
in mind their ages of 16 and 17 at the time of the hearing, was not clearly
identified in the evidence.  She said that they were independent for most
purposes and they had only lived as a family with the appellant from
September 2019.  The hearing took place on 17 February 2020.  The judge
made the point that there was no information from the children's school
about the appellant's involvement with the children.  Subsequently at
paragraph 50 she noted that the children were British, the sponsor had sole
legal responsibility for them, and they had always lived with their mother
and that would promote their best interests.  She remarked that the
children were rapidly approaching adulthood and might soon be making their
own decision as to where they were located or relocated.  They were
qualifying children for the purposes of the proportionality assessment and
should not be expected to relocate unless it was reasonable to expect them
to do so.

6.   The judge went on to say that the sponsor had a choice as to whether
she wished to remain in the United Kingdom or relocate on a permanent or
temporary basis to Pakistan.  She had already spent time in Pakistan on a
temporary basis and had family there.  The judge remarked that it was
highly likely that for the next couple of years the sponsor's children
would remain with her, wherever she chose to live.  The decision to leave
the United Kingdom and for what period would be one for her.  It would not
be unreasonable for her to go to Pakistan or for the children to join her
there considering her familiarity with that country and her support there.
The judge went on to say that whilst the best interests of the children
were a primary consideration, their relationship with the appellant was a
brief one and noting their ages they were unlikely to be looking for
significant emotional support from the appellant.  The judge was not
satisfied that the appellant's removal to Pakistan would greatly impact on
the sponsor's children or lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences for
them.  Earlier the judge had referred to the fact that though the appellant
was not the children's biological father this did not prevent him from
having a parental relationship with them, quoting the decision of the Upper
Tribunal in RK [2016] UKUT 00031.  The appellant had said in his
application form that he helped the children with their homework.  He had
not placed any supporting evidence before the judge about their
relationship and the judge noted that the relationship only really began in
September 2019.  She went on to identify the test of whether a person who
was not a biological parent was in a "parental relationship" with a child
for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 depended on the individual's circumstances and whether the
role that individual played established that he or she had "stepped into
the shoes" of a parent.  The judge also considered SR [2018] UKUT 00334
where it was held that a parent who was unable to demonstrate for the
purposes of the Immigration Rules that they had been taking an active role
in a child's upbringing might still have a genuine and subsisting parental
relationship with them as long as the relationship involved an element of
direct parental care.

7.   In determining her proportionality assessment the judge concluded that
the public interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration
control outweighed the Article 8 rights of the appellant and the sponsor.
She said that there was little evidence that the appellant had a
significant private life and his family life had been cultivated at a time
when his status in the UK was precarious.  He did not meet the requirements
of the Rules and there was little to persuade her that the respondent's
decision would have unduly harsh consequences.  Clearly this refusal might
lead to a separation but as a natural consequence of that decision, that in
itself was not exceptional or unusual.  The appeal was accordingly
dismissed.

8.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal on the basis first that the judge had not said whether on the
evidence before her she accepted or rejected the claim that the appellant
had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the children and
secondly, in concluding that she was not satisfied that the appellant's
removal to Pakistan would greatly impact on the children or lead to
unjustifiably harsh consequences for them, she had not answered the
question whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the
United Kingdom.  Permission to appeal was limited to those matters and
their impact on the judge's assessment of proportionality.

9.   The respondent put in two separate Rule 24 responses, in both of which
it was argued that the judge had not erred in law and that the decision
should be maintained.

10.  In his submissions Mr Singh relied on what had been said by the Upper
Tribunal Judge who granted permission.  He also placed reliance on the
grounds.  There were witness statements from the appellant and his partner.
 The appellant had confirmed that he shared responsibility for the children
after their father had died and the sponsor had also said this.  The judge
had said there was no supporting evidence placed before her about the
appellant's relationship with the children.  She had set out the tests but
had not carried out the necessary investigation required as set out in SR.

11.  As regards the reasonableness of relocation for the children, the
judge had set out the test and noted that they were qualifying children but
did not set out what the assessment was to make it reasonable for the
children to join the appellant in Pakistan.  She did not say whether it
would be unduly harsh.  The children had both been born and brought up in
the United Kingdom.  The fact of their visit to Pakistan in 2016 did not
justify permanent relocation.  The judge had not referred to section 55 and
the need to consider and take into account the best interests of the
children.

12.  In his submissions Mr Melvin relied on the two Rule 24 responses.  As
the judge had identified, the relationship between the appellant and the
children was very short in nature.  He had only been living at their house
for a short number of months at the time of the hearing.  The judge had
noted the ages of the children and the fact that they were near adulthood
and increasingly independent.  She observed at paragraph 47 that there was
no supporting evidence about the relationship, including no written
statement from either of the children.  The judge had correctly directed
herself with regard to the guidance in RK and SR.  Her finding could only
be read one way.  It was implicit that the appellant was found not to have
discharged the burden of proof that he was in a subsisting parental
relationship with the children given the reference to a lack of evidence to
support such a finding.  It was necessary to find that there was a
subsisting relationship and that it was not reasonable to expect the
children to leave the United Kingdom, in the test under section 117B(6).
There were ample references by the judge to conclude as she did about the
reasonableness of the whole family relocating to Pakistan.  It was a matter
for evidence to be put in and there was little about reasonableness.  The
judge had acted lawfully in her findings.  Her decision should be upheld.

13.  By way of reply Mr Singh relied on his original submissions.  He
argued that there was a parental responsibility and there was the issue
concerning the reasonableness of the children moving to Pakistan.  The
judge had not applied the case law properly and that was necessary for the
decision to be upheld.

14.  I reserved my decision.

15.  In essence the challenge to the judge's decision, on the basis of the
grant of permission, comes down to whether or not the judge erred in law in
her application of paragraph 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002, which states as follows:

"(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where -

(a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and

(b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom."

16.  It is clear that these are cumulative requirements.  As a consequence,
if a person does not satisfy the requirement in section 117B(6)(a), then
the element in (b) is essentially redundant.

17.  As noted above, the judge quoted the relevant guidance from RK and SR
as regards the tests for a parental relationship for the purposes of the
subsection.  The judge observed at paragraph 36 of her decision that she
had little supporting evidence as to the appellant's relationship with the
sponsor's children.  In his witness statement the appellant said at
paragraph 11 that after getting to know each other as a couple and as a
family with his now stepchildren they happily agreed to marry each other
with their children and the families' blessing.  He went on to refer to the
fact that he had established a family life together in the UK with his
spouse and stepchildren and he was the only father figure in their life as
their biological father had passed away.

18.  Essentially the same points were made in essentially the same wording
in the witness statement of Mrs Bibi.

19.  The judge was, in my view, entitled to say that she had little
supporting evidence as to the appellant's relationship with the sponsor's
children.  It is not without relevance to note that there was no evidence
from the children themselves.

20.  The judge went on to say that whilst the appellant acted as a
stepfather to his 16 and 17 year old stepdaughters, his level of parenting
to those children, especially noting their ages, was not clearly identified
in the evidence.  They were independent for most purposes and had only
lived as a family with the appellant from September 2019.  There was no
information from the children's school about the appellant's involvement
with them.  She also said, at paragraph 47, having set out the test in RK,
that the appellant had said in his application form that he helped the
children with their homework.  She said that he had not placed any
supporting evidence before her about their relationship which had only
really begun in September 2019.  She noted the absence of any photographs
or any other evidence of the family enjoying activities together.

21.  It is argued on behalf of the respondent that what the judge found
could only be read as an implicit finding that the appellant had not
discharged the burden of proof in establishing that he was in a genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with the children, bearing in mind the
express reference twice to a lack of evidence to support such a finding.

22.  Not without some hesitation, I have concluded that on balance the
arguments of the appellant are to be preferred in this regard.  The judge
was required to make a clear finding in this regard and although what she
said came close to doing so, she did not, as was noted in the grant of
permission, state whether she accepted or rejected the claim that the
appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the
children.  As a consequence I find that the judge erred in law in that
element of her evaluation of the claim.
23.  I also consider that she erred with regard to the issue whether or not
it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.
The judge referred to the correct test at the end of paragraph 50, but her
conclusion at the end of paragraph 51 that she was not satisfied that the
appellant's removal to Pakistan would greatly impact on the sponsor's
children or lead to unjustifiably harsh consequences to them did not apply
the correct test.  Though she was aware of the fact that the children were
British citizens and had been born and brought up in the United Kingdom,
there was no assessment of the reasonableness of expecting the children to
leave the United Kingdom.  Certainly earlier in the paragraph the judge
said that, considering the sponsor's familiarity with Pakistan and the
support within that country it would not be unreasonable for her to live
there or for her children to join her in Pakistan, but that was essentially
the context of reasonableness in regard to the sponsor, and failed to give
the appropriate consideration to the interests of the children as a
separate entity.

24.  As a consequence I consider that the errors of law contended for in
this case are made out.  The degree of re-assessment of the claim that will
have to be made is such that it will have to be done in the First-tier
Tribunal.  The judge's finding at paragraph 36 that the marriage is genuine
and subsisting is preserved.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 3 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



