
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21539/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 10 January 2019                   |On 25 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     YZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson, Counsel, instructed by AGI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

UPON hearing  from  Mr  Timson  for  the  appellant  and  Mr.  Tan  for  the
respondent

AND UPON considering the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Thorne  dated
17 July 2017 dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision of 24 August 2016 refusing the appellant's human rights claim;  the
appellant's grounds of appeal dated  16  January  2018;  and  the  grant  of
permission to appeal dated 10 October 2018

AND UPON it being agreed between the parties, following KO (Nigeria)  &  Ors
v SSHD (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53, that in placing  significant  weight  on
the appellant's poor immigration history, when  determining  whether,  under
s.116B(6)  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  it  would  be
reasonable to expect the appellant's son YCL to leave  the  United  Kingdom,
the judge erred in law

AND UPON it being agreed between  the  parties  that  the  judge's  decision
should be set aside

AND UPON the respondent indicating that  the  appellant's  evidence  in  the
appeal is unchallenged

AND UPON it being recorded that YCL is now registered as a British Citizen

AND UPON the respondent  also  indicating  that  for  the  purposes  of  the
remaking of the decision, the respondent's position is now that it would  be
unreasonable for YCL to be expected to leave the United  Kingdom,  and  that
the public interest does not therefore require the appellant's removal  from
the United Kingdom

AND UPON this Tribunal finding that it is appropriate to make such an order

IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, BY CONSENT, UNDER RULE 39, TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008, THAT:

1     The decision of the judge is set aside

2     The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed:     Date: 19.4.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns the interests of a minor  child.  Unless  and until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellants
and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Date: 19.4.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

