
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/22900/2018
                                                HU/22904/2018, HU/22907/2018
                                                HU/22911/2018, HU/22917/2018
                                                               HU/22922/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2019                  |On 15 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                   Mrs S B
                                   Mr A H
                                 Master H A
                                 Master R A
                                  Miss A A
                                  Miss A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Otchie, instructed by Burney Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellants' appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Roots promulgated on 18 June 2019 dismissing their appeals against
the decision of the Secretary of State dated 25 October 2018 rejecting
their applications made on 12 December 2017 for leave to remain on human
rights grounds.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal on 16
September 2019, considering it arguable that the judge has set out an
insufficient analysis of the degree of integration attained by the two
older children across the social, educational and cultural spectrum of the
United Kingdom in assessing the impact of deracination and the issues
relating to reintegration.  Judge Hollingworth considered it arguable that
the application of Section 55 has been affected and the proportionality
exercise in considering whether there would be a breach of Article 8
outside the Rules has also been affected.

Shortly prior to the hearing, the appellant sought an adjournment on the
basis that she was unwell and submitted a doctor's certificate stating that
she was suffering from joint pains and was having difficulty in walking.
The certificate is to the effect she was not fit for work but makes no
mention of attending court. No diagnosis nor prognosis is offered and it is
not clear when she would be fit. The document was entirely unsatisfactory
and insufficient to justify adjourning the appeal, which has been listed
for some time. She has had ample time to prepare for the hearing and to
give instructions. I noted that it was not clear that the appellant would
need to give evidence as the hearing was listed initially for an error of
law. I refused the application on the basis that, if necessary, a further
application could be made, depending on the outcome of the error of law
hearing. At the hearing, the second appellant did attend. The adjournment
application was not renewed and I considered it consistent with the
overriding objectives to deal with cases fairly and justly to proceed with
the hearing.

For the reasons I have set out below, I find there was no error of law in
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to be set
aside.

It was agreed at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing that the main issue
was Article 8 family and private life and the best interests of the
children.  The appellants' representative, Mr Aslam, suggested that
paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was the starting point for the parents and it was
agreed at the outset of the appeal that the children cannot meet that
provision, as they had been in the UK less than seven years at the date of
the application.

There was no argument that the appellants met the requirements of Appendix
FM of the Immigration Rules.  The appeal was purely on human rights grounds
outside the Rules and it would appear that much of the argument before the
First-tier Tribunal centred on Article 8 ECHR.  The judge set out the
relevant provisions, including paragraph 276ADE and Section 117B of the
2002 Act, from paragraph 7 of the decision.  As the children had all lived
in the UK less than seven years, they did not qualify under the provisions
of paragraph 276ADE.

At the outset of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal Mr Otchie sought to argue
that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had failed to consider the issue
of very significant obstacles to integration under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).
 Whilst the judge has set that provision out at paragraph 7 of the
decision, it does not appear from the judge's summary of the submissions
and the discussion at the appeal that it was ever argued substantively that
there were very significant obstacles to the children's integration in
Pakistan.  According to paragraph 30 of the decision, the appellants'
representative's submissions turned on the children's best interests and
their integration in the UK.  There is no reference to any submissions or
argument that there would be very significant obstacles in relation to the
children. At paragraph 29 of the decision the judge noted the first and
second appellants had raised arguments that there would be very significant
obstacles to their integration into Pakistan.  However, the judge recorded
that this was not pursued with any real vigour at the hearing and provided
cogent reasons there why there were not very significant obstacles,
particularly given the length of time that they lived in Pakistan and their
employment there. It does not appear to have been argued that there were
very significant obstacles to the children's integration in Pakistan.

Mr Otchie focussed on the question of the extent of integration of the two
older boys, who were then not yet 7 at the date of the application.
However, notwithstanding Mr Otchie's submissions, it is clear from a
reading of the decision that the question of the children's integration in
the UK was adequately addressed under the heading 'best interests of the
children'.

With regard to the best interests of the children, the judge dealt with
this at paragraph 30 and it is clear there that Mr Aslam's submissions
turned on their best interests and their integration.  Submissions were
made and taken into account in relation to their schooling, their speaking
of English at school and at home, and the fact that the children are not
fluent in their native language.  The judge noted all relevant facts,
including that the youngest child were born in the UK but the two older
children came to the UK, when they were aged just over 4 years, and that
they have adapted well.  The judge addressed the question of language at
paragraph 32 and at paragraph 33 did not accept that the children would
necessarily have to go into private education on return to Pakistan, there
being no evidence to support that assertion.

The judge accepted that there was likely to be some effect on the
children's education and development by returning to Pakistan.  He accepted
that they had been in the English educational system for quite some time
and it was only to be expected that they will have built up their private
lives, as it evidenced from the documents.  However, the judge found that
none of that was sufficient to establish that their best interests are to
remain in the UK.  What he found was that the best interests are to remain
with their parents and, all things being equal, this would have been to
remain in the UK, but that was not the case.

Essentially, applying the principles of Agyarko, the judge pointed out the
parents have no right to remain in the United Kingdom and that is the
starting point.  If this had been the case of the seven year threshold
being crossed, then there would have been the reasonableness test which
applies under Section 117B and also paragraph 276ADE, but that was not this
case. Even if it was this case, the starting point was that the assessment
of reasonableness of expecting the children to leave the UK had to be
assessed in the 'real world' and that is that the parents had no right to
remain in the United Kingdom, and that the children would return as a
family unit with their parents to Pakistan, and have the support of their
parents there.  As stated above, at paragraph 33 the judge accepted there
would be some effect on the children's education and development but he was
not satisfied that there was evidence to show that this would be other than
relatively short-term and he was confident it would eventually be overcome
with love, attention and support of the parents.

At paragraph 34 the judge accepted that the family as a whole may well find
it challenging and difficult to settle in Pakistan.  It was pointed out
that they may well have found it considerably easier had they returned in
April 2017, when the children were two years younger and when the first
appellant had an offer of a job in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which
he had turned down because he wanted to stay in the UK.  At paragraph 35
the judge accepted the respondent's submission that there is no obligation
to respect the appellants' choice of where they would like to live; they
had no legitimate expectation of being able to settle with their children
in the UK.

It follows that leave can be granted outside of the Rules under Article 8
only if there are compelling circumstances, exceptionally, sufficient to
make the decision disproportionate on the basis that it would create
unjustifiably harsh consequences for any or all of the appellants.  As the
judge has pointed out at paragraph 36, this family accepted that they knew
in 2013 that they were coming to the United Kingdom for a temporary period
based on the first appellant's work for the embassy, and they knew that she
might have to leave at the end of that period.

The judge concluded at paragraph 37 that it was not unjustifiably harsh to
require them to return to Pakistan.  Of course, they preferred to stay in
the United Kingdom, but the judge concluded, having assessed the evidence
as a whole, that their wishes did not outweigh the public interest in
maintaining immigration control.  The judge also pointed out the statutory
factors arising from Section 117B that their immigration status was
precarious and therefore in the proportionality balancing exercise little
weight should be given to the private life of any of the appellants
established in the United Kingdom.

At paragraph 38 the judge pointed out that the children are not qualifying
children but did accept that the older two children had been in the UK for
nearly six and a half years and that period would shortly become seven
years, when they would then become qualifying children.  Of course, they
could make fresh applications at that point but what had to be considered
was whether the children met the requirements of the Rules and if not,
whether the decision was proportionate.

I find, looking at the decision as a whole, the judge has assessed all the
relevant circumstances.  He has assessed the best interests of the
children.  When pressed on the matter, Mr Otchie was unable to point to any
specific matter the judge had not addressed. In reality, the submissions
and the grounds in this case that there was an "insufficient analysis of
the evidence" amounts to no more than a disagreement with the reasoning of
the judge and the findings and conclusions.

In the circumstances, I find no error of law in this decision.  The judge
accepted at paragraph 34 that the family as a whole may well find it
challenging to settle in Pakistan but there is nothing sufficient in their
circumstances to outweigh the public interest in the proportionality
balancing exercise, so that they, or any of them, should be allowed to
remain, even taking into account the degree of integration of the children
and in particular the two elder boys.

Decision

I find no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and the appeal of each
appellant remain dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
                       [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated                  13 November 2019



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.
                       [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                  Dated                  13 November 2019


