
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/23534/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|On 10th July 2020                  |
|Rules 2008                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                 OKSANA BAS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

      1. The appellant appeals with permission  from  the  decision  of  the
         First  tier  (Judge  Chohan)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision to refuse her leave to remain on human rights
         grounds.

      2. The appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal following a grant  of
         permission to appeal by the Court of Appeal granted by LJ Asplin on
         the 6 November 2019. A consent order was then  signed  whereby  the
         parties agreed that the UT's  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
         remitted for reconsideration.

      3. In the light of the present need to take  precautions  against  the
         spread of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the
         Procedure Rules[1], directions were sent out to the  parties   that
         the Upper Tribunal's  provisional   view   was  that  it  would  be
         appropriate to determine the following questions without a hearing:

          a) whether the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

          b) whether that decision should be set aside.

      4. That decision also set out directions. It was sent out the  parties
         by way of email.  In compliance with those directions,  submissions
         were provided by Counsel (on behalf of  the  appellant)  by  letter
         dated 1 May 2020 and a response from the respondent on  the  8  May
         2020.

      5. The respondent indicated that she accepted that the decision of the
         FtTJ contained material errors of law and therefore does not oppose
         the application for permission to  appeal  and  invited  the  Upper
         Tribunal to determine the appeal by setting aside the  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chohan) and remitting the appeal  to
         the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

      6. Pursuant to rule 40(3) of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (as amended), the Upper  Tribunal  is  not  required  to
         provide written reasons for its decision under  paragraph  40(2)(a)
         of the Rules, where the decision is made with the  consent  of  the
         parties (rule 40(3)(a)), or the parties have consented to the Upper
         Tribunal not giving written reasons (rule 40(3)(b)).

      7. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside
         and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  rehearing
         (not before FtTJ Chohan) on a date to be notified to the parties.

      8.  Pursuant  to  rule  40(3)(a)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required,
         the decision being made with the consent of the parties.


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Date 25 June 2020


           ______________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).


