
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25276/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2020                  |On 1 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                       Mr Babatunde Ayorinde Adepitan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aborisade, Solicitor, O A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could  be  determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  I  did  not  experience  any
difficulties, and neither party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

In a decision promulgated on 2 July 2020 (a copy of which is appended to
this decision) I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I now
remake that decision.

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14 November 2001.  On 18
August 2018 he applied for entry clearance to the UK under Paragraph 297 of
the Immigration Rules in order to join his father ("the sponsor").

The sponsor moved to the UK in 2007, when the appellant was 6 years old.
The sponsor left the appellant in the care of the appellant's paternal
grandmother. The appellant lived with his grandmother until she died in
December 2017.  Since then, he has been living with a friend of the
sponsor, Mr Esan.

The appellant claims that the sponsor has had sole responsibility for his
upbringing within the meaning of paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration
Rules.  In the alternative, it is argued that there are serious and
compelling family or other conditions which make exclusion of the appellant
undesirable under paragraph 297(i)(f).

This appeal is brought under section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that refusing entry to the
appellant is contrary to Article 8 ECHR and therefore unlawful under
section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

The burden is on the appellant and the standard of proof is the balance of
probabilities.

Evidence

The evidence relied upon by the appellant consists of the following:

      a) His witness statement.  This is an extremely brief statement where
         the appellant states that he was abandoned by his mother when he
         was 6 months old and that his grandmother, with whom he lived after
         his father moved to the UK, died in December 2017.  He states that
         his father made arrangements with Mr Esan to look after him whilst
         an application was made for him to move to the UK.  He states that
         his father and stepmother in the UK pay for his maintenance and
         accommodation and that his stepmother has visited him several
         times.  He also states that his parents in the UK have
         responsibility for him and communicate with him on a daily basis.

      b) The witness statement of the sponsor.  This, too, is extremely
         brief and lacking in detail.  The sponsor states that he left
         Nigeria in 2007 when the appellant was 6 years old, and that his
         wife has visited the appellant more than seven times.  He also
         states that he made arrangements for the appellant to live with Mr
         Esan whilst his visa was being arranged.  He states that he has
         responsibility for the appellant and communicates with him on a
         daily basis.

      c) The witness statement of the sponsor's wife. In her brief
         statement, the sponsor's wife states that she has visited the
         appellant in Nigeria more than seven times and that she and the
         sponsor are responsible for him. She also states that following the
         death of the sponsor's mother arrangements were made for the
         appellant to live with Mr Esan whilst a visa to travel to the UK
         was obtained.

      d) The witness statement of Mr Esan. He states that when the
         appellant's application was refused the sponsor pleaded with him to
         exercise patience and allow the appellant to continue living with
         him.

The bundle of evidence also includes a death certificate for the
appellant's grandmother, showing that she died on 28 December 2017;
receipts of money transfers made between 2017 and 2019, mostly from the
sponsor to the appellant, and also from the sponsor to Mr Esan; and a copy
of a college report from 2015 concerning the appellant's education.

At the hearing, both the sponsor and the sponsor's wife were available
(remotely) for cross-examination.  Mr Jarvis only cross-examined the
sponsor.  During the cross-examination, the sponsor stated, in response to
questions from Mr Jarvis, that the appellant completed his A levels in
August 2019 and is now studying medicine.  The sponsor stated that he is
paying for the appellant's accommodation and education, but that presently
the appellant is living with Mr Esan because of a strike at the university.

When asked why he waited until 2018 to apply for the appellant to join him
in the UK (a total of eleven years), the sponsor's response was that he
wanted to settle down with his wife first and be financially secure.

Mr Jarvis asked the sponsor about the decisions he makes for, and in
respect of, the appellant.  The sponsor's response was that he makes every
decision and controls everything; and that he wants the appellant to come
to the UK now so that he can take proper care of him.  He also stated that
his wife loves the appellant and that he speaks to him every day.

Submissions

Mr Jarvis argued that, despite the entry clearance refusal having been made
almost two years previously, there was very little evidence, and no up-to-
date evidence, before the Tribunal.  He noted that the burden lies on the
appellant to demonstrate sole responsibility on the balance of
probabilities, and that the appellant was in difficulty in doing so because
of the lack of evidence.

He highlighted the absence of any detail as to what decisions the sponsor
has made on behalf of the appellant or about his involvement in the
appellant's life.  He also argued that the reason given by the sponsor in
cross-examination for not applying earlier for the appellant to join him in
the UK (that he wanted to become settled beforehand) was inconsistent with
the evidence given in the First-tier Tribunal, where it was stated that he
did not want to disturb the appellant's education.  He noted that given the
appellant is now studying medicine, and that at the time of the application
the appellant was studying for his A levels, this seems incongruous as
there would still be a significant disruption to the appellant's education
by relocating to the UK.

Mr Jarvis also submitted that it is far from clear that it would be in the
best interests of the appellant to relocate to the UK when he is currently
studying medicine and appears to have a stable environment in which to
live.

Mr Aborisade submitted that the sponsor gave credible evidence that he
makes decisions about everything for the appellant and that this is
consistent with the evidence of the appellant.  He drew attention, in
particular, to the evidence of Mr Esan that the sponsor had had to plead
with him to provide accommodation to the appellant.  He argued that this
indicates that the appellant has no-one else looking after him than the
sponsor.

Findings of Fact

Having considered the evidence, as summarised above, I make the following
findings of fact:

      e) The appellant was abandoned by his mother when he was 6 months old
         and has not had contact with her since.

      f) When the appellant was 6 years old his father moved to the UK,
         leaving him with his paternal grandmother.

      g) The appellant lived with his grandmother until she died in December
         2017. During that time, the appellant was cared for, and supported
         financially and emotionally, by his grandmother, who took all
         important decisions in his life. The sponsor argues that he, rather
         than the appellant's grandmother, provided this support to the
         appellant. However, the burden is on the appellant and he has not
         adduced any documentary evidence to show the involvement of the
         sponsor in his life before 2017. In addition, the statements of the
         appellant, sponsor and sponsor's wife give no detail, and merely
         make the bare assertion that the sponsor made decisions for the
         appellant.  Similarly, no detail was provided during oral evidence.

      h) Whilst the appellant was living with, and being looked after by,
         his grandmother, the sponsor's wife visited him on approximately 7
         occasions.

      i) The appellant's circumstances changed significantly following the
         death of his grandmother in 2017, when he was 16 years old.  The
         evidence indicates, and I accept, that the sponsor arranged for the
         appellant to reside with his friend Mr Esan, on a temporary basis,
         whilst he sought a visa for the appellant to join him in the UK.  I
         also accept that from March 2017 onwards the sponsor provided
         financial support to the appellant, as well as some funds to Mr
         Esan.

      j) The oral evidence of the sponsor was that he is paying for the
         appellant's medical education in Nigeria.  It is disappointing that
         no documentary evidence to corroborate this has been submitted when
         plainly such evidence would be readily available.  However, having
         heard cross-examination of the sponsor, and carefully considered
         the evidence, I am satisfied that on the balance of probabilities
         this is in fact what has occurred.

Analysis

The appellant has not established that the sponsor had sole responsibility
for him before the death of his grandmother. As explained above, no
documentary evidence was adduced to show that, prior to 2017, the sponsor
had any involvement in the appellant's life or provided him with financial
(or other) support. Reliance was placed on the witness evidence to show
sole responsibility prior to 2017, but this evidence lacks any detail.
Neither in his witness statement nor in his oral evidence did the sponsor
state what decisions he made, or had ever made, in respect of the
appellant; or what role he played in the appellant's life whilst the
appellant's grandmother was living. I find that prior to her death the
appellant's grandmother took responsibility for him and the sponsor did not
have sole responsibility for him.

Circumstances changed, however, in 2017, when the appellant's grandmother
died. The evidence, scant though it is, indicates that the sponsor became
involved with the appellant at this time and that he (a) found a place for
him to live; (b) applied for him to move to the UK; (c) sent him funds; and
(d) paid for him to go to university to study medicine.

There are two alternative ways to construe the actions of the sponsor
following the death of the appellant's grandmother. The first is that he
acted with kindness towards the appellant, taking steps to keep him in
accommodation and education, but without assuming sole responsibility for
him. As noted by Schiemann LJ in Nmaju v ECO [2000] EWCA Civ 505 at [25]
situations can (and do) arise where no one can be regarded as having
responsibility for a child's upbringing. The appellant was already 16 years
old when his grandmother died and it is entirely plausible that thereafter
no one assumed responsibility for him. The second alternative is that
following the death of the appellant's grandmother the sponsor stepped into
the role she had previously undertaken and began taking responsibility for
the appellant.

Having carefully considered the evidence, I am (just) persuaded that the
second alternative is the more likely and I find that, on the balance of
probabilities, the sponsor assumed sole responsibility for the appellant in
December 2017 when the appellant's grandmother died and that this continued
(and was continuing) when the appellant's application for entry clearance
was made. Even a brief period of sole responsibility is sufficient (see
Nmaju), and therefore I accept that the conditions of paragraph 297(i)(e)
of the Immigration Rules were met.

In order for the appellant to satisfy the requirements of Paragraph 297 of
the Immigration Rules it is not sufficient that he meets the conditions of
sub-paragraph (i)(e). He must also meet the requirements of sub-paragraphs
(ii) -(vii). The respondent's refusal letter did not identify a failure to
meet the requirements of sub-paragraphs (ii) -(vii) and Mr Jarvis confirmed
at the hearing that the respondent did not take issue with any of them. I
therefore find that the appellant meets the conditions for indefinite leave
to enter the UK as a child of a parent present and settled in the UK
pursuant to Paragraph 297.

Mr Jarvis accepted that article 8(1) ECHR was engaged. Accordingly, I allow
the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8 as where a person
satisfies the Immigration Rules, this will be positively determinative of
that person's article 8 appeal, provided their case engages article 8(1):
see TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34].



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan                                  18 November
2020

