
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA074492015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 June 2016                              |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                       MR. UJJWAL DHAKAL
             (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                              Appellant

                                    v


            SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                Respondent

                 ______________________________________

                                 DECISION & REASONS
                 ______________________________________

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Abbas, counsel instructed by Imperium Group
            Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent: Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

1. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 23 January 1977. He
arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 October 2009 as a Tier 4 student and
his leave was subsequently extended until 18 August 2014. On 1 August 2014
he applied for leave as a Tier 2 Migrant.  On 10 October 2014, the
Appellant sought to vary his leave to remain on the basis of his private
life. The application for leave as a Tier 2 Migrant was refused on 6
February 2015, with reference to paragraph 322(1A) on the basis that his
certificate of sponsorship was said to be false. The application was also
refused with reference to paragraph 245HD(a) of the Rules.

2. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
First tier Tribunal Judge CAS O'Garro for hearing on 15 October 2015. In a
decision promulgated on 12 November 2015, she dismissed the appeal under
the Immigration rules and on human rights grounds. At [14] of her decision,
she records that the Appellant's representative raised a preliminary issue
viz the fact that the Respondent had failed to consider the Appellant's
application made on 10 October 2014 to vary his leave on the basis of his
private life. At [15] she further records the submission that the
Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law for this reason
and the matter should be sent back to the Respondent for consideration. At
[21] the Judge concluded that having considered the refusal letter
carefully, she was satisfied that he Respondent had considered both
applications as she was required to do. The Judge then went on to consider
the grounds of appeal and found at [25] that the Appellant had not
intention to deceive when he submitted the Certificate of Sponsorship and
the requirements of paragraph 322(1A) were not met but at [26] he did not
submit a valid Certificate of Sponsorship and therefore could not succeed
under paragraph 245HD(a) of the Rules.

3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made
in time on 26 November 2015. The grounds of appeal, which take the form of
a statement of truth by the Appellant's counsel, Mr Abbas, assert that at
the hearing the First tier Tribunal Judge indicated that she had made a
decision that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
and that the matter would be remitted back to the Respondent for a fresh
and proper consideration; that it was a "complete surprise" that the appeal
had been refused; the hearing lasted only a couple of minutes and no
questions were asked of the Appellant at all - there was no cross-
examination or even adoption of the Appellant's witness statement and other
than the preliminary issue raised, no submissions were advanced by either
party in respect of the Article 8 claim or otherwise.

4. Permission to appeal was granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
9 May 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge has misdirected
herself and the grounds of appeal were arguable.


Hearing

5. At the hearing before me, Mr Duffy accepted that if what Mr Abbas claims
is correct then the First tier Tribunal Judge had made an error of law. He
had had regard to the record of proceeding taken by the Presenting Officer
at that hearing, who had noted that the case had been taken as a float and
that the First tier Tribunal Judge indicated she would send it back to the
Respondent.

6. I inspected the Court file and the record of proceeding, which is rather
illegible, would seem to indicate that the Judge recorded the submission
that the appeal should be allowed on the basis that it was not in
accordance with the law.

Decision

7. I find that First tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro erred materially in law in
proceeding to determine the Appellant's appeal, without having heard
evidence or submissions on the substantive issues, due to an indication
whether mistaken or otherwise, that she intended to allow the appeal on the
basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law. She then
appeared at [21] to change her mind about how to proceed, but this was
after the hearing had ended. This was clearly procedurally unfair
particularly to the Appellant but to both parties as the Respondent had no
opportunity to cross-examine the Appellant or to make submissions.

8. I remit the appeal for a de novo hearing before the First tier Tribunal.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

13 June 2016

