
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/11713/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 June 2016                 |On 6 September 2016             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               WIJESINGHE [N]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara, counsel instructed by Jade Law
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           ______________________

                             DECISION & REASONS
                           ______________________

1.    At a hearing which took place on 12 May 2016, I found that the First
tier Tribunal Judge had erred materially in law in allowing the appeal on
the basis that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
and I adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing to take place on 29 June
2016 [see error of law decision appended}.

Hearing

5.    The Appellant gave evidence before me and confirmed her name and
address and that that the contents of her statement of 30 July 2015 were
true and accurate. She was then cross-examined by Mr Kotas when she
confirmed that her husband, CT, dislikes strangers and has had difficulty
interacting for about 6 years and that he has outbursts in public places
and feels people are laughing at him. She confirmed that CT was mostly
confined to the home. She stated that they did go out together to the shop
and to Church, but if they go to crowded places he gets confused and they
did not go out much. She further confirmed that he was receiving medication
for stress and sickness and he was attending hospital every 6 months. She
further confirmed that she has visited Sri Lanka twice with her husband and
she thought the last time was in 2010. She confirmed that her mother lived
in Sri Lanka in a village house which had 3 rooms and that her sister also
lived there. She agreed that she was unable to work because she had to look
after her husband and that she was supported by way of benefits and they
rented their home. She stated that she would be unable to look after him in
Sri Lanka because CT would find it difficult to adapt and the situation is
very difficult to live there. They stayed for 2 weeks on their last visit.
The nearest big town to the village is Kurunagala, which is 1 hour away.
The Appellant confirmed that she is in good health.

6.    In response to questions from me, the Appellant stated that her
mother's house had two bedrooms and one sitting room and that her mother
and one sister lived there. She and her husband had stayed there in 2010
and her husband had struggled because of the weather and mosquitos. She
confirmed that because it is uncommon for Sri Lankan women to marry
foreigners she and her husband were subject to great curiosity when they
had visited the village and the constant staring had made her husband
unsettled, aggressive and angry.

7.    There was no re-examination by Mr Kannangara. The Appellant's
husband, CT, then entered the hearing room when he was informed that he
would not be questioned, Mr Kotas being content to accept the contents of
his statement.

8.    I then heard submissions from both parties. Mr Kotas accepted that
the Appellant is a credible and truthful witness. He submitted that the
issue of whether there are going to be insurmountable obstacles to family
life in Sri Lanka was defined in EX2 as very serious hardship for the
Appellant and her partner and that this was a high test cf. R (ota) Agyarko
v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

He submitted that the medical evidence falls slightly short of
demonstrating that the Appellant's husband would suffer very serious
hardship, in that he faces difficulties even here in the UK because he is
largely confined to the home and his wife tends to his needs and care.
There is a property in Sri Lanka that could accommodate him and they could
do the same things and lead broadly the same lifestyle as in the UK. In
respect of Article 8, he submitted that the Appellant speaks English but is
not financially independent. The application was more than 28 days out of
time so she does not have section 3c leave and whilst family life was
established lawfully the Appellant has not had leave recently. He submitted
that interference with the Appellant's family life would be proportionate.

9.    In his submission, Mr Kannangara invited me to find that this case
meets the insurmountable obstacles threshold. It was not disputed that the
CT, the Appellant's husband is suffering from autism, learning
disabilities, depression and anxiety disorder [51] and his main support is
his wife. He submitted that CT has suicidal tendencies and had attempted
suicide when waiting for his wife to be given entry clearance from Sri
Lanka. He submitted that CT would be stigmatised in Sri Lanka: 140-143 of
bundle, particularly 141. He drew my attention to the fact that Dr Catani
met CT for the second time: [supplementary bundle at 19-20] where he
explains because of autism symptoms he isolates himself and the Appellant
is the person who is supporting him and settling him when he is restless.
For these reasons there will be a huge impact on her husband's welfare if
he has to relocate to Sri Lanka and this would affect his stability and
well-being. He is getting medication for depression but there is no cure
for autism and learning difficulties and the Appellant's husband has been
stressed by her immigration situation since 2012. The Appellant came in
2008 as spouse as a settled person. She had leave for 2 years and was not
advised to apply for settlement but obtained 2 years further leave. The
payment for the extension of leave did not go through as a result of which
the application was refused and there was no right of appeal. The Appellant
did not voluntarily place herself in that situation. Her subsequent
application was refused by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
She does not have section 3C leave and Mr Kotas acknowledged that the
Appellant would not now be granted entry clearance because she could not
meet the financial requirements of the Rules. It is very clear that the
Appellant's husband is not in a position to work. In respect of Article 8,
Mr Kannangara submitted that there would be no public interest benefit to
asking this family to leave the United Kingdom and the Secretary of State's
decision was disproportionate.

Decision

10.   I informed the parties that I was allowing the appeal under the
Immigration Rules. I now give my reasons.

11.   The Appellant was granted entry clearance on 5 February 2008 for 2
years in order to join her spouse in the United Kingdom. She was
subsequently granted an extension of stay for a further 2 years. The
Appellant then made a further extension application herself on 24 April
2012 but regrettably the application was rejected as a result of the
payment not being processed and consequently the re-submitted application
was made out of time and was refused without the right of appeal.

12.   The application which is the subject of the current appeal was made
prior to the changes in the Immigration Rules but, after judicial review
proceedings, was reconsidered after 9 July 2012 and refused on the basis
that, due to the period of overstaying the Appellant did not meet the
requirements of E-LTRP2.2(b) and therefore in order to qualify under the
Rules EX.1(b) would have to apply. The period of overstay came about due to
rejection of the in-time application for an extension of leave made on 24
April 2012 due to the fact that the payment was not processed. This
application was returned to the Appellant on 16 May 2012 and was re-
submitted on 6 June 2012. Mr Kotas did not seek to disagree with the
contentions put forward by the Appellant's representative that (i) she
became an inadvertent overstayer and (ii) the Appellant had previously been
granted 4 years leave as the spouse of her British husband. He further
expressly accepted that the Appellant was a credible and truthful witness.

13.   The only issue before me was whether or not there were insurmountable
obstacles to family life continuing between the Appellant and her British
husband in Sri Lanka, within the meaning of EX1(b) of Appendix FM of the
Rules. EX2 defines "insurmountable obstacles" as very significant
difficulties or very serious hardship.

14.   I have taken account of the submissions of both parties and the
evidence submitted in the Appellant's bundle and supplementary bundle. Mr
Kotas did not seek to dispute the medical and other evidence that the
Appellant's husband had been diagnosed with autism, learning difficulties
and depression. The Appellant's evidence, which he accepted, was that her
husband felt unsettled, aggressive and angry when staying with the
Appellant in her mother's village house. This was due to the interest
displayed in them as a mixed couple and due to the fact that he is prone to
outbursts in public.

15.   A letter from Dr Catani, a consultant psychiatrist, dated 9 June
2016, confirms that CT has been diagnosed with severe Autistic Disorder
according to the ICD-10 Classification (Code F84.0) and in additional
suffers from learning disability, chronic depression, claustrophobia and
generalized anxiety disorder. He states [20 of the supplementary bundle]:

    "I am also of the opinion that it would be extremely negative for [CT]
    to relocate in Sri Lanka. This would affect C's psychological
    stability, emotional and physical welfare and general well-being. The
    difficulties C has experienced in the past on a trip to Sri Lanka for a
    month about six years ago are indicative of the deleterious effects of
    his relocation. He became very distressed and suspicious of the local
    people to whom he was not able to communicate in English. As a
    consequence, he refused to step out of the house because he felt people
    were staring at him. He was also subjected to intense ridicule and
    denigration by the local community in rural regions of Sri Lanka in
    which stigma attached to mental illness is still very prominent. I have
    also concerns about the lack of services for adults with autistic
    behaviour in the local community. Finally it is evident that C is unfit
    to travel. In a previous travel he showed clear difficulties with
    travelling. He threw his passport to the security officer and nearly
    got arrested. Once in the airplane he refused to sit down and fasten
    his belt and stood up for nearly all the flight from London to Sri
    Lanka."

16.   The Appellant's husband, who is now aged 50, was born and brought up
in the United Kingdom. Prior to his marriage he lived with his parents and
was looked after by his mother, who sadly died in 2013. He has in place a
support network which includes his father and his sister, with whom he has
close and regular contact and his GP and mental health services. He does
not speak Sinhala or Tamil, which are the only languages spoken in his
wife's village and there are no locally accessible mental health services
to whom he could look for support. In these circumstances I find there is
substance to the concerns set out at [15] of his statement that: "Moving to
Sri Lanka, which is very different from England, would not only worsen my
depression but increase my anxiety, cause me to feel more and more
isolated, making me completely house bound. Relocation would challenge my
very existence in a manner that is detrimental to my health and well-
being." His concerns are also supported by Dr Catani.

17.   I have also had regard to the background evidence at pages 140-143 of
the Appellant's main bundle, which makes clear that there is a stigma
attached to mental illness in Sri Lanka and I find that this is consistent
with the experience of the Appellant and her husband during their visit to
the village in 2010.

18.   For the reasons set out above, I find that there are insurmountable
obstacles to family life continuing between the Appellant and her husband
in Sri Lanka and that to require him to relocate there would result in very
serious hardship and/or very significant difficulties for him because of
his mental health, the lack of support he would receive and how he may be
perceived by the community there. I find that the requirements of EX1(b) of
Appendix FM of the Rules are met and thus I allow the appeal on this basis.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

2 September 2016
