
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/17497/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Done at Field House                  |Decision Served                      |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             George kwaku anyomi
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal of  the  Respondent  (hereinafter
"the claimant") against a decision of  the  present  Appellant  (hereinafter
"the Secretary of State") to refuse  him  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom.

By a "Decision and Directions" following a hearing on 4 September  2015  the
Upper Tribunal set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
directed that the appeal be decided again in the Upper Tribunal.

I am informed by e-mail dated 22 October 2015 that the  Secretary  of  State
has withdrawn the decision that was  the  subject  of  the  appeal.  She  is
entitled to do that but that decision does not, of itself,  dispose  of  the
appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

By the same e-mail the Secretary of State asked for permission  pursuant  to
rule 17(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to
withdraw her case and I give permission as requested.

As the Secretary of State no longer has an appeal before the Upper  Tribunal
I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

As the First-tier Tribunal's decision has been  set  aside  I  substitute  a
decision allowing the claimant's appeal. However, as the decision  that  was
the subject of the appeal has been withdrawn  that  decision  to  allow  the
appeal will not, of itself, lead  to  the  claimant  gaining  any  right  to
remain in the United Kingdom. The Secretary of State  must  now  decide  the
outstanding application.

Decision

The Secretary of State's case is withdrawn at her request.

The  claimant's  appeal  against  the  withdrawn  decision  is  allowed  but
allowing the appeal does not entitle the claimant to remain  in  the  United
Kingdom.



| Signed                              |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2015                |

