
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/33203/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 October 2017                       |On 26 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Md abu taher
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Chowdhury, solicitor from Kingdom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State refusing the appellant an EEA residence card as  an  extended  family
member.

2. I begin by considering the First-tier Tribunal's  decision.   This  notes
that the appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  who  claimed  that  he  was
entitled to a residence card as  the  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
national, who I identify simply as Ms S, who is a citizen of Hungary.

3. The respondent refused the application by letter  dated  5  October  2015
under Regulation 8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
2006.  The respondent was not satisfied that the parties were in a  durable
relationship.   She  did  not  give  any  other  reason  for  refusing  the
application.

4. The judge noted that although that decision was appealed  the  claim  was
not brought on human rights grounds.  Given that this is  an  EEA  decision
and there is no decision to remove the applicant it is very hard to see how
the decision could be contrary to the Appellant's rights under Article 8 of
the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  with  the  judge's  observation
clarifying the position.  This was not a human rights appeal.

5. In the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 6  October  2015  the  respondent
explained that the appellant and his alleged partner had not lived together
for long enough or  provided  sufficiently  persuasive  evidence  of  their
relationship for the respondent to be satisfied that theirs was  a  durable
relationship within the meaning of the Rules.

6. It was the appellant's case that cohabitation had commenced  in  February
2014 and the application was made in April 2015 which is a period of  about
14 months.

7. The respondent also found the supporting photographs to  appear  "staged"
and the bank statements showed  only  limited  transactions  so  that  even
cumulatively these things were not persuasive.

8. The judge noted that the Presenting Officer asked for the  appeal  to  be
dismissed for want of  jurisdiction  and  relied  on  a  decision  of  this
Tribunal in Sala (ESMs - right of appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC).   The
respondent objected saying that it would be unfair to deny the appellant  a
hearing at that stage.  The judge then said at paragraph 21:

  "After consideration I took the view that, while accepting the ruling  in
  Sala, given the impact on the appellant of dismissal at this  stage  that
  it was in the interests of justice and in accordance with the  overriding
  objective of the Tribunal under its procedure rules to make  findings  of
  fact.  I explained this to the parties."

9. The Presenting Officer decided not to assist further and the  appellant's
representative made submissions unopposed.

10. The judge decided that the appellant is a national of Bangladesh  living
in the United Kingdom.  He entered the United Kingdom with a  student  visa
in January 2011.  That visa was due to expire on 30  April  2014  but  that
leave was cancelled in April 2012 because of his failure to attend college.
 He remained as an overstayer and was served with notice as  an  overstayer
in January 2014 and  failed  to  report  to  the  Home  Office  on  several
occasions.  He made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  of  a
durable relationship with an EEA national on 1 April 2015.

11. The appellant had applied previously for permission  to  remain  on  the
basis of his  relationship  with  the  sponsor  but  that  application  was
unsuccessful.  The judge received evidence that they lived together and had
bank statements in their joint names but there was nothing such as a rental
agreement to indicate the basis of the occupation  of  the  property.   The
judge noted that sharing an address does not prove a durable  relationship.
It could indicate that  they  are  simply  "flatmates".   There  was  clear
evidence that they are co-directors of a company but  the  judge  took  the
view that that was not evidence of life partnership.  The judge noted there
was no evidence other than their own testimony that they had had an Islamic
marriage ceremony at their home address.

12. The judge considered the bank  statements  carefully  and  found  little
evidence of there being any income paid from the sponsor into the  account.
In short the bank accounts showed at most some modest sharing of resources.

13. The supporting photographs were not dated and although  there  was  some
"flirtatious" chat messages the judge found that they fell short of showing
a durable relationship.  The judge noted the oral  evidence  and  that  the
appellant and his sponsor could not agree about where they first met.   The
judge found that a revealing inconsistency.  The judge  said  unequivocally
and helpfully at paragraph 34:

  "Looking at all of the above evidence in the round, if I were to find  in
  this case I would  find  that,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  the
  appellant and sponsor are not in a durable relationship  and  accordingly
  the appellant does not meet the criteria of Regulation 8."

14. The grounds of appeal are unhelpful.   They  contend  that  because  the
appellant was told he had  a  right  of  appeal  before  the  decision  was
promulgated in Sala his right of appeal must  remain  and  that  the  judge
erred by not considering the case on Article 8 grounds  and  that  findings
were unclear.

15. Permission was given because a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  thought  it
reasonably arguable that the findings of fact should not have been made.  I
find that a potentially interesting point but it was not  developed  before
me.

16. Mr Chowdhury argued very assertedly that the judge  was  wrong  to  have
made findings when he had no jurisdiction without addressing the fact  that
the judge was encouraged to make findings  by  a  different  representative
from Mr Chowdhury's firm.  I see no merit in the submission.   The  judge's
findings are clear and reasoned.  They do not become "wrong" by  reason  of
his not having jurisdiction.  I can see that in a case where  a  judge  has
decided there  is  no  jurisdiction  the  hypothetical  findings  might  be
perfunctory or ill considered but that is patently not the case here.  They
are detailed and reasoned and indicate no fault.

17. It is known that the decision in Sala has been criticised in  the  Court
of Appeal and although at  the  time  of  writing  the  judgments  are  not
available it is accepted by both parties that the  authority  of  Sala  has
been much diminished by the clearest possible indication by  the  Court  of
Appeal that it is wrong.

18. It follows that  to  the  extent  that  the  judge  decided  he  had  no
jurisdiction he erred.  However he had jurisdiction and the consequence  of
this is that any argument based on his findings being hypothetical  because
he did not have jurisdiction are  misconceived.   It  follows  that  I  see
absolutely nothing in the grounds that begins to undermine  the  lawfulness
of the findings.  They are reasoned and explained and  manifestly  open  to
the judge.

19. I reinforce the observation of Mr Kotas and the  finding  of  the  judge
that there is authority to say that refusals of residence cards  cannot  be
expected to involve consideration of Article 8 of the  European  Convention
on Human Rights and there is no removal decision here.  I do not  begin  to
see how the application could have succeeded on Article 8 grounds.  If  the
applicant thinks he is entitled to remain on Article 8 grounds then he  can
make a suitable application and let it be considered in detail.   Asserting
a right to remain and asking for  a  card  to  confirm  that  right  is  an
entirely different process.

20. Mr Kotas also, helpfully, pointed out that this is  not  a  case  where,
for example, the appellant and his sponsor have been accused of taking part
in a marriage of convenience.  Rather the respondent and later  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge decided that the evidence of their cohabitation was too
shallow and too short lasting to establish a durable relationship.  None of
this prevents a further application on better evidence if there  is  better
evidence to produce.

21. I see no merit in the grounds of appeal or the arguments  raised  before
me.  It follows  that  although  the  judge  was  wrong  (albeit  for  very
understandable reasons) to find that there was no jurisdiction to entertain
the appeal the error is immaterial because the decision that the  appellant
does not in fact meet the requirements of the Rules was clearly open to the
judge and in no way dependent on the earlier decision  that  there  was  no
jurisdiction, if such a decision was in fact made.

22. For all these reasons I dismiss the appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 25 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |



