
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/35073/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2019                            |On 15 November 2019           |
|Extempore decision                            |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mr Md Masudur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Chancery
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Scott promulgated on 22 February 2017.  We shall refer
to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Judge Scott allowed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh
born on 31 December 1982, against a decision of the respondent dated 28
October 2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain as a Tier 1
Entrepreneur.  That application had been submitted on 26 October 2012.  The
operative basis for the refusal decision by the Secretary of State was that
the appellant had used a proxy test taker in an English language test he
purportedly took at Colwell College in East London on 27 June 2012.

Factual background

This matter has a complex procedural history.  The appellant is a citizen
of Bangladesh born on 31 December 1982.  He arrived in the United Kingdom
with entry clearance as a student on 31 October 2009.  He was granted leave
to remain until 31 December 2012.  On 26 October 2012 the appellant applied
for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur under the points-based system.
 That application was initially refused on 25 March 2013, on the basis that
the appellant had failed to provide the requisite specified evidence to
demonstrate that he had at least ï¿½200,000 available to invest in the
business in the United Kingdom.  He appealed against that decision to Judge
Sharp of the First-tier Tribunal, who allowed the appeal to the extent that
the matter was remitted to the Secretary of State to consider the decision
again, having failed to exercise or consider the exercise of evidential
flexibility in favour of the appellant during the initial consideration of
the application.

Having reconsidered the application pursuant to the remittal by Judge
Sharp, the Secretary of State reached the decision which is under challenge
in these proceedings.  Although the Secretary of State had been directed to
consider the evidential flexibility policy in the Immigration Rules, the
operative reason for the refusal of the application on this occasion was
because the appellant was said to have engaged in English language test
fraud.  That refusal decision triggered a further right of appeal which led
to the decision before Judge Scott which is the decision under appeal
before us.

The respondent was not represented before Judge Scott.  The judge heard
evidence from the appellant and found him to be a credible witness.  The
judge accepted that the appellant had attended Colwell College on 27 June
2012 and taken the test himself.  The judge also noted that the appellant
gave evidence in what he described as "good English", which appeared to be
consistent with the scores that were recorded in his test results.  The
judge also ascribed significance to the fact that the appellant claims to
have been educated in Bangladesh in English prior to his arrival in the
United Kingdom.  This led to the following conclusion at [19] of the
judge's decision:

         "All of this suggests a proficiency with the English language which
         makes it very difficult to see why the appellant would have any
         need to use a proxy to take the TOEIC test for him."

    The appeal was allowed, with the judge noting that the respondent still
    was to act upon the outcome of the previous appeal by applying the
    evidential flexibility policy contained in the Immigration Rules.

The Secretary of State obtained permission to appeal against that decision
pursuant to an application which was advanced on essentially a single
ground, namely that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for a
finding on a material matter.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge
Hollingworth of the First-tier Tribunal.

The matter thus came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy, who, in a
Decision and Reasons promulgated on 7 December 2017, found that Judge Scott
had fallen into error when concluding that the appellant had no motive to
cheat.  At [18] the deputy judge stated that: "The judge I consider reached
a conclusion which was in effect perverse."

The deputy judge noted that the decision of this Tribunal in MA (ETS -
TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) held that the motive to cheat in an
English language test would not necessarily be on the basis of a lack of
proficiency in the English language.  At [57] of its decision in that case,
this Tribunal noted that the reasons that people would adopt the use of a
proxy in a test include "inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of
failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt for the immigration
system."  These are factors, noted Judge McGeachy, that the judge had
failed to consider.

The deputy judge found an error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal, and noted at [19] that he had "all the relevant evidence" before
him to remake the decision and proceeded to remake the decision, allowing
the Secretary of State's appeal to the effect that the appeal of the
appellant before the First-tier Tribunal was overturned, and the decision
of the Secretary of State to refuse the application was allowed to stand.

The appellant obtained permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal against
Judge McGeachy's decision on three grounds.  The first was that the Upper
Tribunal had erred when finding that there had been an error of law.  The
second was that the Upper Tribunal fell into procedural unfairness by
proceeding to re-make the decision, having not had live evidence from the
appellant on the core issue going to the heart of his credibility and
honesty.  The third was that the Upper Tribunal had failed to provide
adequate reasons when dismissing the appeal.

Permission to appeal was granted by Leggatt LJ on 31 October 2018 in
relation to all grounds.  The reasons given by His Lordship were as
follows:

"There is a real reason as to whether the Upper Tribunal was entitled not
only to overturn the FtT's finding that the appellant had given truthful
evidence but also to conclude that the appellant should be disbelieved and
found to have committed deception without having heard him give oral
evidence and without giving him an opportunity to address such matters as
whether there were reasons why he might have reached a decision not to
attend the course and why he had attended at Colwell College in any event
(both matters which the UT identified as relevant at [18]).  It is strongly
arguable that the UT Judge was wrong to say at [19] that he had before him
all the relevant evidence."

Pursuant to that grant of permission to appeal, the appellant and
respondent agreed to settle the matter by consent.  A proposed statement of
reasons was provided to the Court of Appeal which stated at [7] that the
parties agreed that the most appropriate venue for the "substantive appeal"
to be heard would be the Upper Tribunal, and that together they considered
that the most effective way to resolve the matter would be to consent to
the appeal being allowed and then to have this matter remitted to the Upper
Tribunal for a fresh determination of the "substantive appeal".  That led
to a consent order being issued by the Court of Appeal on 22 February 2019
in these terms:

"By consent it is ordered that:

1.   This appeal is allowed.

2.   The Upper Tribunal determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
McGeachy promulgated on 7 December 2017 be set aside.

3.   The matter be remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a fresh determination
of the appellant's appeal."

It was in those circumstances that the matter returned to the Upper
Tribunal for a hearing before us.  At the outset of the hearing we raised
with the parties a query that we had in relation to the scope of the
appeal.  It was clear from the helpful skeleton argument provided by Mr
Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State that his understanding of was
that the appeal's scope was confined to the matter being a rehearing of the
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  On behalf of the appellant, Mr
Aslam submitted that there was no such ambiguity in the consent order
issued by the Court of Appeal, and that the decision of Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge McGeachy was set aside in its entirety.  So much is clear,
he submitted, by [2] of that order.

We indicated to the parties at the hearing that we agreed with the
submissions of Mr Aslam.  There is no scope within the terms of the Court
of Appeal's consent order for certain findings by Deputy Upper Tribunal
Judge McGeachy to be preserved and certain other findings to be set aside.
While we are mindful of the terminology in the statement of reasons which
spoke in terms of the "substantive appeal" being reheard, we do not
consider that that term in isolation provides sufficient clarity with which
to read down or otherwise interpret the operative provisions of the Court
of Appeal's consent order any differently.  As such, the hearing before us
proceeded on the basis that it was the first time the Upper Tribunal was
considering the matter on appeal from First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott.  We
heard submissions from the parties as to whether Judge Scott fell into an
error of law such that his decision need be set aside.

Discussion: the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

It is necessary to recite the full wording of the following operative
paragraphs of Judge Scott's decision in order to analyse whether he fell
into an error of law:

"17. The appellant in the present case was able to give a detailed account
of the TOEIC test which he claims to have taken, and the procedures
followed at Colwell College on the date in question, 27 June 2012.  I find
this account and the other evidence given by him to be credible.

18.  The appellant gave his evidence in good English, which appeared to be
consistent with the scores recorded as having been achieved in his test
results.

19.  I also attached significance to the evidence, which I accept, that the
appellant completed a BA degree in Bangladesh, which was taught in English,
before coming to the United Kingdom; that he was not required to undertake
an English course on arrival; that he undertook the ACCA [Association of
Chartered Certified Accountants] course until his college was suspended;
and that he was subsequently able to gain entry to a university from which
he later graduated with an MBA degree.  All of this suggests a proficiency
with the English language which makes it very difficult to see why the
appellant would have any need to use a proxy to take the TOEIC test for
him."

The judge proceeded at [20] to find that the respondent had discharged the
initial evidential burden incumbent upon her when seeking to establish
allegations of deception, such that it was necessary for the appellant to
provide an innocent explanation in response.  Before us, there was no
challenge to the judge's self-direction as to the burden and standard of
proof in relation to allegations of deception and we find no reason to
criticise him on this account.  The core of Mr Melvin's criticism of the
judge's reasoning lies in the central allegation that the judge failed to
give sufficient reasons for his finding that the appellant had not engaged
in the use of a proxy test taker.

Mr Melvin highlights the Project Faï¿½ade Report into Colwell College in
Leicester, a partial copy of which appears to have been before the judge,
which stated that between 18 October and 15 January 2013 Colwell College
undertook 2,901 TOEIC speaking and writing tests which had been identified
by Educational Testing Services ("ETS"), the test administrator, as
featuring 1,559 "invalid" tests and 1,342 "questionable" tests.  Across
that time period, there is not a single certificate that had been issued by
ETS which was not withdrawn.  This gave a total percentage of invalid test
results as being 53%.  Mr Melvin highlights the evidence contained in that
report to support his submission that Colwell College was a fraud factory.
It was highly unlikely, in his submission, that this appellant could have
purported to have been taking the test genuinely in his own capacity
without the use of a proxy test taker, and with no knowledge of any proxy
test taking going on around him, given the prevalence of fraud and
widespread irregularities taking place at Colwell College.  Against that
background, submits Mr Melvin, the judge's analysis at [17] to [19] of his
decision is deficient.  It was necessary, he submits, for the judge to have
engaged with the findings of the report in addition to simply having
accepted that the initial evidential burden had been satisfied.

We have considered submissions from Mr Aslam, who highlights that the judge
made unchallenged credibility findings at [17] of his decision which found
the appellant to be a credible witness and who had provided generally
credible evidence before him.  Mr Aslam accepts that the judge fell into a
degree of error in relation to ascribing significance to the fact that the
appellant is able to speak English or was at the hearing able to speak
English as there may be a number of reasons that an individual would cheat.
 However, he submits that any error on that account is immaterial.  By the
time the judge gave the reasons contained in [18] and [19] he had already
found the appellant's evidence to be credible and therefore the findings at
[18] and [19] were otiose and do not detract from the unchallenged findings
at [17].  We accept Mr Aslam's submissions.

Returning to the central thrust of Mr Melvin's case, we consider that it
amounts to a departure from the approach of the Court of Appeal, as
underlined in a number of cases, which has consistently held that an
intense fact-specific assessment is required in every case.  In Majumder
and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167
Beatson LJ considered whether the Secretary of State's evidence adduced in
cases of this nature was capable of discharging the legal burden for
deception.  At [27] His Lordship endorsed the decision of this Tribunal in
the same case at [102] that each case will be fact-sensitive, with the
outcome determined on the basis of the evidence adduced by the parties.  In
practical terms, we find that that means the Secretary of State's generic
evidence, combined with the specific material said to link that generic
evidence to the conduct of an appellant, will rarely, if ever,
automatically be able to lead to a finding of deception regardless of the
innocent explanation proffered by the appellant.  In human rights cases a
case-specific assessment will always be required.

We consider that that is precisely what the judge did in this case.  He
heard live evidence from the appellant concerning the process that he went
through to attend the test, what took place when he registered, what took
place during the conduct of the test itself and how long the test lasted.
In light of that assessment, the judge reached his operative finding at
[17] that the appellant had provided a credible account, and that he had
essentially discharged the evidential burden which had swung to him
pursuant to the initial case advanced by the respondent.  We do not find Mr
Melvin's submissions that the judge should have ascribed further
significance to the Project Faï¿½ade Report to be persuasive.  In this
respect, we recall that in MNM (Surendran guidelines for Adjudicators)
Kenya [2000] UKIAT 00005 the "Surendran guidelines" were endorsed.  The
sixth guideline states as follows:

"It is our view that it is not the function of a Special Adjudicator to
adopt an inquisitorial role in cases of this nature.  The system pertaining
at present is essentially an adversarial system and the Special Adjudicator
is an impartial judge and assessor of the evidence before him.  Where the
Home Office does not appear the Home Office's argument and basis of
refusal, as contained in the letter of refusal, is the Home Office's case
purely and simply, subject to any other representations which the Home
Office may make to the Special Adjudicator.  It is not the function of the
Special Adjudicator to expand upon that document, nor is it his function to
raise matters which are not raised in it, unless these are matters which
are apparent to him from a reading of the papers, in which case these
matters should be drawn to the attention of the appellant's representative
who should then be invited to make submissions or call evidence in relation
thereto."

In the present matter, the judge had a partial copy of a Project Faï¿½ade
Report in relation to Colwell College in Leicester.  Only every other page
had been photocopied.  Although this appellant did take a test at Colwell
College, it was at the East London branch.  It is by no means clear from
the incomplete documents before the judge and indeed, nor is it clear from
the complete documents which we have had the benefit of viewing in
preparation for this appeal, whether the figures contained in that report
relate solely to Colwell College at Leicester or whether they cover the
East London satellite branch of the college.  As such, pursuant to the
Surendran guidelines, it was not the role of the judge to expand upon the
reasons given for refusal.  The respondent had chosen not to appear at the
proceedings before the judge in the First-tier Tribunal and had not applied
to adjourn the matter so that she could be represented on a future
occasion.  There has been no challenge before us to the judge's decision to
proceed in the absence of the respondent.  It is not possible, therefore,
for the respondent to contend at this stage that there were matters which
had not been raised either expressly in the refusal letter or impliedly
through a perusal of the incomplete papers which had been provided to him
and which now should present the case in a different light.

As such, drawing this analysis together, we consider that the judge reached
findings of fact which were open to him on the evidence, and which do not
feature any irrationality or perversity.  Although we note Mr Aslam's
observation that the judge may be described as having fallen into error by
virtue of his application of the case of MA, it is not necessary for us to
reach detailed findings on that issue, other than to observe that in the
case of MA itself, this Tribunal had recorded many paragraphs of detailed
credibility concerns in relation to the appellant in those proceedings
before dismissing the possibility that the credibility concerns that had
been outlined in extensive depth could be undermined by virtue of the
simple fact that the appellant would be able to speak English, and
therefore had no basis to cheat.

The decision of this judge is in entirely different territory to the fact-
finding task which the Tribunal in MA engaged in.  This judge, as we have
already noted, found the appellant to be a credible witness.  He accepted
the account that had been given before him and, as such, the consideration
of the appellant's motive or lack of motive to cheat must be viewed in that
very different context which may be distinguished from the case of MA.  It
may well be that the judge could have given express consideration of the
reasons that people engage in cheating even when there is no ostensible
reason for them to do so.  However, ultimately, the judge did not fall into
error because by the time the judge considered those matters, he had
already found the appellant to be a credible witness.

For those reasons, this appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.  The
original decision of Judge Sharp that the matter be remitted to the
Secretary of State for reconsideration of the original Tier 1 Entrepreneur
application pursuant to the evidential flexibility provisions of the
Immigration Rules stands.  As such, the outcome of this decision is that it
remains for the Secretary of State to consider the appellant's application
as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur pursuant to those evidential flexibility
provisions and not to hold against him the suitability-based concerns that
she outlined in the refusal letter of 28 October 2015.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Scott, including the fee
award, stands.  The immigration decision is remitted to the Secretary of
State in accordance with the earlier decision of Judge Sharp.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Stephen H Smith                             Date  14  November
2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


