
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46012/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2015                    |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S H STOREY


                                  Between:

                         RADOSLAW ANDRZEJ KONWERSKI
                           (AnonYmity not granted)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Counsel Ms M Sirikanda, on the instructions of Imran
                    Khan & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

 1. The appellant (A) is a  Polish  national,  now  aged  33.  He  seeks  to
    challenge the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT), promulgated  on
    29 June  2015,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 17 November 2014 (and served on 18 November  2014),  to
    deport him  under  regulation  19(3)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006  Regulations).  That  decision
    was made in the light of his conviction in June  2014  for  offences  of
    possession of an imitation firearm with intent to cause fear or violence
    and theft. He was sentenced in August 2014 for a total of 24 months  for
    these offences. His appeal was made out of country following his removal
    to Poland on 16 April 2015. Although he did not attend  the  hearing  in
    person (a matter we shall return to later) he was represented,  and  his
    father and stepmother attended and gave evidence.

 2. A claims that he entered the United Kingdom (UK) in June  2007  and  had
    been in employment for much of  the  time  thereafter,  including  as  a
    security guard. However, the respondent  considered  that  he  had  only
    provided evidence of working for periods in 2011, 2012,  2013  and  2014
    and  so  had  not  provided  evidence  of  continuous  residence  or  of
    exercising Treaty rights in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years.

 3. The grounds of appeal upon which A relies are set out  in  the  Skeleton
    Argument, and attached to his application for permission to appeal dated
    26 November 2014. Additional grounds dated 24 July 2015  and  8  October
    2015 were also before us. It is submitted that the FtT materially  erred
    in law by failing to:

      i) Provide adequate reasons to establish that A had  a  propensity  to
         reoffend, or posed an unacceptably high risk of reoffending, or  to
         identify what level of risk of reoffending he posed;

     ii) Correctly identify the categories of risk  available  in  an  OASys
         assessment;

    iii) Pay demonstrable regard to material evidence of rehabilitation;

     iv)  Conduct  an  assessment  of  proportionality  in  accordance  with
         regulations 21(5)(a), 21(5)(e) and  regulation  21(6)  or  to  give
         consideration to the prospects of A's future rehabilitation in  the
         United Kingdom and Poland in accordance with Essa [2012]  EWCA  Civ
         1718.

 4. The application for permission to appeal was considered by a  FtT  Judge
    on 6 August 2015, who granted permission on the grounds that, the  first
    instance judge had arguably materially erred in law by:

      a) Failing to give adequate reasons for a finding that A represented a
         present threat  by  reason  of  a  propensity  to  reoffend  or  an
         unacceptably high risk of reoffending;

      b) Generally failing to have proper regard to the factors set  out  at
         regulation 21; and

      c) Failing to consider A's prospects of rehabilitation in Poland.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing, we had before us an application from A  to  adjourn  the
    proceedings to enable him to attend and give oral evidence. We  did  not
    consider that an adjournment was necessary in the interests of  justice,
    for the purposes of the hearing before us.

 6. Ms. Sirikanda, submitted that regulation  21  of  the  2006  Regulations
    required the FtT to make a finding on the  level  of  risk  A  posed  to
    society.  In doing so, the FtT Judge  should  have  had  regard  to  the
    evidence before him of a Senior Probation Officer. In  relation  to  A's
    residence in the UK, she  argued  that  the  FtT  Judge  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he had had regard to the  documentary  evidence  before
    him of A's employment and training, and to make a finding of fact on the
    number of years A had resided in the UK. There was also, in her view,  a
    failure to address A's dependency on his father and the  extent  of  his
    integration in the UK.

 7. Mr. Kandola, submitted that the  FtT  had  made  a  legally  sustainable
    finding that A presents a  present,  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to the public based on the findings of the Probation  Officer  in
    the Pre-Sentence report. He argued  that  A  had  provided  insufficient
    evidence of integration and could not benefit from rehabilitation  until
    he can demonstrate integration. He argued that A could not be integrated
    in two countries and pointed to evidence that suggested A had  relatives
    and accommodation in the UK and Poland.

The Legislative Framework

 8. Regulations 21 of the 2006 Regulations provides as follows:

         'Decisions taken on  public  policy,  public  security  and  public
         health grounds


         21. (1) - (4) ...

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
         or public security it shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
             conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
             represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
             which relate to considerations of general  prevention  do  not
             justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
             themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.'

Was there an error of law?

9.   In our judgment, there was no material error  of  law  in  the  judge's
treatment of the issue  of  rehabilitation.  Given  that  A  had  failed  to
produce evidence to establish that he had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent
residence (by virtue of a continuous period of  5  years  exercising  Treaty
rights), it would have been wrong in law had the FtT judge sought to  attach
substantial weight to prospects of rehabilitation: see  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department v Dumliauskas & Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  145  and  MC
(Essa principles recast) [2015] UKUT 520 (IAC)).

10.  That is not  to  say  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of
integration was free of error. The FtT  Judge  found  as  fact  that  A  was
"integrated in Poland" because he had spent his formative years  there  with
"relatives" and that his father and stepmother could visit  him  in  Poland.
Even  if  his  prospects  of  rehabilitation  could  not  be  one  that  had
substantial weight in the balance, it was still necessary for the  judge  to
assess A's degree of integration in the UK against the background that  even
if he had not been working continuously he had  been  in  the  UK  at  least
since 2006. The judge does not appear to have made any clear finding on  the
extent to which A had integrated into the UK, simply saying at paragraph  13
that his father and stepmother can visit him in Poland "if  they  so  wish".
The FtT judge failed to engage with the evidence that A's mother, with  whom
he had lived in Poland (prior to joining his father and  stepmother  in  the
UK), was now deceased and that he had no immediate family  in  Poland,  save
for cousins. His finding [at paragraph 13] that A was integrated  in  Poland
was not adequately reasoned and supported by evidence.

11.  Considered on its own, the above deficiencies were  not  sufficient  to
amount to a material error of law. However, we do consider the  FtT  made  a
material error of law by failing to give adequate reasons  for  its  finding
[at paragraph 14] that A "poses a threat of serious harm to the  public  and
should not be able to return to the UK whilst the deportation order  remains
in force". Despite  noting  the  contents  of  the  Pre-Sentence  Report  of
Probation Officer, Ms Souza, dated 13 August  2014  [at  paragraph  8],  the
judge's treatment of it in paragraph 10 dwelt solely on its finding  that  A
"poses a medium risk of harm to the  public"  and  appears  to  have  wholly
disregarded its final conclusion, that "he does not pose a significant  risk
to members of the public of  serious  harm  by  the  commission  of  further
specified offences". At the end of paragraph 10, the  judge  notes  that  he
was told that the Home Office Offenders Re-Conviction Scale had given  A,  a
score on probability of proven re-offending as 6% within 12 months  and  11%
within 24 months, "placing him in the lower risk category  based  on  static
factors alone,  i.e.  age  at  first  conviction,  conditional  or  absolute
discharge". This was evidence in support of the appellant's  case,  yet  not
only did the judge conduct no analysis of it,  but  he  thereafter  made  no
reference to it and simply proceeded [at paragraph  11]  to  state  his  own
view that, "[t]he appellant has failed to recognise the implications of  his
offence and would act in the same  way  again  in  the  same  circumstances,
which he did ...".

12.  It is worth noting at this  point,  that  A  was  not  present  at  the
hearing to give evidence and the judge does  not  record  any  witnesses  as
saying anything to  suggest  that  A  would  act  in  the  same  way  again.
Furthermore, although not mentioned at all by him in his determination,  the
judge had before him a  report  dated  27  March  2015  from  Sasha  Howard,
Probation Service Officer. In it, she referred to A's feelings  of  remorse,
his engagement with prison services and his  high  level  of  motivation  to
change his identified  risk  factors.  This  evidence  was  not  before  the
respondent at the date of her decision.  In  the  light  of  this  evidence,
Sasha Howard concluded that A posed a medium risk to  the  public,  but  was
unlikely to cause harm unless there was a change in circumstances,  such  as
misuse of alcohol, deficit in thinking and  poor  emotional  management.  In
her opinion, A was at low risk of re-offending.  There  was  also  an  OASys
report dated 23 March 2015, indicating that A had taken  decisive  steps  to
address his alcohol abuse. The  failure  of  the  judge  to  consider  these
further reports was a plain error of law.

13.  The FtT judge was right  to  conclude  that  A  had  committed  serious
offences, as reflected in the 24-month custodial sentence. However, we  take
the view that the judge was still required to conduct a balancing  exercise,
which he failed to do, in order to assess  on  all  the  available  evidence
whether A represented a  present  threat  of  serious  harm  to  the  public
because of a  propensity  to  reoffend  or  an  unacceptably  high  risk  of
reoffending. The finding of the FtT judge that A poses a threat  of  serious
harm to the public, was not demonstrably  based  on  an  assessment  of  the
entirety of the evidence before him.

Decision

14.  For the above reasons, we find that the FtT did  make  material  errors
of law and we remit the appeal to be heard before a different FtT judge.



|Signed:                              |Dated:                               |
|[pic]                                |27 January 2016                      |
|Sehba H Storey                       |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |                                     |

