
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/2548/2019  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |Bikash Sapkota                               |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins

HAVING considered all documents lodged  and  having  heard  Mr  S  Karim  of
counsel, instructed by Legend Solicitors, for the Applicant and Mr  Z  Malik
of counsel, instructed by GLD,  for  the  respondent  at  a  hearing  on  22
October 2020.

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is granted for the reasons in the
       attached notes of my extempore judgment.


    2) The Respondent must pay the Applicant's costs to be assessed  if  not
       agreed.


    3)  There  was  no  application  for  permission  to  appeal.  I  refuse
       permission because I see no arguable error in my decision.


      Signed:     Jonathan Perkins


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins

      Dated:            24 February 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/2548/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             22 October 2020


                                  The QUEEN
                  (ON The application OF Mr Bikash Sapkota)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE Perkins


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Legend Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE PERKINS: This application for judicial review succeeds.


2.    The applicant is a citizen of Nepal.   He  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since about September 2009.  There was a  break  in  his  leave
    from 18 September 2005 when his leave ran out and 30 May 2016  when  an
    application for further leave made on 25 September  the  previous  year
    succeeded.  He was given leave as a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  until  1
    November 2018 but that leave was curtailed to expire on 25  March  2018
    following problems with his sponsor.

3.    On 19 March 2018 he applied for leave as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant.
    The application was refused on 6 December but the applicant  asked  for
    administrative review and on 13 February 2019 the  respondent  affirmed
    her decision to refuse the application but abandoned one of the reasons
    on which she had relied.  The decision of 13 February affirmed the rest
    of the decision of 6 December and it is those decisions that are  under
    challenge.

4.     Permission  was  granted  on  the  papers  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Sheridan.

5.    The applicant's case depended on his being offered work as a  business
    development manager with Haveli Fine Dining Restaurants Limited.  It is
    important to emphasise that the application  was  unsuccessful  because
    the Secretary of State did not accept that there was a genuine vacancy.
     Mr Karim has pointed out that it is not relevant whether  or  not  the
    applicant is a genuine employee.  What is relevant is  whether  or  not
    the Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that there  was  not  a
    genuine vacancy.

6.    Certain things are clear.  The job was advertised in the  proper  way.
    There was compliance with all the requirements  and  the  Secretary  of
    State, being dissatisfied that not all the information had  been  sent,
    makes clear that all that was required was sent at a later stage.   So,
    it is a job that is advertised by an apparently  genuine  business  and
    there  were  apparently  other  applicants  and  this   applicant   was
    successful.  At no point has there been any criticism  made  about  the
    bona fides of the new employer.

7.    The Secretary of State, on administrative review,  had  to  reconsider
    her position  and  abandoned  arguments  that  the  applicant  was  not
    qualified to do the job.  So, on the undeniable facts in the case,  the
    Secretary of State has accepted that the applicant is qualified for the
    job and has accepted that the job has been advertised by a firm that is
    not in any way criticised in the decision-making but then moves to  the
    conclusion that the vacancy is not genuine.  Put like that, and that is
    how Mr Karim did put it, the decision of the Secretary of  State  looks
    staggeringly wrong.

8.    It is not quite that bad.  There were reasons to  be  concerned  about
    the bona fides of the applicant.  These were in effect that things  had
    been said that made compliance  officers  who  were  looking  into  the
    affairs of the Mount Gurkha Restaurant think that the applicant was not
    working for them as a business development manager or whatever the  job
    title was.  People who investigated that did  not  think  the  business
    would need it.  The people investigating that  were  told  things  that
    made them uneasy and that led to an interview with the applicant.

9.    However, as Mr Karim has again pointed out properly,  if  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's case that the  applicant  had  been  compliant  in
    misbehaviour with  the  Mount  Gurkha  Restaurant  she  had  powers  to
    summarily curtail his leave.  That is what the Rules provide, it is not
    an obligation on the Secretary of State but it is the normal course and
    she chose not to do it.  One assumes that the reason she chose  not  to
    do it is that she was not satisfied that the applicant was involved  in
    improper behaviour.  We do not know and perhaps we do not have to  know
    but it certainly does not assist the Secretary  of  State's  case.  The
    point is that if this is a man who has been behaving  improperly  there
    is a very obvious remedy and it was not taken here.

10.   I do not find the snippets  we  have  of  the  interview  particularly
    revealing.  It is very clear from the decision that  the  Secretary  of
    State did  not  believe  the  applicant's  answers  and  preferred  the
    unexplained evidence, which has not been  disclosed,  that  caused  the
    officers to think that the applicant had not been working in  the  role
    he claimed  with  the  Mount  Gurkha  Restaurant.   It  is  not  really
    satisfactory.  Not every point has to be given, not a full  explanation
    but to simply say that he was interviewed and we preferred what we  had
    been told to his evidence is not really an explanation or a  reason  at
    all, especially when  we  know  that  the  sponsor,  the  Mount  Gurkha
    Restaurant, was unsatisfactory.  It was an organisation that  lost  its
    role as a sponsor.  It clearly was not run  properly.   It  might  have
    been run dishonestly but neither of those  things  necessarily  reflect
    adversely on the applicant, who was treated in the way  applicants  are
    treated when they are the victims  of  incompetent  and  poor  sponsors
    rather than treated in a way  appropriate  to  somebody  who  has  been
    complicit in bad behaviour.

11.   The reasons for  suspecting  that  the  applicant  had  been  behaving
    properly were a perfectly good reason to interview him.   They  may  be
    perfectly good reasons to be suspicious of the  whole  enterprise.   It
    may be that it cried out for further  enquiry  but  when  there  is  no
    criticism of the new employer it is very hard to  see  how  it  can  be
    maintained that the job is not a genuine vacancy.   Of  course,  it  is
    possible that a person is so spectacularly unsuited to the job that  it
    is just unbelievable that the new job could  be  possibly  genuine  and
    made available to him although that is quite a leap because  one  would
    have to look at what the applicant said when he was after his new  job;
    but this is somebody who is qualified for it because that  is  accepted
    by the Secretary of State.

12.   I agree with Mr Karim that the criticisms in the reasons for  refusal,
    even if well-founded do not justify the conclusion that this is  not  a
    genuine job.  At their very highest they support a conclusion that  the
    applicant is not a genuine applicant but even that, for the  reasons  I
    have already indicated, is a very unsatisfactory  conclusion  to  reach
    when it is expressly conceded he is qualified for the job and when  the
    evidence that is supposed to undermine his integrity is from a disputed
    source and not really explained.

13.   Other points were raised before me but I think that the  foregoing  is
    probably enough to deal with this matter.

14.   There is an additional point raised by Mr Malik that this case  is  so
    bad that it could not possibly have  succeeded  even  if  it  has  been
    explained inadequately.  That does not work.  This is not a case  where
    anything about the  job  is  established  in  a  way  that  supports  a
    conclusion it is not a genuine vacancy or anything about the  applicant
    is established in a way that makes it impossible to say that  he  could
    do that job or be allowed to do it, it just does not follow.

15.   I make it plain that the alleged two points raised  by  Mr  Malik  are
    really one.  The concern was that the applicant was not working in that
    capacity in his  previous  employer  and  did  not  have  the  relevant
    experience.  That is not important.  He got the relevant  qualification
    and the reasons for it were not really based on lack  of  qualification
    but on lack of trust.

16.   There is a bit of a red herring that needs addressing here and  it  is
    that the applicant is reported to have said that he had done some  work
    for embassies.  That is something he  denied.   I  do  not  think  that
    actually matters very much except that it does seem to me that if  this
    man, who claimed to have worked for Spud U Like and then to work for  a
    restaurant in the East Midlands, really had said that he had also  done
    work  arranging  for  parties  for  embassies  it  is   so   startingly
    incongruous that some further  enquiry  ought  to  have  been  made  at
    interview.  It seems to me a more likely explanation is  that  he  said
    something that was misheard and not  noted  by  the  applicant  or  his
    representatives  because  they  heard  it  differently  but   that   is
    speculation and does not feature very highly in my reasons.

17.   What really matters here is there is no proper evidence before  me  to
    show that the Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that this was
    not a genuine vacancy and that is what is necessary for  the  case  and
    that is what the Secretary of State has failed to do.

18.   The applicant succeeds and the decisions will be quashed.

Application for Permission to Appeal to the Court of Appeal

19.   If an application had been made for permission to appeal I would  have
    refused it because I think I made the right decision, which  is  why  I
    did it.

Costs

20.   Respondent to  pay  the  applicant's  costs  to  be  assessed  if  not
    agreed.~~~~0~~~~


