
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/4073/2019  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |Zurius                                       |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Entry Clearance Officer                      |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having  heard  the  applicant  in
person and Mr M. Wall of counsel, instructed by GLD, for the  respondent  at
a remote hearing at Field House on 21 September 2021

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is refused for the reasons in the
       attached transcript of the extempore judgment given at the hearing.


    2) The Secretary of State may make an application  for  costs  within  7
       days of the substantive hearing, that is by 28 September  2021.   The
       applicant may serve submissions in response within  14  days  of  the
       substantive hearing, that is by 5 October 2021.   The  Tribunal  will
       then take a decision concerning costs on the papers.


    3) Permission to appeal is refused.   I  have  considered  the  proposed
       grounds of appeal advanced by the applicant at the hearing. I  refuse
       permission to appeal  because,  in  my  view  none  of  them  have  a
       realistic prospect of success and there is no other compelling reason
       why permission to appeal should be granted.



      Signed:     Stephen H Smith


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


      Dated:           22 Sep. 21


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
22 September 2021

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


IAC-FH-CK-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/4073/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                           21 September 2021


                                  The QUEEN
                       (ON The application OF Zurius)

                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                               - - - - - - - -

The Applicant appeared in person.

Mr M Wall, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on behalf
of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


    JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH: The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Mauritius.   He
    appeared before me as a litigant in person.  He seeks  judicial  review
    of a decision of the respondent dated  17  May  2019  to  refuse  entry
    clearance to him as a visitor, in order to  conduct  business  for  the
    company for which he worked at the time in Mauritius.

Procedural history

 2. On 11 November 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  granted  permission  to
    bring this claim, in relation to  only  one  of  the  multiple  grounds
    advanced by the applicant.  That ground  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was Wednesbury unreasonable.   Against  that  background,  the
    Secretary of State offered to compromise the proceedings on  the  basis
    that she would withdraw the impugned decision, take  a  fresh  decision
    and meet the applicant's reasonable costs.  The applicant refused  that
    offer and these proceedings were maintained.

 3. On 26 January 2020 the applicant applied to this Tribunal for an  order
    mandating the respondent to  grant  a  four  month  visit  visa.   That
    application was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley  in  terms  to
    which I will return.

 4. On 8 July 2020 the respondent took a fresh decision in any event.   She
    did so of her own motion.  The  fresh  decision  withdrew  the  earlier
    impugned  decision  and  re-refused  the  entry  clearance,  albeit  on
    different grounds.  Throughout the period from the grant of  permission
    up until this hearing, those representing the Secretary of  State  have
    sought, on multiple occasions, to invite the applicant to withdraw this
    claim for judicial review on the basis that  it  has  become  academic.
    The applicant refused to do so.  It was in those circumstances that the
    matter came before me for a substantive judicial review hearing.

 5. Despite being a  litigant  in  person,  the  applicant  demonstrates  a
    knowledge of many areas of immigration law and practice.   So  much  is
    clear from the detailed correspondence in which he has engaged with the
    Secretary of State and also from his  skeleton  argument  prepared  for
    these proceedings, which I have considered.

 6. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Wall of Counsel appeared.  I  am
    grateful to both parties for their clear and helpful oral  and  written
    submissions.  Mr Wall prepared a skeleton argument and in addition both
    parties at my request prepared chronologies setting out their  view  of
    the essential and salient steps in the history to these proceedings.

Submissions

 7. The applicant submits that the  Secretary  of  State  should  not  have
    purported to treat his challenge to the 17 May 2019 decision  as  being
    academic.  In his submission,  nothing  less  than  a  mandatory  order
    compelling the Secretary of State to grant him entry  clearance,  or  a
    decision by the respondent  granting  him  entry  clearance,  would  be
    sufficient to render these proceedings  academic.   Mr  Zurius  accepts
    that he has not brought a challenge to  the  subsequent  decision,  and
    that the decision that formally is before this Tribunal by way of  this
    judicial review application remains that of 17 May 2019.  He  explained
    that he had not sought to expand the grounds  for  judicial  review  to
    encompass the July 2020 decision as, in his view, it was  necessary  to
    "balance  the  proceedings".   He  further  contends  that  the  second
    decision, while not formally being the subject of this  challenge,  was
    corrupted by bad faith.  For that reason  the  respondent's  submission
    that the application is academic must be refuted, he submits.

 8.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Wall  submits   that   this   is
    unquestionably an academic claim.   The  decision  under  challenge  no
    longer exists, and pursuant to the  settled  concerning  challenges  to
    academic claims, there  is  no  basis  upon  which  this  Tribunal  may
    properly entertain this application for judicial review any further.

The law

 9. Judge Reeds granted permission to the applicant to pursue only a single
    ground, namely that the decision of 17 May 2019 was arguably irrational
    or unlawful on Wednesbury unreasonableness grounds.  Pursuant  to  that
    doctrine the task  for  this  Tribunal  is  to  determine  whether  the
    decision reached by the Secretary of State was  outside  the  range  of
    decisions that were reasonably open to the  Secretary  of  State.   Was
    this decision one which no reasonable Secretary  of  State  could  have
    reached?

10. Also relevant  to  this  claim  are  the  now  established  authorities
    concerning the need for procedural rigour in  public  law  proceedings.
    In R on the application of Talpada [2018] EWCA Civ 841 at [67] to  [69]
    the Court of Appeal emphasised the need for public law litigation to be
    conducted with an appropriate degree of "procedural rigour".

11. In R on the application of Spahiu v The Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ  2604  the  Court  of  Appeal  outlined  the
    principles with which courts and Tribunals should approach the issue of
    so-called rolling review.  Rolling review is sometimes the  name  given
    to the phenomenon of extant judicial review proceedings being  used  to
    challenge developments in  the  decision  originally  under  challenge,
    whether by way of  subsequent  decisions  or  amendments  to  it.   For
    example, a rolling review situation may arise where "Decision A" is the
    subject of a judicial review challenge, but during the currency of  the
    proceedings and before their resolution, the Secretary of State takes a
    further decision concerning the same  issue,  "Decision  B".   Bringing
    Decision B within the scope of judicial review proceedings  challenging
    Decision A is a practice that would amount to what is  called  "rolling
    review".  In Spahiu, the Court of Appeal  quoted  Lord  Justice  Lloyd-
    Jones (as he then was) in R on the application of Tesfay v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 415  at  [78]  where  His
    Lordship said:

         "Rolling or evolving judicial review of this kind does, in my view,
         give rise to difficulties both in principle and in  practice.   ...
         The  impact  of  the  reviewing  court  scrutinising  post-decision
         material is likely to be particularly significant  in  contexts  in
         which there will frequently be a change of circumstances or in  the
         evidence available between the time of the  original  decision  and
         the time the matter comes before the reviewing court."

12. Then at [63]:

         "It will usually be better  for  all  parties  if  judicial  review
         proceedings are not treated as 'rolling' or 'evolving', and  it  is
         generally simpler and more cost-effective for the  reviewing  court
         to avoid scrutinising post-decision material.  But there will  also
         be a need to maintain a certain procedural flexibility so as to  do
         justice as between the parties."

13. At [15] of his skeleton argument Mr Wall outlines the approach  of  the
    higher courts to the issue of academic claims.  In R on the application
    of Zoolife International Ltd v The Secretary of State for  Environment,
    Food & Rural Affairs [2007] EWHC 2995 (Admin) the High Court said:

         "32.     The starting point for considering whether a court  should
             permit a party to pursue an academic point  in  a  public  law
             case is the classic statement of Lord Slynn of Hadley in  R  v
             The Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte  Salem
             [1999] 1 AC 450 in a speech with which other  members  of  the
             Appellate Committee agreed when he explained that:

                  '...  I accept, as both Counsel agree, that in case  where
                  there is an issue  involving  a  public  authority  as  to
                  questions of public law, your Lordships have a  discretion
                  to hear the appeal, even if by the time the appeal reaches
                  the House, there is no longer a list to be  decided  which
                  will directly affect the rights  and  obligations  of  the
                  parties inter se ... The discretion to hear disputes, even
                  in the area of public law, must be exercised with  caution
                  and appeals which are academic between the parties  should
                  not be heard unless there is good  reason  in  the  public
                  interest for doing so as for example (but only by  way  of
                  example) where a discrete point of statutory  construction
                  which does  not  involve  detailed  consideration  of  the
                  facts, and where large numbers of similar cases  exist  or
                  are anticipated so that the issue will most likely need to
                  be resolved in the near future.'" (Emphasis original)

    There are a number of additional authorities to similar effect.

Discussion

14. Against that background I turn to my analysis of this  application  for
    judicial review.  I  will  address  first  the  scope  of  the  present
    challenge and secondly the submissions made by Mr Wall  concerning  the
    academic status of this claim.

15. First, the scope of  the  challenge.   As  Mr  Zurius  accepted  during
    submissions, this application for judicial review relates only  to  the
    decision of 17 May 2019.  While Mr Zurius explained that, in his words,
    he sought to "balance" the proceedings  by  not  formally  applying  to
    amend his statement of facts and grounds so as to  encompass  the  July
    2020 decision, that approach does not make sense.  The submission  that
    a claim for judicial review may be "balanced" by virtue of a deliberate
    decision by an applicant not to challenge the only  operative  decision
    is, in my judgment, deeply flawed.  In view of the  importance  of  the
    principle of procedural rigour, it is vital that the parties to  public
    law proceedings, and the Tribunal, have the utmost clarity  as  to  the
    scope of the challenge and in particular the  decision  that  is  being
    challenged.  Grounds for judicial review should  target  the  operative
    decision, not an earlier, withdrawn, decision.  Maintaining a  judicial
    review challenge to a withdrawn decision, while omitting  to  apply  to
    expand a challenge to an extant decision is not "balance"; if anything,
    it is lopsided.

16. Had Mr Zurius sought to expand his challenge to encompass the July 2020
    decision, he would have been able to apply to do  so  at  the  relevant
    time, by means of an application to amend his statement  of  facts  and
    grounds.  Alternatively, this claim could have been withdrawn, he could
    have recovered his reasonable costs  by  virtue  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's offer  to  meet  them,  and  he  could  have  brought  separate
    proceedings against the 8 July 2020 decision.

17. Mr Zurius did not apply to amend his statement of  facts  and  grounds,
    and it follows, therefore, that the only decision that is  before  this
    Tribunal is that of 17 May 2019.  In any event, it would be  unfair  on
    the respondent and would offend the  principles  of  procedural  rigour
    were I to permit a substantive challenge  to  the  July  2020  decision
    within the confines of these proceedings at this late stage.  To do  so
    would be to permit  litigation  by  ambush.   The  respondent  has  not
    attended the Tribunal ready to defend the 8 July 2020  decision.   That
    decision has not been challenged in any event, due to  the  applicant's
    desire to "balance" the claim.

18. I turn now to the question  of  whether  the  claim  is  academic.   It
    appears that the applicant misunderstands the objective  and  scope  of
    the judicial review jurisdiction.  As he confirmed to  me  during  oral
    submissions on multiple  occasions,  in  his  view  a  judicial  review
    application may only be  described  as  "academic"  if  the  underlying
    impugned decision was re-taken in such a way as to meet his objectives.



19. So, applied to the facts of this case, in  the  applicant's  view  this
    judicial review application  would  only  be  academic  if  either  the
    Secretary of State had already agreed to grant entry clearance to  him,
    or if she had already done so.  Mr Zurius  relies  on  OB  (Ukraine)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA  Civ  1216.   An
    unsuccessful  appellant  to  an  entry  clearance  human  rights  claim
    appealed from this Tribunal to the Court of Appeal.  In parallel to the
    proceedings taking place before that  court,  the  Secretary  of  State
    reconsidered her position and granted entry clearance to the appellant.
     The appellant nevertheless wanted to succeed in his statutory  appeal,
    and did not take the necessary steps to provide his biometric  details,
    instead preferring to prosecute the appeal.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    on the basis it was academic.

20.  In  Mr  Zurius's  submission,  OB  (Ukraine)  is  authority  for   the
    proposition that a decision may only be categorised as academic  if  it
    is one that is  favourable  to  an  applicant.   In  my  judgment  that
    submission is misconceived.  It so happens that  on  the  facts  of  OB
    (Ukraine) the Secretary of State had granted  entry  clearance  to  the
    applicant,  thereby  rendering  the  human  rights  appeal  proceedings
    academic.  That was a case-specific decision which, on the facts of the
    proceedings before the Court of Appeal, meant that  the  challenge  was
    academic.  While I accept that in OB (Ukraine), had entry clearance not
    been granted, it may have been  harder  to  say  that  the  appeal  was
    academic, it does not follow  that  in  all  other  cases  where  entry
    clearance has not been granted the proceedings are incapable  of  being
    categorised as academic.  Such a stark proposition of cause and  effect
    cannot follow.  Indeed, it would make a mockery of the judicial  review
    jurisdiction, for it would result in the courts and this Tribunal being
    littered with unmeritorious claims concerning decisions which no longer
    exist in relation to which there could only be  one  outcome  which  is
    capable of satisfying the requirement for finality in the  proceedings,
    namely an outcome in which the applicant succeeds.  That is as  much  a
    misunderstanding  of  OB  (Ukraine)  as  much  as  it  is   a   broader
    misunderstanding of the nature of the judicial review jurisdiction.

21. Turning to the criteria for an academic claim, the 17 May 2019 decision
    no longer exists.  It has been  withdrawn.   I  can  identify  no  good
    reason in the public interest for continuing to examine the  underlying
    decision of the Secretary of State.  There is not a  broader  point  of
    statutory construction raised by the challenge, indeed, it is  a  case-
    specific Wednesbury unreasonableness  challenge,  nor  are  there  many
    other cases of this nature likely to require resolution in light of the
    decision of this tribunal.  Although the criteria in  Salem  were  non-
    exhaustive,  not  one  of  the  reasons  advanced  by  Mr  Zurius   for
    entertaining this claim further demonstrate any good reason to  examine
    the claim further.

22. I must address a submission made by Mr Zurius that the mandatory nature
    of the order he seeks is  a  further  reason  that  means  that  it  is
    incapable  of  being  categorised  as   academic.    In   addition   to
    misunderstanding  the  nature  and  scope  of   the   judicial   review
    jurisdiction as I have already outlined, Mr  Zurius's  insistence  that
    this Tribunal grant a mandatory order against the  Secretary  of  State
    misunderstands the judicial review jurisdiction in another  significant
    respect.  The nature of  a  judicial  review  application  is  that  it
    reviews an underlying decision.  There must always be a decision  which
    is capable of being subjected to scrutiny.  It is not a  forum  for  an
    applicant to  seek  mandatory  relief  without  the  proceedings  being
    anchored to an underlying decision.  For  the  reasons  already  given,
    there is no underlying decision in these proceedings.  It follows  that
    it would not be appropriate for this court to entertain this submission
    any further.

23. In any event, mandatory orders are highly exceptional.  I  respectfully
    endorse the reasons given by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley for refusing
    the applicant's application of 26 January 2020 for a mandatory order in
    these terms:

         "1.      On 26th January 2020 the applicant applied  for  an  order
             mandating the respondent to grant a  4  month  visit  visa  to
             enter the UK.

         2. I  refuse  the  application  for  the  following  reasons.   The
             respondent is offering to consent to  the  withdrawal  of  the
             judicial review  and  to  pay  the  reasonable  costs  of  the
             applicant, and to make a further decision on  the  application
             within 3 months of the date of the consent order.

         3. The making of a mandatory order that something should happen  is
             very seldomly part of the relief in successful judicial review
             proceedings,  and  is  only  normally  utilised  to  put   the
             applicant back in the same position he or she was in prior  to
             the contended unlawful decision.

         4. The most common form of relief for a successful applicant  would
             be quashing  (removing)  of  the  unlawful  decision  and  the
             payment of his or her costs.  The applicant has  an  offer  by
             the respondent which effectively covers  these  two  forms  of
             relief as the applicant is guaranteed a  further  decision  on
             his application to come to the UK, which will put him  in  the
             same position as he would be if the things he  has  complained
             about had not happened.

         5. It would not therefore be just to make the order requested.

         6. The applicant should consider that if he proceeds  with  a  full
             judicial review hearing rather than agreeing the consent order
             proposed by the respondent that  he  may  be  liable  for  the
             respondent's costs from the date of the proposed consent order
             if he does not succeed in gaining anything further  from  that
             hearing.

         7. Costs reserved."

24. Mr Zurius did make an allegation of bad faith against the respondent in
    relation to the second decision.  There are several  difficulties  with
    that allegation.  First, it was not brought  in  a  timely  fashion  in
    relation to the decision when it was made.   For  the  reasons  I  have
    already given it would be unfair and inappropriate for this Tribunal to
    permit Mr Zurius to advance significant allegations of that  nature  at
    this late stage.  Secondly, on the basis of the  materials  before  the
    Tribunal, I see no basis to conclude that such  an  argument  would  be
    arguable in any event.

25. Drawing this analysis together, this  application  is  dismissed.   The
    challenge has been brought in relation to a  decision  that  no  longer
    exists, and there has been  no  application  to  amend  the  facts  and
    grounds so that judicial consideration may have been given to expanding
    the scope of the challenge to encompass the 8 July 2020 decision.   The
    substantive claim before the  Tribunal  is  wholly  academic.   Nothing
    turns on the facts of this case for any wider cohort  of  litigants  or
    applicants (although I do not underestimate the disappointment that  my
    decision will be to Mr Zurius personally).

26. The applicant has already been offered by  the  respondent  the  relief
    which he could do no more than hope to receive  in  these  proceedings,
    namely for his decision to be reconsidered and a fresh decision  taken.
    The respondent offered to do that for the  applicant  as  early  as  24
    December 2019.   The  applicant  refused  that  offer  as  he  did  all
    subsequent offers to resolve the proceedings while  avoiding  the  need
    for this hearing to take place.

27. For those reasons this application for judicial review is dismissed.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~


