
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06341/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 August 2016                          |On 8 August 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              Mrs Bakiza Alsino
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION not madE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sulaiman Alkuttna (sponsor) for the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with  the
   permission of a Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal, against a  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Foudy hereinafter "the Judge") to  dismiss
   her appeal against a decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer  made  on  9
   March 2015, to refuse to grant her entry clearance to come to the UK with
   a view to settlement, as the spouse of a refugee.

2. I will say, at the outset, that there have been significant  developments
   since the decision of the Judge was made which have meant  that  whatever
   is decided in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is really  of  very  much
   less significance than it would have been. In that context, the appellant
   was out of the country when she sought entry clearance. However, she  has
   since entered the UK unlawfully but has successfully applied  for  asylum
   in her own right.  I mean successful in the sense that her application to
   be recognised as a  refugee  has  been  granted.  She  has,  accordingly,
   existing leave as a refugee and this was accepted to be the  position  by
   Mrs Pettersen at the  hearing  before  me.  Nevertheless,  the  appellant
   through her sponsor who was acting as her  representative  (her  original
   solicitors no longer being instructed)  did  not  wish  to  withdraw  the
   appeal and asked me to make a decision upon it. That is what I have done.



3. By way of background, both the  appellant  and  her  sponsor  are  Syrian
   nationals. They married each other, in what has been  referred  to  as  a
   "religious ceremony", in Syria on 5 November 2012.  It has been explained
   that, at the time, Government offices in Syria were  closed  due  to  the
   hostilities there so that the marriage could not be officially registered
   with the relevant authorities.  Given the increase in  the  intensity  of
   the fighting in Syria the appellant and  sponsor  fled  to  Turkey.  From
   there the sponsor came to the  UK  and  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
   successful. The appellant went from Turkey back to Syria  and,  with  the
   assistance of the sponsor's brother, sought to register the marriage with
   the Syrian authorities. It is said that a  Syrian  Court  then  issued  a
   registration document in relation to the marriage on 29  June  2014.  The
   appellant then returned to Turkey.   She  sought  entry  clearance  as  a
   spouse of a refugee. That was the way in which  matters  stood  when  the
   Judge heard the appeal.

4. The Entry Clearance Officer who made the decision  of  9  March  2015  to
   refuse entry clearance did so because he was  not  satisfied  as  to  the
   validity of the marriage and, it seems, not satisfied that  each  of  the
   parties intended to live permanently  with  the  other  as  each  other's
   spouse. So, he thought that the requirements set out at paragraph 352A(i)
   and (iv) of the Immigration Rules were not met

5. The appellant's appeal, made of course while she was  still  outside  the
   UK, was considered by the Judge at a hearing of 22 September  2015.  Both
   parties were represented at  that  hearing  and  the  sponsor  gave  oral
   evidence. The Judge's determination dismissing the  appeal,  which  is  a
   model of conciseness, was promulgated on 30 September 2015.

6. The Judge found the sponsor to be an honest witness and  found  that  the
   couple had a genuine relationship and that they  regarded  themselves  as
   being married to each other. As to all of that he said this;

                 "6. The ECO asserted that the appellant could not meet  the
requirements  of                           paragraph  352A  as  he  had  not
married     before     he     left     his     country      of      habitual
residence to seek asylum. The ECO also asserted that the  marriage  was  not
                  subsisting.

                  7.  The  second  issue  is  easily  determined.  There  is
abundant evidence  before                              me  that  this  is  a
genuine   couple   who   care    very    much    for    one    another.    I
           accept that they regard themselves as  having  been  married,  at
least in the                                   religious sense,  since  late
2012.     Their     marriage     has     so     far     survived     extreme
hardships and I am satisfied that it is a genuine and subsisting one."

7. However, the Judge concluded whilst seeming to accept that  the  marriage
   had subsequently been registered, that that had only been done after  the
   sponsor had fled to seek asylum so that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
   352A(i) were not met. Specifically, as to that point, he said;

                 "8. Regarding the first issue, I find  that  the  appellant
and sponsor  went                                      through  a  religious
marriage    ceremony    in    Syria     in     November     2012,     before
the sponsor left to seek asylum elsewhere. However,  by  the  sponsor's  own
                   evidence, a marriage is not  recognised  as  valid  under
Syrian law  until  it  is                        registered  by  the  Syrian
authorities. That did not occur until the Syrian  Court               issued
a  registration  document  in  June  2014,  which   was   well   after   the
                   sponsor had fled to seek asylum in the UK.

                 9. It follows from my findings that  the  appellant  cannot
satisfy paragraph                                   352A of the  Immigration
Rules    as    she    did     not     lawfully     marry     the     sponsor
 until after he had fled his home country to seek protection elsewhere."

8. Finally, the Judge considered, in the alternative, whether the  appellant
   might succeed under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
   (ECHR) but concluded that she could not. In that context, he said this;

                 12. Whilst I have every sympathy  with  the  situation  the
appellant and                           sponsor find  themselves  in  ,  the
appellant is not currently in  a  life-                          threatening
situation.   She   is   safe   in   Turkey,   where   many   thousands    of
             Syrians are currently living. Her husband is able to visit  her
there, as he  has                   done  in  the  recent  past.  He  is  in
employment therefore they  are  not  in  dire                      financial
circumstances.  It  would  be  tempting   at   the   moment   to   "stretch"
                   Article  8  in  Syrian  cases  to  reflect  international
sympathy for  those  citizens,                             however  a  Judge
should  not  succumb   to   such   influences.   My   duty   is   to   apply
         the  law  and  I  find  that  there  are  in  truth  no  compelling
circumstances in this                          appeal  that  mean  that  the
appellant should be excused the need to make  a                       proper
entry clearance application under the Rules."

9. So, the appeal failed, but that was not the end  of  the  matter  because
   the appellant, then represented by the  Cohesion  Legal  Services  Centre
   (who no longer represent her) applied for permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal. Essentially, it was contended that the Judge had erred in
   failing to follow the approach set out in Hassan v Minister  for  Justice
   [2013] IESC 8 (Supreme Court Fennelly J Murray  20  February  2013)  with
   respect to the question of the legality of the marriage;  in  failing  to
   consider the appeal, in the alternative, under Rule 352AA  which  relates
   to unmarried partners of refugees and  in  wrongly  deciding  that,  with
   respect to Article 8, the decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
   lawful and in pursuance of a legitimate aim.

10. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted  and  the  grant  was  not
   limited.

11. Permission having been granted the matter was listed  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be given as  to  whether
   or not the Judge had erred in law and, if so, what should flow from that.
   Representation at that hearing was as stated above.

12. A letter written by Cohesion Legal Services Centre of 27  May  2016  had
   alerted the Upper Tribunal to the fact that the appellant  had,  by  that
   time, made her way to the UK and had claimed asylum. It was only  at  the
   hearing,  however,  that  it  was  confirmed  that  her  application  had
   succeeded, a copy of a Residence Permit which had been issued to  her  by
   the Home Office having  been  produced  by  the  sponsor.  Mrs  Pettersen
   undertook some checks and was able to confirm that  Home  Office  records
   did now show that that grant of asylum  had  been  made.  Notwithstanding
   that, and as already noted, the appellant asked that I go on to determine
   this appeal to the Upper Tribunal and I agreed to do so.

13. In support of the appeal the sponsor, speaking with the assistance of  a
   Kurdish Kurmanji-speaking interpreter whom he appeared to understand  and
   who appeared to understand him, said, in effect, that he thought that the
   appeal should have been  allowed  because  he  had  produced  a  document
   demonstrating  that  the  marriage  had  been  lawfully  registered.  Mrs
   Pettersen submitted that the Judge  had  correctly  found  that  although
   there had been an attempt at  registration,  such  registration  did  not
   operate retrospectively so  that  the  marriage  had  not  been  properly
   registered, and could not be regarded as being a lawful one in the  sense
   that it was recognised by the authorities  in  Syria,  at  the  time  the
   sponsor had departed that country.

14. I can only allow an appeal to the Upper Tribunal if I am satisfied  that
   the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and that such error was material.

15. I shall deal, in turn, with the three separate grounds of  appeal  which
   had been relied upon when the application for permission to appeal to the
   Upper Tribunal was made.

16. As to ground one, it was suggested  that  had  the  Judge  followed  the
   approach taken in the case of Hassan, cited above, he would have  allowed
   the appeal. It was said that in Hassan, the Supreme Court had stated that
   in deciding whether a marriage with legal effect had taken place all  the
   circumstances had to be looked at including any explanation  offered  for
   an inability to produce a relevant marriage certificate.

17. I do not accept that Hassan assists the appellant in  this  case.  First
   of all, the  Supreme  Court  in  Hassan  were  dealing  with  immigration
   legislation relevant to Ireland and not the law which this Judge  had  to
   have regard to. Secondly, it appears that the Supreme Court  was  dealing
   with a case where there had been a clear assertion, at the outset, that a
   marriage ceremony with legal effect had taken place prior to leave  being
   sought. In this appellant's case, however, it was not clear to me that it
   was being asserted that, prior to the Entry  Clearance  Application,  the
   religious ceremony, of itself, which is all that had taken place at  that
   time, had amounted to a marriage ceremony with  legal  effect  in  Syria.
   Indeed, as the Judge noted at paragraph 8 of his determination  which  is
   set out above, such had not been contended at the hearing.  In looking at
   the wording of Rule 352A(ii) it does seem to me that what is contemplated
   by the Rule is a marriage of a lawful nature in the home country prior to
   the departure from that country  of  the  asylum  seeking  spouse.   This
   marriage only became lawful  according  to  the  findings  of  the  Judge
   (findings clearly open to him) after registration.  It could not be said,
   in these circumstances, that the Rules were met. It was certainly open to
   the Judge, notwithstanding the case law cited above, to conclude  it  was
   not.  I reject this ground.

18. The second ground is that the Judge ought, in the alternative,  to  have
   considered matters under Rule 352AA. However, the Judge did  not  err  in
   law in this regard because paragraph 352AA had never been relied upon  at
   any stage either in the Entry Clearance Application nor in the grounds of
   appeal to the First-tier Tribunal nor in argument before  the  Judge.  In
   this context, of course, the appellant was competently represented before
   the Judge.  I reject that ground.

19. As to the third ground, it does not seem to me that it can  properly  be
   contended on any basis, that the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
   concerning Article 8 was not a lawful one and was not, in general  terms,
   in pursuance of a legitimate aim being that of immigration control.  That
   is the only challenge made to that part of the decision.

20. In the circumstances I would conclude that the Judge did not err in  law
   in making his decision and that decision should,  therefore,  stand.   Of
   course, none of that affects the fact that the  appellant  has  now  been
   recognised as a refugee and has leave on that account.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of
   an error of law. That decision shall, therefore, stand.

Anonymity

22. I make no anonymity Direction.

                       Signed
                                             MR Hemingway
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                       Date                                        8  August
2016

To the Respondent
Fee Award

23. I make no fee award.

                       Signed
                                             MR Hemingway
                                             Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                       Date                                        8  August
2016
