
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00422/2017 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype via Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2021                         |On 11 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, instructed by Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on 1st January 2000 who
arrived in the UK as a minor in 2016 and claimed asylum on arrival on the
basis of his fear of the Taliban.  He claimed the Taliban had threatened
his father by reason of his membership of the Ahmadzai Shora as a village
elder in his home area in Baghlan province.  The UNHCR Guidelines dated
30th August 2018 referenced village elders as being a risk category.

Immigration History

The Secretary of State in her letter dated 23rd December 2016 gave detailed
reasons for the refusal of the appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection
and human rights claim.  The respondent accepted that the appellant's
father was an Ahmadzai Shora but rejected the claim that he had received
threats from the Taliban.  Although the appellant's claim regarding the
threat from the Taliban was addressed briefly, the Secretary of State's
refusal concentrated on the possibility of internal relocation, and
referenced HK & Ors (minors - indiscriminate violence - forced recruitment
by Taliban - contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 376
(IAC) stating that:

"Where a child has close relatives in Afghanistan who have assisted him in
leaving the country, any assertion that such family members are
uncontactable or are unable to meet the child in Kabul and care for him on
return, should be supported by credible evidence of efforts to contact
those family members and their inability to meet and care for the child in
the event of return."

It was considered that as the appellant had been assisted by his mother and
maternal uncle in leaving Afghanistan, he had failed to provide credible
evidence to suggest his family would be unwilling or unable to care for him
on his return.

The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf, who dismissed the
claim on all grounds on 10th April 2017.  There was a challenge made to
that decision on the basis that the judge had made material errors of law,
not least that the judge did not adopt the correct legal approach to
considering the evidence of a minor when assessing credibility.  Upper
Tribunal Judge Jordan, when setting aside the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal on 26th March 2018, stated:

"[The appellant] and his father and the family were part of the Ahmadzai
tribe and came from a village in Baghlan province.  His father was a member
of the Ahmadzai Shora, which is a committee of notables from different
provinces in Afghanistan who participate in a form of government.  There is
no doubt that the appellant's home area is controlled by the Taliban and it
was his case that his father was threatened by the Taliban because they saw
members of the Ahmadzai Shora as supporters of the government.  That seems
both plausible and, according to the judge, credible.  In the result the
judge was satisfied, according to paragraph 55 of the determination, that
it was reasonably likely that the appellant's father came under threat to
leave his post as a member of the Ahmadzai Shora and, accordingly, I think
the inevitable consequence of that was that the appellant's family were at
risk in the home area.

At present I do not see it was a finding made by the judge that the
appellant himself as a minor could return to an area which is under the
control of the Taliban, all the more so if his father had a position as a
member of the Ahmadzai Shora.  It followed from this that the issue before
the Tribunal was whether or not it was reasonable, (the expression 'unduly
harsh' is sometimes used as a synonym), for him to relocate as a minor to
Kabul.

...

However, it was simply not enough to render the appellant's relocation to
Kabul as reasonable or not unduly harsh.  It would require specific
findings that the appellant as a minor could have returned to Kabul where
he would have contacted a member of his family, either his mother or father
or more distant relatives. In normal circumstances it would be a perfectly
proper inference to draw that if a family member were confronted with a
telephone call from a minor who could not return to his home area that the
family member would make efforts to provide the safety net that the minor
requires but there has to be a thoroughgoing enquiry as to whether that is
possible."

The matter was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and came before Judge
Sullivan on 16th April 2019.  Her determination was promulgated on 9th May
2019.  That decision was challenged, permission to appeal granted and my
error of law decision dated 29th August 2019 set aside Judge Sullivan's
decision and preserved no findings in relation to the assessment of risk on
return.

Further evidence was provided for the resumed hearing including inter alia,
the appellant's GP medical notes, a report of Dr Hartley, clinical
psychologist dated 7th September 2020, a Pathway Plan for the appellant
dated June 2020, a letter from the Red Cross dated 1st August 2019, a
witness statement of Atiqullah Sherzad dated 27th January 2021 and a
further witness statement of the appellant dated 27th January 2021.
Additionally, there was further country background material particularly
referencing Afghanistan and the Covid crisis.

Mr Smyth in his submissions relied on the three bundles before the
Tribunal, those submitted for the First-tier Tribunal hearings and a
further third bundle submitted for the purposes of this hearing and in
particular a witness statement of the appellant dated 27th January 2021 and
two further witness statements from the appellant's friends Mr Mohammed
Haroon and Mr Ali Jabarkhail attesting to the appellant's epileptic
attacks. Those statements were not signed and dated.  This, he said, was
due to the COVID-19 restrictions but Mr Jabarkhail attended and was willing
to give evidence at the hearing.  He was not, in the event, called.

At the hearing, Mr Smyth submitted that it was open to the appellant to
adduce further evidence to allow me to depart from earlier findings of the
First-tier Tribunal following the authority of AZ (error of law:
jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245 (IAC),  which held that
pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
Act 2007, the Upper Tribunal has jurisdiction to depart from, or vary, its
decision that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law, such that the
First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside under section 12(2)(a).
That jurisdiction however would only be exercised in very exceptional
cases.

Mr Melvin made further written submissions on 4th February 2021, objecting
to the admission of further witness statements from the appellant and two
of his friends attesting to his seizures.  He observed the solicitors had
ample opportunity to adduce this evidence in the near eighteen months since
the last hearing.  At the hearing Mr Melvin repeated his objection to the
inclusion of the appellant's and two further witness statements from the
appellant's friends.

Nevertheless, in the interests of justice, I admitted all the further
evidence. The pandemic had delayed consideration of the appeal and updated
material was significant.  I considered that submissions by the
representatives could be made as to the weight to be attached to the
witness statements from the appellant and friends.  The difficulty with the
submission from Mr Smyth in relation to AZ is that permission was only
granted in relation to the ability of the appellant to relocate.  That said
as indicated below, I have approached the findings of the First-tier
Tribunal with the guidelines given in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702
in mind.

Mr Smyth confirmed that the appellant could speak good English and there
was no requirement for an interpreter, but he did not intend to call the
witness and Mr Melvin made no request to cross-examine the witness.

Mr Melvin made oral submissions and relied on his written submissions as
follows.  The appellant was now a 20-year-old healthy male not at risk of
persecution from the Taliban in Kabul and the decision should be made
pursuant to the updated country guidance AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan
[2020] UKUT 130 (IAC).  The appellant did not come into any of the
categories of risk and was not affected by indiscriminate violence.  Mr
Melvin submitted that with regard to reasonableness of internal relocation
it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant to return to Kabul even
without specific connections, a support network or even without a taskera.
The First-tier Tribunal had found the appellant was not a credible witness
in relation to his personal history, his journey and the claimed lack of
contact with his family members.  The appellant would be able to obtain
financial and emotional support from his family members, who albeit do not
reside in Kabul would be able to assist him as they did financially when
sending him to the UK.

The appellant had language and educational and vocational skills in that he
could speak Pashtu and Dari and attended education in Afghanistan to year 9
and had been attending college and studying English and mathematics in the
UK.  He was currently living with a friend.  No evidence had been provided
to show that he was unable to undertake manual work to support himself in
Kabul.

Following the submission of further medical evidence, Mr Melvin was
astonished that no medical evidence had been provided in the many previous
hearings before the Tribunal. With regard to the medical evidence the
appellant used to take levetiracetam daily to control his seizures which he
stopped in November 2018 and now confirmed that he had had three or four
more seizures this year, but it appeared that the medication was available
in Kabul as confirmed from the solicitor's interpreter who had contacted
pharmacies in Kabul.  The consultant neurologist Dr Meera Sabeka had
confirmed to his GP on 4th February 2019 that the appellant had attended
for a review previously and was diagnosed with symptomatic epilepsy, but
this medication was ceased in November 2018, him having stopped the
seizures.  Thus, the seizures had ceased, the medication was stopped, and
he was discharged from neurology.

Dr Patel of the Guildhall Surgery dated 4th November 2020 (at the request
of Kesar & Co Solicitors) confirmed that the appellant had restarted
levetiracetam but that he had no mental health issues outside sadness and
isolation and wondering about his family.

The opinion of Dr Hartley, the psychologist who met the appellant on 24th
August 2020, was that the appellant was not suffering from any diagnosable
mental health condition.

The respondent was concerned that the Tribunal was not getting the full
picture of the seizures claimed by the appellant.  Outside his anxiety
about his immigration status there were no mental health issues.  According
to the Pathway Plan the appellant was enjoying his time in the UK, in
education and living independently without problems.  The belatedly
disclosed medical records showed some concern and treatment with medication
but there were no concerns that his seizures could not be treated by
medication.  Dr Hartley's report recommended an assessment by a neurologist
and a neuropsychologist to investigate and determine the extent, nature and
cause of the symptoms that he reported but the appellant had seen a
neurologist.  Dr Hartley commented on whether the appellant should avoid
heavy lifting or operate heavy machinery and that he could not perform
manual work, but the respondent rejected this submission without further
expert evidence.  The GP had not indicated any further need.

The appeal showed that at its highest the appellant had suffered
occasionally from seizures that were managed with medication.

The respondent also referred to the CPIN on Afghanistan issued by the
respondent in December 2020 which outlined socio-economic factors and the
unemployment rate in 2017 of approximately 23.9%.  The labour force was
estimated at 8,478,000 in 2017 with 44% in agriculture, 18.1% in industry
and 37.6% in services.  The CPIN outlined medical and healthcare services
which included neurological conditions at section 14.1.1 and that MedCOI
had advised that inpatient or outpatient specialist treatment by a
neurologist was available at the Ali Abad Hospital in Kabul.

At 14.1.3 MedCOI showed that antiepileptic drugs were available including
levetiracetam.  In fact, the respondent submitted that treatment,
medication and support would be available to the appellant in Kabul.

Mr Melvin did submit that the claims of seizures made by the witnesses were
not borne out by the medical records and the appellant did not tell the GP
until the week before the hearing.  In his oral submissions Mr Melvin
relied on EU (Afghanistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 202, paragraph 10, where Sir
Stanley Burnton had indicated the motivation for incurring cost was that a
child could have a better life in another country and therefore the family
would be unlikely to be happy to cooperate for the child to return as that
would be a waste of an investment.  He also made reference to AA
(Afghanistan) EWCA Civ 1625 at paragraph 11.  Even if the Red Cross had
visited the village it was unlikely that the family, who according to the
appellant's own evidence spent $5,000 to $6,000, would assist.  The
submissions on the Red Cross letter did not outweigh the findings at
paragraphs 21 and 22 of Judge Sullivan's decision.

In relation to his medication and epilepsy the consultant neurologist had
advised the appellant to create a seizure diary and that did not appear.
There was only one noted seizure in April 2017 and nothing since that time.
 If the appellant had had seizures in 2020, he would have contacted the GP
and restarted his medication.  There were large time gaps between these
incidents, and nothing put before Judge Sullivan in 2019 and it had only
recently come to light.  The Pathway Plan in the health section made no
mention of any difficulties with the appellant's epileptic seizures.

Mr Smyth submitted that there had been further evidence from the Red Cross
as per the letter of 1st August 2019 and an appointment had been made for
the appellant to attend.  This post-dated the hearing before Judge
Sullivan.

The appellant could not obtain a taskera because it was clear from the
country guidance that he had to obtain it from his home area.  This was
someone who was destined to work in the informal economy and could not rely
on regular financial assistance.  The question was what would happen to him
when his return package had evaporated because he had no personal
connections in Kabul and had lost contact with his family.

The current country guidance of AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan [2020]
went into far more detail about the types of work available and set out
explicitly the limits on employment and the fact that owing to his
circumstances the formal economy would be forever beyond him.  The country
guidance made clear that there was employment in the construction industry
but here his epilepsy was highly relevant.  The appellant had not
fabricated this, there had been a formal diagnosis of epilepsy.  Dr Hartley
had made the point that his epilepsy coincided with anxiety and his
thoughts on his parents.  He had struggled to get appointments in the face
of the COVID pandemic and managed to obtain one at the end of January 2021
and his GP had prescribed him further medication albeit by telephone.

I was invited to consider all of the evidence in the round and referred to
Mr Smyth's skeleton argument that this was a young man with a formal
diagnosis of epilepsy with seizures controlled by medication.  There was no
embellishment on the part of the appellant.  The cost of medication was
that one day's labour would be equivalent to ten days' medication.  It was
clear from the evidence that work as a day labourer was irregular and the
indication was that it was common for people to only obtain a handful of
days per month.

The COVID-19 pandemic was relevant to the reasonableness of his return
because at the date of the hearing the world was affected by a world
pandemic and the employment opportunities, his lack of connection in Kabul
would force him to be accommodated in a tea house, which had notoriously
poor sanitation and were crowded.  This was an appellant who had never been
to Kabul.

I was invited to allow the appeal.



Analysis

The appellant adduced further evidence from the Red Cross and further
medical evidence under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Much of that evidence post-dated the First-tier
Tribunal and it was admitted in the interests of justice.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan stated at paragraph 17 that in assessing
the appellant's evidence, "I have kept in mind his youth and the fact he
would have been a child at the dates of key events".  She noted that:

"19.  In the light of the evidence filed and given in this appeal and the
concessions made by the two representatives at the hearing I find as
follows:

a)    The Appellant is now 19 years of age;

b)    He comes from Shahabuddin village in the Puli Khumri district of
Baghlan province;

c)    His father was a member of the Ahmadzai Shora which is the Ahmadzai
tribal gathering which by tradition resolves issues between councils and
villages; and

d)    The Taliban is in control in Baghlan province so that it is not safe
for the Appellant to return."

Judge Sullivan at paragraphs 20 to 22 made a series of findings that she
was not satisfied that the Taliban had attempted to recruit the appellant
when he was living at home in Shahabuddin and that she was not satisfied
that the appellant had given a truthful account of his history in
Afghanistan or of his journey to the United Kingdom.

For reasons which will become clear, not least the appellant's health
condition, I highlight the principles enunciated and encapsulated in AM
(Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 with regards vulnerable
witnesses.  Paragraph 21 of that authority gave what was described as an
inexhaustive checklist

       "21. It is submitted on behalf of t2he appellant that the agreed
       basis for allowing the appeal on the merits reflects core principles
       of asylum law and practice which have particular importance in claims
       from children and other vulnerable persons namely:



        a. ..given the gravity of the consequences of a decision on asylum
        and the accepted inherent difficulties in establishing the facts of
        the claim as well as future risks, there is  a  lower  standard  of
        proof, expressed as 'a reasonable chance', 'substantial grounds for
        thinking' or 'a serious possibility';


        b. ..while an assessment of personal credibility may be a  critical
        aspect of some claims, particularly in the absence  of  independent
        supporting evidence, it is not an end in itself or a substitute for
        the application of the criteria for refugee status  which  must  be
        holistically assessed;


        c. ..the findings of medical experts must be treated as part of the
        holistic assessment: they are not to be treated as an 'add-on' and
        rejected as a  result  of  an  adverse  credibility  assessment  or
        finding made prior to and without regard to the medical evidence;


        d...  expert  medical  evidence  can  be  critical   in   providing
        explanation for difficulties in giving a  coherent  and  consistent
        account of past events and for identifying any relevant  safeguards
        required to meet vulnerabilities that can lead to  disadvantage  in
        the determination process,  for example, in  the  ability  to  give
        oral testimony and under what conditions  (see  the  Guidance  Note
        below and JL (medical reports - credibility) (China) [2013]  UKUT
        00145 (IAC), at [26] to [27]);


        e. ..an appellant's account of his or her fears and the  assessment
        of an appellant's credibility must also be judged in the context of
        the known objective circumstances and practices  of  the  state  in
        question and a failure to do so can constitute an error of law; and
        f.  ..in  making  asylum  decisions,  the  highest   standards   of
        procedural fairness are required.




I remind myself of the principles set out in Devaseelan.  In AA (Somalia) v
SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 at paragraph 53, Carnwath LJ (as he then was)
extracted some key tenets as follows:

           'In Devaseelan itself it was the Secretary of State who was
           seeking to rely on the previous decision. ...I extract what seem
           to me the most relevant points for present purposes (including
           the AIT's emphasis):
                 (1) The first Adjudicator's determination should always be
                 the starting-point. ....
                 (4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought
                 to the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they
                 were relevant to the issues before him, should be treated
                 by the second Adjudicator with the greatest circumspection.
                 ...
                 (6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies
                 on facts that are not materially different from those put
                 to the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim
                 by what is in essence the same evidence as that available
                 to the Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator
                 should regard the issues as settled by the first
                 Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in line
                 with that determination rather than allowing the matter to
                 be relitigated...
                 (7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4)
                 and (6) is greatly reduced if there is some very good
                 reason why the Appellant's failure to adduce relevant
                 evidence before the first Adjudicator should not be, as it
                 were, held against him... "

The appellant asserted he arrived in the UK on 24th June 2016.  In his
asylum intake interview the appellant stated that he had no health
difficulties, but I note in his witness statement of 28th November 2016 at
paragraph 13 he stated that the Taliban had visited his house and when he
refused to join them, they kicked him and beat him with the backside of the
rifle and, "as a result I got head injury on my left side of the skull.  I
still have a visible wound mark of that injury.  I went to the local clinic
named Haji Nawab Clinic where I had eight stitches at my head injury".

His Statement of Evidence (SEF) clearly identified as having a witness
statement dated November 2016 attached, wherein he refers to the nature of
his injuries to his head.  That predates the very first appeal decision,
which in fact was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan on 26th March
2018.  On 27th September 2017 the appellant is recorded by his GP practice
as,

"seen with support worker present Big World used describes ? seizures as
starting whilst home in Afghanistan three years ago first episode - was
sitting with family and then had ? seizure, did not know what happened but
says mum described incident as him being possessed, fell on floor and
became unconscious and mum got him back by pouring water on face - all four
limbs were shaking ... had generalised pains in body afterwards with
confusion - unsure how long ? seizure lasted has had similar episodes two -
three times since most recent was April 2017 was sitting at friend's home,
had ? seizure - friend said fell unconscious did not tell him full details
of episode as ? did not want him to feel bad ... unable to speak as was
took weak, no identifiable provoking factors ... informed by support worker
the patient had head injuries in past (sic)."

The doctor's notes record that the appellant described to the doctor that
the Taliban entered his home and hit him on the head with a gun and
described profuse bleeding, admission to a hospital, and seizures started
afterwards.  The doctor identified no family history of seizures and that
he "feels well in self otherwise".

I note this description in September 2017 was very similar to the
description given in his 2016 witness statement which predated any decision
either from the Secretary of State or the judiciary.  The appellant
apparently had no warning signs of his impending attacks.  As recorded in a
letter from the Looked After Children's nurse Linda Robinson on 29th June
2017:

"F has experienced a 'blackout' episode.  This occurred in April 2017.  He
says he did not have any warning.  He is unclear how long this lasted and
he had to be roused by his friends who splashed him with water.  He says he
had not taken alcohol or any other drug on this occasion.  His initial
health assessment dated 2nd July 2016 also records an episode of a seizure
and it had asked for this to be investigated by his GP by August 2016 and
this does not appear to have occurred."

The nurse proceeded to state that he had some sleep difficulties and
headaches which he managed using paracetamol but otherwise was in good
health.  She also acknowledged that he "presented as a polite young man.
He had some worries and anxieties that his social worker is supporting him
with and this appears to be specifically related to his asylum claim".

The significance of this letter is that it is quite clear that the
appellant had requested that he be investigated by his GP as long ago as
July 2016 and this did not occur.

There is a further record from Coram Adoption and Fostering Academy dated
28th June 2017 and the entry reads:

           "Social worker to encourage F to make an appointment to discuss
           'blackout' episode, headaches and sleep difficulties".

In fact, the appellant was first registered with the Guildhall Surgery on
24th June 2016 and has only ever been registered with the Guildhall Surgery
since that time.  His new patient questionnaire identifies under "under
serious illnesses" possible 'seizures'.  A year later in September 2017 he
was referred to the Children and Young People's Mental Health Services for
what he described in the meeting as "seizure-like episodes" and that the
appellant called them "genies".  The health care practitioner there
reported 'From F's reports of his friend's account of what the episodes
look like they are in line with definition of seizures.  F is unable to
stop or recall anything about them."  She stated:

"Due to F's undiagnosed seizures our service was unable to properly assess
his mental health needs, in our view further medical investigation into the
seizures is required.  F also reported that he suffered a trauma to the
head during the time Taliban hit him repeatedly with a metal object"

and:

"With regards to risk my assessment highlighted the safety risk to this YP
especially due to seizure episodes.  So far the seizures have been
witnessed by his friends and no-one sought medical attention during or
after the event.  My concern is that FA lives in an independent
accommodation with no adult supervision, who would be able to call an
ambulance when a seizure occurs.  In addition there are no obvious triggers
to the seizures that FA was able to identify.  He is not able to control
his body during seizures which pose a risk of choking and death."

That letter was dated 15th November 2017.

He was referred to the Urgent Care and Long-Term Condition Neurology
Department of the William Harvey Hospital in Ashford and seen by a locum
consultant neurologist, Dr Valavarius, who wrote on 3rd April 2018 that the
appellant had attended the clinic alone (there did not appear to be an
interpreter) and "he reports head injury probably a shotgun whilst he was
in Afghanistan".  The doctor took information confirming that he did not
hold a driving licence.  It would seem, however, that the doctor considered
that he had a metal fragment in his head and sent him for a CT scan and he
was to have an MRI brain scan and an EEG.  He was placed under the care of
the epilepsy specialist nurses and prescribed with medication.

On 22nd May 2018 it was reported that the MRI scan did not reveal any
significant epileptic focus, but the EEG revealed some "sharp waves which
are not particularly prominent at the side of your reported injury".

The consultant neurologist Dr Sabeka confirmed on 4th February 2019 that
again the appellant attended the clinic alone for review and that he had
been seen on a few occasions and was diagnosed with symptomatic epilepsy.
This letter stated:

"He was unable to describe the circumstances of the cause of the scar over
the left temporal area.  The gunshot injury was in Afghanistan, in August
2017 he got three consecutive seizures.  On that day he was discharged from
neurology and his medication was not continued."

On 4th November 2020 Dr M R Patel of the Guildhall Surgery wrote:

"He was diagnosed with generalised tonic clonic seizures probably
posttraumatic symptomatic epilepsy.  He was started on levetiracetam
medication to achieve absolute control of the seizures and he was referred
to the epilepsy specialist nurse to take over his care."

He added, "Mr A requires levetiracetam to keep his seizures under control"
and added:

"As it does not appear that he has been followed up by the mental health
team I am not sure what specific mental health issues he has apart from
feeling 'sad, isolated and alone' at times and wondering if his family are
alive or dead as the Red Cross have been unable to locate them."

I make various comments about the documentation, not least that this
epilepsy appears to have been associated with an attack in Afghanistan and
prior to his departure.  There does not appear to have been an interpreter
present during many of his medical appointments and I think it credible
that the appellant was, as it says, unable to describe the circumstances
properly but he also has a scar in line with the injury as he claims which
is that he was hit on the head with a rifle.  I accept he was experiencing
epileptic seizures and had a serious medical condition prior to his asylum
claim and a condition which was not (understandably) factored into the
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan when considering the
circumstances of the appellant on return to Kabul.

Dr Sarah Hartley, clinical psychologist, in her report of 7th September
2020 confirmed that the appellant did not worry about his mental health,
but his specific concern was clearly his epilepsy (section 2.4.1).  She
also recorded at 2.4.7: "He tries to keep busy so that he does not think
about things that make him sad and the last time he had an attack was in
July 2020."  Interestingly, with a suggestion of his own denial she also
stated: "He does not believe that he has been diagnosed with epilepsy."
She identified that he was not taking his medication anymore because it had
run out, but the attacks were still happening.

To her, he denied symptoms of psychosis, suicidal ideation and that
although at the time he felt depressed, but this was owing to his asylum
application.

She stated that she did not think he was suffering from a diagnosable
mental health condition although he was a "vulnerable young man who
struggles with some psychological symptoms".  The appellant did not
exaggerate his claim and "denied many symptoms of PTSD during the
interview" but in the "psychometric questionnaire he scored within the
significant range for defensive avoidance" (3.1.3).  He did not meet the
full criteria of PTSD but he apparently did have some of the symptoms and
had anxiety about his family.  She recommended that he may benefit from
psychological treatment for his trauma-related symptoms and she observed
critically at paragraph 3.5.1 that:

             "Mr A would not be prevented from working by a mental health
             condition, but the ongoing seizures that he reports would
             prevent him from being able to work safely, particularly in a
             role which required heavy lifting or the use of heavy
             machinery."

I accept the report of Dr Hartley.  She has been a clinical psychologist in
the NHS for eleven years and a member of the British Psychological Society
with a raft of appropriate qualifications and is registered with the Health
and Care Professions Council.  She has a panoply of publications and has
undertaken various presentations. I found her report in this particular
instance balanced.

I therefore give weight to her report and I consider that the medical
evidence suggests that the appellant has been consistent about his medical
condition, did not manufacture the condition for the purposes of the appeal
hearings because the scan clearly shows some evidence of abnormality and he
has a scar, verified by medical professionals, on his left temporal side
which is consistent with his assertion of being attacked.  He has been
diagnosed with epilepsy.

The appellant's friends' statements were not signed but one did attend to
give evidence albeit he was not, in the event, called.  Moreover, there is
reference in the letter cited above from the primary mental health worker
Ania Lero on 15th November 2017 that his seizures had indeed been witnessed
by his friend.  I find that the seizures occurred prior to his departure
from Afghanistan and have continued subsequent to his asylum claim to date.
 I consider that his friends' statements are not an embellishment and
merely reflect the existing day to day position.  In the light of the Covid
pandemic use of the NHS has been actively discouraged including attendance
at surgeries and hospitals and the lack of appointments in relation to the
appellant's epilepsy is not surprising.

I consider that the principles set out in AM (Afghanistan) and the Joint
Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and
sensitive appellant guidance, apply because of the appellant's epilepsy.

I realise as per Devaseelan that there have been findings made in respect
of the appellant's credibility by Judge Sullivan.   She applied the
Presidential guidelines on vulnerability but was not aware of the
appellant's condition of epilepsy when the decision was made and which
included adverse credibility findings in relation to the appellant's
account of his time in Afghanistan and his journey.   However, the
additional evidence now submitted, shows that the appellant prefers to deny
his medical condition and this evidence was not taken into account when
there was an assessment of the discrepancies between his written and oral
evidence.  That said it was the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal in
relation to relocation to Kabul, were set aside and in relation to risk on
return, I confine myself to considering the circumstances pertaining to
relocation but that must include consideration of the new evidence and
include consideration of the appellant's attempts to trace his family in
Afghanistan which in turn are relevant to his ability to support himself in
Kabul.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan was not satisfied that attempts to trace
the appellant's family in Afghanistan had failed or the appellant did not
have means to contact them.  At 22(b) of her decision the judge did not
accept in relation to the lack of contact with the family that his evidence
was "persuasive" and at 22(c), "according to his evidence his mother, four
brothers and three sisters were all living in Shahabuddin when he left
Afghanistan; there is no evidence to suggest that they have moved home."

The judge also found that he did not give the Red Cross tracing service any
contact details for his parents and that he had two maternal uncles in
Afghanistan who were married with children who lived half an hour by foot
from his own home but there was nothing in the correspondence from the Red
Cross or in the letter of 7th June 2018 from the Red Cross to show that he
had disclosed the existence of these relatives.

The judge criticised the appellant for failing to give further information
from the Red Cross, bearing in mind that the last letter was the June 2018
letter and there was no indication of the outcome of any enquiries.

Nonetheless the Judge Sullivan in her decision promulgated on 9th May 2019,
at paragraph 23 stated this:

"23.  The Respondent has accepted that the Appellant cannot safely return
to his home area.  In considering whether it is reasonable for him to move
to Kabul and what risks (if any) he would face there I do so on the basis
of the following circumstances.

24.   The Appellant relies in particular on the UNHCR guidelines dated 30
August 2018, particularly at pages 148 - 149 of the Appellant's bundle.
The UNHCR guidelines post-date the country guidance cases.  The Appellant's
father's role as a village elder who was a member of the Ahmadzai Shora
with the tradition of settling disputes between villages/councils brought
him within the category of 'tribal elders' identified at paragraph (h) on
page 149 of the Appellant's bundle.  I am not satisfied that he would
otherwise have been, or been regarded as, a government official, civil
servant or perceived supporter of the government.  I am satisfied that the
Appellant was thus a member of the family of a tribal elder.  However the
Appellant's father is reported to have resigned his role in or about late
2015.  I am not satisfied that he is now a tribal elder or that the
Appellant is a now a member of the family of a tribal elder.  I find that
the Appellant does not currently fall within the risk category summarised
at pages 148 - 149 of the Appellant's bundle or that he would be remembered
or recognised as having been in that category more than 3 years ago.  It
has not been suggested that he falls within any other risk category
identified by the UNHCR in these guidelines."

There has now been further information from the Red Cross, and I make these
observations particularly in the light of the new medical evidence which
has been provided for the resumed hearing and its implications for the
previous findings. Judge Sullivan stated that the appellant changed his
evidence on losing contact with his family between his Statement of
Evidence Form (SEF) at B4 - 10 and to the appellant, "I have lost their
contact number" and at B4.11, "I don't have their contact phone number",
and, when under cross examination.   I remind myself that there was a space
of some three years between the November 2016 SEF statement given when the
appellant was a minor and evidence given three years later in 2019 under
cross examination, when the appellant had to be "reminded of what he had
said earlier", and I conclude in the light of the medical evidence, there
was no appreciation that the appellant had sustained head injuries or
rather had epilepsy.

Throughout the reports the appellant has displayed his sadness at losing
contact with his family.  I have admitted the witness statement of the
appellant dated 27th January 2021 whereby he confirmed that on 6th August
2019 he met with two people from the Red Cross, an interpreter and his
social worker.  He was told that the Red Cross had visited his village and
asked the village elder and his neighbours about his family, but the
neighbours told the Red Cross that the Taliban had come and attacked people
in the village.  There was some fighting and after that fighting his family
disappeared.  That had occurred four years earlier and nobody knew where
they went. Although the Red Cross stated they could not put this in
writing, there was also, a reference by the solicitors for the appellant to
the Pathway Plan in which it recorded that Ms O'Brien accompanied the
appellant to a meeting with the Red Cross at which meeting it was confirmed
that his family left the village four years ago.

By way of confirmation of the appellant's attendance at the offices of the
Red Cross, the Pathway Plan dated 2020 from Kent County Council stated, "F
attended a meeting with the Red Cross last year who reported that they had
been to his village and found his old house but was told by an elder that
the parents had left four years ago, there was no further update".  Indeed,
there was a letter from the British Red Cross dated 1st August 2019 which
showed that an appointment had indeed been made for him.  That letter made
clear the Red Cross had "no wish to become involved in any capacity in
legal or other official proceedings".  Thus the lack of any further written
evidence in relation to the tracing enquiries from the Red Cross is
understandable.

In view of the further evidence, I revisit the finding of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Sullivan in relation to the appellant's contact with his
family. Albeit I note that she identifies discrepancies between his
evidence at paragraph 22(a) and 22(b), she stated at 22(d): "He did not
give the Red Cross tracing service any contact details for his parents."
In fact, in a letter of 7th June 2018 (Judge Sullivan heard the case on
16th April 2019) the Red Cross specifically state: "We refer to your recent
tracing enquiry concerning your father M.. A.., mother K.. A.. and seven
siblings."  It is clear that the appellant had given the details and the
village of the appellant's parents. The appellant clearly did give contact
details for his parents as indeed the judge herself noted from the last
letter from the Red Cross at 22 (e) of her determination.

I also note that the Pathway Plan added that 'F added his details to the
family tracing list in case his family are looking for him'.   I consider
that the appellant has made efforts to secure knowledge of the whereabouts
of his family and the explorations by the Red Cross in the relevant area of
Afghanistan and on enquiries would have likely led to extended family
members. I do not think the appellant can continue to be criticised for
failing to give details of members of his extended family particularly
after this length of time.  It was accepted by Mr Melvin that the home area
of the appellant was not safe for him to return and that the Taliban had an
active presence in that area.  Indeed, the reasons for refusal conceded
that the appellant's father worked as an Ahmadzai Shora and that his
account was internally consistent (paragraph 17 of the reasons for refusal
letter). That the appellant's father was a member of the Ahmadzai Shora and
indeed that was a matter that was accepted by the respondent in the refusal
letter and First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan.

The UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection
Needs of Asylum Seekers from Afghanistan dated 30th August 2018 outline in
the summary at page 48 under (l) that:




"UNHCR considers that, depending on the individual circumstances of the
case, persons associated with, or perceived as supportive of, the
government or the international community, including the international
military forces, may be in need of international refugee protection on the
basis of a well-founded fear of persecution at the hands of non-state
actors for reasons of their (imputed) political opinion or other relevant
Convention grounds, combined with a general inability of the state to
provide protection from such persecution.  Such persons include:

...

(h)   tribal elders and religious leaders;

..."

UNHCR Guidelines are not determinative but they should be taken into
account and given weight.  What has been established is that the home area
is not safe, and the family is associated with an Ahmadzai Shora, indeed,
their name is Ahmadzai as given by the appellant. The fact is that the
appellant and family have been associated with the father as an Ahmadzai
Shora (tribal elder) even if he resigned in 2015 as found by Judge
Sullivan, continues as a fact, and I am not persuaded that the family
association would have changed.  The appellant last had contact with his
family now nearly five years ago in 2015, when he left Afghanistan, and
there have been attempts by him to trace his family through the Red Cross.
It would be unsurprising if his family had departed owing to their links
with a member that was associated with the government and at risk from the
Taliban especially if the Taliban are in control in the area; it is
accepted that the area is subject to Taliban insurgency.

I therefore find it likely that the family including any extended linked
family may well have departed and I accept the appellant's claim that he
has not been able to make contact with his family or his extended family in
order to secure support, even financially, in Kabul.  There was criticism
of the appellant for failing to contact his extended family but there was
no indication that their circumstances were such that they too would not
have left or indeed would be able or now willing to afford him support.

Turning to relocation, Lord Bingham held in Januzi [2006] UKHL 5 at
paragraph 21

           'The decision-maker, taking account of all relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the claimant and his country of
           origin, must decide whether it is reasonable to expect the
           claimant to relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to
           expect him to do so'.

AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) was appealed to
the Court of Appeal on the point of the numbers at risk on return to Kabul
owing to indiscriminate violence and was remitted to the Upper Tribunal,
which, having undertaken a consideration of further evidence submitted,
produced further country guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG
[2020]. This considered the reasonableness of return and relocation to
Kabul.

AS (Safety of Kabul) 2020 acknowledged the widespread and persistent
conflict-related violence in Kabul but stated that the proportion of the
population affected by indiscriminate violence was small and not at a level
where a returnee, even one with no family or other network and who had no
experience of living in Kabul, would face a serious and individual threat
to their life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence.  In
particular, it found that although there were difficulties faced by the
population living in Kabul it would not in general be unduly harsh for a
single adult male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he did not
have any specific connection or support network.  Nonetheless the
particular circumstances of the individual must be taken into account.  The
headnote at (iv) emphasised

           'However,  the  particular  circumstances   of   an   individual
           applicant  must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context   of
           conditions in the place of relocation, including a person's age,
           nature  and  quality   of   support   network/connections   with
           Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health,  and  their
           language,  education  and  vocational  skills  when  determining
           whether a person falls  within  the  general  position  set  out
           above. Given the limited options for employment,  capability  to
           undertake manual work may be relevant'.





AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] remarked upon the socio-economic
conditions and in relation to conditions to be experienced with regard work
a critical factor to avoid destitution and goes to reasonableness of
relocation, as follows:

           '229...Even a person who is unable to form any such connections,
           and who must survive without the benefit of a network, will
           ordinarily be able to find inexpensive accommodation in a "chai
           khana" and (depending on physical abilities, health and other
           individual characteristics) be able work as a day labourer in
           the informal labour market in Kabul.

           230. A returnee with a support network or specific connections
           in Kabul may be in a significantly stronger position than others
           and in some cases the availability of a network will counter a
           particular vulnerability of an individual on return".



That said, secure rather than temporary employment was said to be dependant
upon connection and at paragraph 236


           'Whether a particular returnee would be able to earn  sufficient
           income from this type of work [manual day  labourer  work]  will
           depend on the individual circumstances. As  the  available  work
           would mostly be manual in nature, it is  necessary  to  consider
           whether an individual would be capable (e.g. in the light of his
           age,  health,  physical  capabilities  and  other  factors)   of
           undertaking such work and would be able to present himself in  a
           way  that  would  attract  employers,  who  frequently  will  be
           selecting individuals from a pool of men  (some  bringing  their
           own tools) who congregate at known meeting points'.


As can be seen from AS, the unemployment situation in Afghanistan and
particularly in Kabul, where the appellant has never lived and has no
taskera, would be highly competitive and that is for somebody of good
health.  The CPIN on Afghanistan produced by the respondent cited
unemployment at 23.9%. The appellant may access the general labour market
but he does not have a taskera and would be unable to obtain a taskera
because he cannot return to his home area.  That, as per the country
guidance, does not mean that he cannot work but he would be forced into
manual labour positions in a highly competitive employment environment
which will have been exacerbated by the pandemic conditions.  The appellant
is clearly somebody who is at risk of seizures owing to his epilepsy.
There was some indication that epilepsy treatment is available, but the
pharmacy appeared to consider that this would have to be purchased and I am
not persuaded that the appellant, even if he could obtain employment, would
be able to find work, find appropriate accommodation and fund his
medication.   The work that would be available to him would be erratic and
irregular and this would place him at a severe risk of being unable to
purchase his medication.  It would also appear that at present he is unable
to drive. Employment in Kabul is described in AS (Safety of Kabul)
Afghanistan CG [2020] as precarious and without guarantee of regular work.

He has limited skills, has effectively been a student and although he can
speak the language and is clearly a personable character, I find his
employment opportunities to support himself on relocation to Kabul would be
severely diminished even in the constrained job market.

This is an appellant who came to the UK, at the age of sixteen but left
Afghanistan at the age of 15 years, and who has spent his time in the UK in
education and has not worked.  Dr Hartley's evidence included an
observation that the onset of his epileptic fits could be affected by
anxiety and stress.  Dr Hartley also described him, as recently as 2020, as
'vulnerable young man who struggles with some psychological symptoms'

I find that he is at the risk of further epileptic tonic clonic (serious)
seizures, the onset of which can be without warning and which need to be
controlled.  Although the regularity of those seizures was questioned by
the respondent, the seizures do occur and appear to have occurred in the
latter half of his teens and it is the unpredictability of those seizures
is of further real concern. The combination of his youth, reduced
employment opportunities and lack of family support will contribute to
ongoing insecure funding for vital medication.

In sum, I find the appellant would not have access to any form of support
on return to Kabul, has a very serious medical condition from which he can
experience tonic clonic seizures with no warning.  He cannot drive and, as
Dr Hartley an experienced medical professional with the NHS has pointed
out, he would be unable to obtain manual work using machinery, which would
place him at an even greater disadvantage in the labour market.

In all the circumstances, I consider that for this particular appellant it
would be unduly harsh to relocate to Kabul, somewhere he has never lived,
and I therefore allow the appeal on asylum grounds and human rights
grounds.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds (Article 3).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 4th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 4th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

