
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/01394/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 September 2019                       |On 19 September 2019           |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              Ibrahim Khalozai
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Mohzam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 8 May 2019 (the date of its written reasons) and which it  sent
         to the parties on 14 May 2019 following  a  hearing  of  23  April
         2019. In making its decision the tribunal dismissed the claimant's
         appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  28  January
         2019 refusing to grant him international protection.

      2. I have not granted the claimant anonymity. The tribunal did not do
         so and I was not invited to consider doing so  by  the  claimant's
         representative. Further, I am unable to detect,  in  the  material
         before me, any proper basis for such a grant. I am sure  if  there
         had been such a basis it would have been brought to my attention.

      3. Shorn of all but essential detail,  the  background  circumstances
         are as follows: the claimant is a  national  of  Afghanistan.  His
         birthdate is recorded as being 1 January 2001. That  means  he  is
         now aged eighteen years. He was at the same age  when  his  appeal
         was considered by the tribunal. He entered the United Kingdom (UK)
         on 7 December 2016 having been brought here as  part  of  what  is
         known  as  the  "Calais  Camp  clearance  exercise".  Having  left
         Afghanistan, he had travelled through various countries, including
         Iran, Turkey, Bulgaria, Belgium and France prior to  reaching  the
         UK. In pursuing  his  claim  and  his  subsequent  appeal  to  the
         tribunal the claimant  asserted  that  he  hails  from  the  Petaw
         village in Kunar Province  in  Afghanistan  where  he  lived  with
         family.  His paternal uncle was a member of the Taliban and wanted
         the claimant to join too. That led to some  conflict  between  the
         uncle and the claimant's father and, eventually, to a threat being
         made by the uncle to take him to the Taliban by force. In response
         the claimant's father arranged for him to leave Afghanistan and it
         is that which led to his eventual  arrival  in  the  UK.  But  the
         Secretary of State refused international  protection  because  she
         did not believe the account offered by the claimant  and,  in  any
         event, thought that even if that claim was true he could re-locate
         to Kabul. The tribunal heard oral evidence from the claimant at  a
         hearing at which both parties were represented.

4.    The tribunal, like the Secretary of State, disbelieved  the  claimant.
As to that, it said this:

                 "Findings

                 13. In view of the grant of status to  the  Appellant  this
                 appeal is on protection grounds only. I will first consider
                 the factual issues before  applying  the  applicable  legal
                 principles to my findings of fact. The Appellant's  account
                 is a relatively simple one. In short, his uncle visited the
                 family several times. The uncle raised the prospect of  him
                 joining the him [sic] or the Taliban in  an  earlier  visit
                 before stating telling [sic] his father that he would  take
                 the Appellant by force on the last occasion. The  Appellant
                 then fled. I note that the core of the Appellant's  account
                 has been largely consistent. I also note that  the  account
                 is a relatively simple one that could have been learnt.


                 14. I do not accept that the Appellant's general account is
                 inconsistent with the country evidence as  claimed  by  the
                 Respondent. I consider that there  is  evidence  of  forced
                 recruitment by the Taliban in Afghanistan, see eg the UNCHR
                 [sic] guidelines of 2018 at AB103.


                 15. I consider the discrepancy raised by the Respondent  in
                 relation to his age when  his  uncle  first  suggested  the
                 Appellant should join him. In his first witness  statement,
                 the Appellant stated that  his  uncle  first  suggested  he
                 should join the Taliban to him when he  was  aged  11.  His
                 uncle returned on two further occasions, and  on  the  last
                 occasion argued with the Appellant's father and  threatened
                 to take the Appellant  by  force.  In  his  interview,  the
                 Appellant stated that he was 12-13  when  his  uncle  first
                 spoke to him (AI43). I note the letter from the Appellant's
                 representatives  at  AB29  dated  16  August   2017   which
                 indicates that the Appellant representatives  had  sent  an
                 earlier email, possibly on 11 August 2017, confirming  this
                 error. While I have not seen the email referred to, it does
                 indicate that the Appellant raised this  issue  before  the
                 interview, and indeed before the Appellant  had  given  the
                 Respondent  the  different  age.  Taking  account  of   the
                 Appellant's age, I do not consider it appropriate to  place
                 significant weight on this issue in the circumstances.


                 16. One significant inconsistency did arise from  the  oral
                 evidence. In oral evidence, the Appellant stated  that  his
                 uncle did not specifically mention the  Taliban  the  first
                 time he asked the Appellant to join him.  This  contradicts
                 the Appellant's first statement at ï¿½10.


                 17. The Respondent makes a valid point  about  the  uncle's
                 failure to forcefully recruit the Appellant. If  the  uncle
                 wished to forcefully recruit the Appellant, it  is  unclear
                 why he did not do so, or at least attempt to do  so,  there
                 and then on his last visit. All that visit  seems  to  have
                 achieved was to put the Appellant's family on notice of his
                 attentions  and  allow  the  Appellant   to   escape.   The
                 hopelessness of this  coercive  recruitment  strategy  does
                 raise a question as the plausibility of the account.


                 18. I now consider the Appellant's evidence concerning  his
                 contact with his family. At RB-B27, in a form completed  on
                 5 May 2017, the Appellant  stated  that  he  spoke  to  his
                 mother in December 2016 when she had been at their maternal
                 grandparents' house. The Appellant's maternal uncle had the
                 contact number for Afghanistan.  The  Appellant's  evidence
                 about this at the interview  was  broadly  consistent  with
                 this (AI14-18). In oral evidence the Appellant stated  that
                 the telephone  conversation  took  place  at  the  maternal
                 uncle's house. This was in Varidan, 30-40 minutes  away  by
                 foot. This is consistent with the  Appellant's  account  at
                 interview  concerning  the  maternal  uncle  who  lived  in
                 Daridam  40  minutes  away  (AI20-21).  Allowing  for   the
                 differences in spelling of foreign place names, I  consider
                 Varidan and Daridam are likely to be the same place.  While
                 this was not  explored,  I  consider  it  likely  that  the
                 maternal uncle and grandparents  are  living  in  the  same
                 place. In oral evidence when asked about  why  he  had  not
                 been in contact with his family after this,  the  Appellant
                 stated that his maternal uncle in the UK contacted his  own
                 family in Afghanistan but not the Appellant's  family.  The
                 Appellant stated he had asked his uncle  about  his  family
                 but been told to keep quiet.


                 19.   I find this a problematic aspect of  the  Appellant's
                 case. One would expect a child fleeing persecution to  keep
                 in as much contact with his parents as possible. One  would
                 expect his uncle in the UK to facilitate this  as  much  as
                 possible. My understanding of  the  evidence  is  that  the
                 Appellant's uncle in the UK is in contact with his  parents
                 and brother, and the Appellant's grandparents and uncle. In
                 these circumstances, one would either expect the  Appellant
                 to be in reasonably regular contact with  his  parents,  or
                 for there to be an adequate explanation as to why  this  is
                 not the case. Yet the evidence is  that  he  spoke  to  his
                 mother on a single occasion. I  think  it  highly  unlikely
                 that the Appellant's uncle would obstruct  the  Appellant's
                 efforts to contact  his  family,  or  would  not  tell  the
                 Appellant information about his family in  Afghanistan.  In
                 these circumstances I consider it  to  be  highly  unlikely
                 that the Appellant has only  been  able  to  speak  to  his
                 family once and his evidence to  that  affect  damages  his
                 credibility.


                 20. The Appellant's case has not been helped  by  the  fact
                 that his uncle Luqman in the UK  did  not  attend  to  give
                 evidence. This is a significant omission in the Appellant's
                 case.  His letter of support at AB11 says nothing about any
                 risks faced by the Appellant if he returned,  or  what  has
                 happened to the Appellant's family. It also state  'he  has
                 no contact with any of  his  family  what  so  ever'.  This
                 statement is problematic in the light of the fact that  the
                 Appellant's evidence  is  that  Luqman  had  been  able  to
                 facilitate contact with his mother in December 2016.  There
                 is no explanation as to why that is no longer  possible.  I
                 find this evidence in relation  to  his  contact  with  his
                 family to be unsatisfactory.


                 21. A further problem is that if the Appellant's account is
                 true,  one  would  expect   the   Appellant's   family   in
                 Afghanistan to have faced problems from  the  Taliban.  One
                 would expect that either  the  family  would  have  had  to
                 relocate, or they would  have  suffered  repercussions  for
                 thwarting the efforts to forcibly  recruit  the  Appellant.
                 The fact that the Appellant spoke  to  his  mother  at  his
                 maternal  grandparents'/  uncle's  house,  which   was   40
                 minutes' walk from the Appellant's home, well over  a  year
                 after he left Afghanistan, indicates  that  they  have  not
                 moved  away.  Further  at  the  interview   the   Appellant
                 indicated that his family were  earning  a  living  raising
                 goats as before (AI3 and 80). If the family have not had to
                 move, and have not suffered any repercussion, this in  turn
                 indicates that the Appellant's father was  able  to  resist
                 his brother's efforts  to  recruit  the  Appellant  without
                 suffering repercussions from the Taliban. So, I  find  that
                 the fact that the Appellant was able to speak to his mother
                 in a family member's home in a nearby neighbouring  village
                 is inconsistent with his claim  to  have  been  subject  to
                 efforts by the Taliban to forcibly recruit him. I  consider
                 that in relation to the evidence concerning the Appellant's
                 contact with his family, he has  failed  to  discharge  the
                 burden upon him under Rule 339L in that the  evidence  from
                 the Appellant's uncle in the  UK  was  inadequate  and  the
                 Appellant has  failed  to  adequately  explain  the  issues
                 arising  relating  to  his  contact  with  his  family   in
                 Afghanistan.


                 22. I have carefully considered all  the  evidence  in  the
                 round  in  line  with  the  guidance  from  the   case   of
                 Ravichandran v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
                 [1996] Imm AR 97 and Karanakaran v SSHD 2000 EWCA Civ 11. I
                 have applied the lower standard of proof, with  the  burden
                 upon the Appellant. I have also taken  careful  account  of
                 the Appellant's age at the time these events  are  said  to
                 have happened and had regard to  Immigration  Rule  351.  I
                 have reached the conclusion that the core of the account is
                 not credible. As  noted  above,  I  find  that  the  stated
                 actions of the  Appellant's  uncle  are  inconsistent  with
                 someone intent on  forcibly  recruiting  the  Appellant.  I
                 consider that the Appellant's evidence  about  his  contact
                 with his family fundamentally undermines his case. I do not
                 accept the Appellant's evidence that his uncle has  refused
                 to tell him about his family or that he has only spoken  to
                 his family once. The fact that the Appellant's family  were
                 still in his home area over a year after the Appellant left
                 in my view shows that the Appellant has not been subject to
                 forced recruitment, and would  not  be  at  risk  from  the
                 Taliban or anyone else on return  to  Afghanistan.  I  find
                 that these issues go to the core of the  Appellant's  claim
                 and cannot be explained by the Appellant's age at the time.
                 I do not accept that the Taliban have attempted to forcibly
                 recruit the Appellant. That was the only basis on which  he
                 was said to be at risk in  Afghanistan.  I  find  that  the
                 Appellant can safely return to live with his family in  his
                 home area. I dismiss the appeal on protection grounds".



5.    Strictly speaking that was sufficient to  dispose  of  the  claimant's
appeal but the tribunal, nevertheless, considered what  the  position  might
be had it reached the opposite view as to the  claimant's  credibility.  So,
to that end, it considered the possibility of  internal  relocation.  As  to
that, it said this:

                 "23. In case I am wrong in my  assessment  of  credibility,
                 and indeed that the Appellant would be at  risk  of  forced
                 recruitment or reprisals from the Taliban in his home area,
                 I go on to consider whether the  Appellant  could  relocate
                 internally. I find that the Appellant is  in  contact  with
                 his family. The Appellant's uncle in the UK is  in  contact
                 with his parents and brother in Afghanistan and can in  any
                 event put  the  Appellant  in  touch  with  his  family  in
                 Afghanistan. So, the Appellant would be able to  return  to
                 Afghanistan and live with his family and relocate with them
                 to Kabul. He would have the support of his uncle in the UK.
                 He would also have the support of his  maternal  uncle  and
                 grandparents in Afghanistan. The Appellant is also  now  an
                 adult. Applying the  country  guidance  of  AS  (Safety  of
                 Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) I  find  that
                 the Appellant is at most  of  low  level  interest  to  the
                 Taliban and so would not be at risk in  Kabul.  Whilst  the
                 Appellant is only just 18, he would be returning to his own
                 core family, and would have support from the  wider  family
                 both in Afghanistan and in the UK. I was not provided  with
                 any  evidence  of  particular   vulnerability.   In   these
                 circumstances, it is not unreasonable or  unduly  harsh  to
                 require the Appellant to relocate internally to Kabul.  For
                 these further reasons, I dismiss the Appellant's appeal  on
                 protection grounds".


6.    An application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
followed. The written grounds are not separated out but, essentially and in
summary it was contended that the tribunal had erred in the following ways:
through failing to bear in mind that a variety of means  are  used  by  the
Taliban  to  compel  families  to  give  up  their  sons;  through  wrongly
proceeding on the basis that there was evidence from which it  could  infer
that reprisal action had not been  taken  against  the  claimant's  family;
through wrongly concluding that the claimant's contention that he had  lost
contact with his mother had been damaged by the failure  of  his  UK  based
uncle to attend before the  tribunal  as  a  witness;  through  failing  to
consider an explanation as to why the uncle had been unable  to  attend  at
the hearing before  drawing  adverse  inferences;  and  through  erring  in
relying upon what had been said in AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
[2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) when considering internal flight.

7.    A grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  followed.  The
granting judge relevantly said:

                 "2. The grounds assert that the Judge erred in  failing  to
                 have regard to material evidence; in  failing  to  consider
                 whether there was a good reason for the  non-attendance  of
                 the witness; in requiring corroboration of the  Appellant's
                 evidence; and in relying on the guidance in AS  (Safety  of
                 Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT  00118  (IAC)  which  was
                 subsequently remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court of
                 Appeal in AS (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2019]   EWCA  Civ  873
                 specifically for further consideration  of  the  safety  of
                 Kabul as a place  of  relocation.  The  grounds  of  appeal
                 disclose an arguable error of law in the light of the Court
                 of Appeal's judgment in AS (Afghanistan)  although  I  note
                 that this would not have been apparent to the  judge  given
                 that the Court of Appeal handed down its judgment on 24 May
                 2019".


8.    The grant of permission was not stated to be limited so  all  of  the
grounds remained in play. But it does seem clear, although not relevant  to
my own deliberations, that the granting judge had only  been  persuaded  by
the ground relating to internal relocation.

9.    Permission having been granted the matter was listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be  given
as to whether or not the tribunal had erred in law and,  if  it  had,  what
should flow from that. Representation at that hearing was as  stated  above
and I am grateful  to  each  representative.  I  have  taken  into  account
everything that each of them had to say. I have concluded that the tribunal
did not err in law. So, the tribunal's decision shall stand. I set  out  my
reasoning below.

10.   I have taken some time to set out  the  tribunal's  reasoning  as  to
credibility because, to my mind, that reasoning is thorough,  complete  and
cogent.

11.   As to the existence of evidence said to be  contained  in  the  UNHCR
Guidelines regarding methods of recruitment, the tribunal was not  required
to refer to each and every item of evidence which had  been  placed  before
it. But the point about forcible recruitment was that,  on  the  claimant's
account, that was what the uncle was actually seeking to do whatever  other
types of recruitment techniques might or might not be used by other Taliban
members. The tribunal simply found, as it was entitled to, that the account
made little sense in that had the uncle  sought  to  forcibly  recruit  the
claimant as he himself had asserted he had, then he would have simply  done
so.

12.   As to the tribunal's view that if the account were true  there  would
have been evidence that the family had suffered reprisals, that was, again,
a conclusion which was open to the tribunal  even  if  the  claimant  might
disagree with it. A point is made in the grounds to the effect that  simply
because the claimant had spoken to this mother in 2016 (his  mother  having
remained in Afghanistan) that did not shed light on the question of whether
reprisal action had in fact been taken against his father. But the tribunal
found that, in fact, there had been more family contact than that. That  is
apparent from what it had to say from paragraph 19 and 20  of  its  written
reasons. The point is that the tribunal was concluding there was some  form
of ongoing family contact so that, if there had been reprisals, which there
would have been had the account been true, that would have become known  to
the claimant. The tribunal was entitled to take that view.

13.   The related assertion that the tribunal had erred in  concluding  the
claimant had not lost contact with his mother after December 2016 is,  just
that, an assertion. As to the tribunal's treatment of the UK based  uncle's
evidence and his non-attendance at the hearing before it, all the  tribunal
really did, as is apparent  from  paragraph  20,  is  have  regard  to  the
evidence from him in the form of a letter of support which he had provided.
It had not been invited to adjourn so that he could attend at a later date.
It was open to it to take the view that the letter, given  the  conclusions
about ongoing family contact, would have  said  something  about  any  harm
which had befallen the claimant's family had such occurred.

14.    In  fact,  although  I  have  sought  to  specifically  address  the
challenges to the tribunal's adverse credibility findings, I am of the view
that none of what is said  in  that  context  genuinely  goes  beyond  mere
disagreement with  the  tribunal's  findings.  Such  disagreement,  however
unfair or unreasonable it might be argued that a tribunal's  findings  are,
is not of itself capable of demonstrating that an error  of  law  has  been
made.

15.   The remaining point relates to internal relocation. I accept, as  did
Mr McVeety before me, that the landscape has  altered  somewhat  given  the
Court of Appeal's decision, as referred to in the grounds of permission, to
remit the Upper Tribunal's decision in AS, cited  above.  But  whether  the
tribunal's assessment as to internal relocation does  or  does  not  remain
sound as a result of the Court of Appeal's judgment need  not  concern  me.
That  is  because  if  the  tribunal's  decision  on  credibility  and  its
consequent conclusion that the claimant could safely  return  to  his  home
area is sound, then that is the end of the matter. If he can return to  and
will be safe in the  home  area  then,  obviously,  he  does  not  need  to
internally relocate.

16.   In light of the above, therefore, the claimant's appeal to the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law. Accordingly, that decision shall stand and this appeal to the
Upper Tribunal is dismissed.
I make no anonymity direction.



Signed:                      Dated: 16 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


To the Respondent
Fee Award

No fee has been paid. No fee is payable. The appeal has been  dismissed.  In
those circumstances there can be no fee award.



Signed:                      Dated: 16 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
