

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/01544/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 16 June 2021                      |On 25 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   N T S P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, aged 30.  He appeals against the
    decision  of  FtT  Judges  Doyle  and  Komorowski,  promulgated  on  15
    September 2020.  His grounds are set out in his application filed on 19
    October 2020.

 2. On 6 February 2021, UT Judge Jackson granted permission,  on  the  view
    that arguably the FtT "... failed to properly  take  into  account  the
    psychological report and expert report when assessing ...  credibility.
    In particular, the FtT has arguably not considered  the  conclusion  of
    the expert that the claim was highly plausible and failed to take  into
    account the country information; or  even  considered  the  possibility
    that even a family member may have no detailed knowledge of the  nature
    of a job ... in the intelligence services ... or any detail of  charges
    against such a person ...".

 3. The Presenting Officer said that while it was easy to see why the panel
    thought that the appellant gave a weak account, and credibility was for
    the panel not for any expert, there was force in the argument that  the
    FtT failed to factor the  reports  and  background  evidence  into  its
    assessment.  She made the reasonable concession that there was error of
    law such as to require a fresh hearing.

 4. The decision of the FtT is set aside, other than as record of what  was
    said at the hearing.  The case is remitted for  a  fresh  hearing,  not
    before either of the previous judges.

 5. An anonymity direction is in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      16 June 2021
      UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.

