
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/02452/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|at George House, Edinburgh           |On 16 October 2020                   |
|on 30 September 2020                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    T C N
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Jain, Neil &
Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, aged 51.  The respondent refused
    his asylum claim for reasons stated in her decision dated  28  February
    2019.

 2. A panel of the FtT comprising Judges Buchanan and  Cowx  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal for reasons stated in their decision promulgated  on
    9 May 2019.

 3. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to appeal to the UT  on
    grounds stated in his application filed on 24 May 2019.

 4. The FtT refused permission on 11  June  2019,  on  the  view  that  the
    grounds were only disagreement.

 5. The appellant applied to  the  UT  for  permission  on  27  June  2019,
    submitting the same grounds, with a further set of grounds insisting on
    their arguability.

 6. The UT refused permission on 5 July 2019, giving similar reasons.

 7. The appellant petitioned the Court of Session for reduction of the UT's
    refusal of permission.  He has adopted the terms  of  the  petition  as
    part of his case to the UT.

 8. Parties submitted a joint minute to the Court:

    i.  At 9.37 of its decision the FtT found the [appellant's] account  of
    having paid $25,000 to agents on reaching the UK not  to  be  credible,
    the lack of detail ... leading to the inference that [he] was  carrying
    the money on his person  during  his  journey  to  the  UK,  which  was
    implausible ... the FtT appears to  have  left  out  of  account  [his]
    answers in the asylum interview record, at  Q/A260  onwards,  where  he
    described payment having been made in Vietnam;

    ii.  At 9.40 of its decision the FtT found the appellant to have  given
    inconsistent accounts of having been fingerprinted [in France and /  or
    in Holland] [apparently] leaving out of account a later answer  at  Q/A
    243;

    iii.   At  9.56  it  is  evident  that  the  FtT's  rejection  of   the
    [appellant's] account depended in  part  on  its  lack  of  detail  and
    inconsistency;

    ...

    vi. The arguable errors of law  on  the  FtT's  part  might  have  been
    material to  its  decision  ...  the  UT  ...  ought  to  have  granted
    permission.

 9. On 2 September 2020, the Vice President of the UT  granted  permission,
    in light of the Court's interlocutor and the joint minute.

10. I conducted the  hearing  on  30  September  2020  from  George  House.
    Representatives attended remotely.  The technology  functioned  without
    difficulty.

11. The main points which I noted from the submissions  for  the  appellant
    were these:

      i) The errors identified at 9.37 and 9.40 of  the  decision  were  not
         only arguable, but actual.

     ii) Although the case had been developed and analysed at length and  in
         detail, it turned on the narrow issue of whether the appellant  was
         at risk for having reported his suspicions of corruption to  higher
         levels of his company.

    iii) The thrust of the petition was failure of anxious scrutiny, through
         absence of a holistic evaluation.

     iv) Certain grounds of appeal, and criticisms repeated  and  elaborated
         upon in the petition, were drawn to my attention;  but  all  points
         were adopted, whether specifically submitted upon orally or not.

      v) The decision used many phrases which indicated application  of  too
         high a standard of proof, such as "reason to question  whether  the
         account is founded in fact", 9.15; "remarkable"; "reason to doubt",
         9.20 and 9.21; "far from persuaded", 9.23, 9.36, 9.48, 9.50; "cause
         to doubt", 9.35; and "not persuaded", throughout.

     vi) This was not just unfortunate  phrasing,  but  an  error  of  legal
         approach.  Arguable error along such lines was identified  by  Lord
         Braid in MF [2020] CSOH 84.  The language  and  style  of  decision
         suggested that this case involved the same FtT judge.

12. The main points which I noted from the submissions  for  the  appellant
    were these:

      i) The decision, read fairly and as  a  whole,  applied  both  anxious
         scrutiny and the lower standard of proof, when resolving  the  case
         as a whole.

     ii) The appellant had shown arguable errors, but not actual errors.

    iii) The points on which permission was granted  were  minor.   Even  if
         made out, they were not shown to be material.

     iv) The other grounds were only  a  lengthy  series  of  disagreements.
         They did not need to be answered in detail and point by point.   An
         overall view should be taken of the case.  The  refusal  letter  at
         [69] made a strong general point.  It  was  inexplicable  that  the
         police would charge two high profile company  employees  after  the
         appellant's complaint, yet take no action on his  complaints  about
         attacks upon him.

      v) At 9.14 - 9.19, the FtT thoroughly explained  why  the  appellant's
         claimed part in the investigation and prosecution of corruption was
         not established.  There was no error in that crucial  finding.   In
         so addressing the concerns raised by the respondent,  the  FtT  had
         the case as a whole in mind, and did not deal with  it  only  as  a
         series of minor points.

     vi) The case for the appellant amounted to seeking a rehearing  of  the
         case put to the FtT by way of submissions to the UT.

    vii) The grounds as a whole were  disagreement,  not  identification  of
         error on points of law.

   viii) Although the FtT did not deal with the point, the claim  failed  in
         any event on internal protection.

     ix) The submission by reference to MF  amounted  to  an  allegation  of
         bias, based only on similarity of wording.

13. I observed that it did not appear to me that Mr Winter had gone so  far
    as to allege bias.

14. Mr Winter replied as follows:

      i) The criticism by reference to MF was not of bias, but  of  applying
         too high a standard of proof, shown by the language used.

     ii) The focus was not on the SSHD's reasons for refusing the claim, but
         on the reasons given by the FtT.

    iii) The starting point should have been positive for the appellant,  as
         the respondent accepted that he and his wife were trafficked.

     iv) The FtT failed to  deal  with  internal  flight.   The  appellant's
         expert report explained why that would not be a reasonable  option,
         so if there was error, there would have to be a further hearing.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. The grounds show that the FtT (i) overlooked that  the  appellant  said
    that agents were paid in Vietnam, not in the UK, and  (ii)  incorrectly
    perceived an inconsistency over where he had been fingerprinted.

17. Those slips need to be placed in context.

18. It is often necessary for the respondent and for the FtT to engage  not
    only with an overall claim, but to examine it in  considerable  detail.
    The SSHD's analysis runs to 106 paragraphs, at pages 3  to  21  of  her
    decision.  The FtT's decision is even more detailed, at 34 pages.

19. The process of appeal on grounds of error on  points  of  law,  on  the
    other hand, should not be one of  picking  over  decisions  by  way  of
    microscopic dispute on the facts.  In  this  case,  the  first  set  of
    grounds runs to 24 paragraphs  over  12  pages;  the  second  set  adds
    another 4 pages; and the petition contains 71 paragraphs over 18 pages.
     The identification of legal errors by which a decision  might  be  set
    aside should be much more succinct.

20. The appellant has not ultimately sought to make much of the two  errors
    specified in the joint minute.  They do not play a large  part  in  the
    ultimate decision, which contains a multitude of  other  reasons.   Nor
    has the appellant shown that any of the other alleged errors amount  to
    more than disagreement on the facts.

21. Of course, a decision based on a  series of factual  howlers  would  be
    wrong in law; but the grounds do not come close to that.

22. Mr Winter put the matter in submissions in this  way:  the  FtT  "over-
    engaged" in anxious scrutiny, and failed to take a holistic view.  That
    might also be put as "not seeing the wood for the  trees".   I  am  not
    persuaded that it did so.  It went into  many  minute  aspects  of  the
    case.  Some points were much more  significant  than  others.  Some  at
    least verge on the trivial.  However, the FtT did engage with the  case
    overall - see 9.56, a summary of conclusions  under  the  headings  (1)
    absence of third party support, (2) lack  of  detail,  (3)  unexplained
    speculation, (4) internal inconsistency, (5)  developing  tale  in  the
    telling, (6) limitations of documentary  evidence,  (7)  contradictions
    between appellant and wife, (8-9)  limitations of expert report;  9.57,
    "appropriate standard of proof applied to the whole evidence".

23. It would be tiresome to apply the same terms of "reasonable likelihood"
    to every factual finding; and there is no need to do so.  It is  common
    to all cases  that  some  propositions  of  facts  are  established  as
    certainties, others to varying degrees of possibility,  and some  given
    no credit at all.  Provided that a tribunal does not leave  even  faint
    possibilities entirely out of the  overall  balance,  and  applies  the
    lower standard at the point of overall decision, there is no  error  in
    using terms such as were criticised.

24. MF is a case where the Outer House reduced a refusal of  permission  by
    the UT.  It is not an authority which shows that in  the  decision  now
    under appeal the FtT left out of account any matter which ought to have
    weighed in the appellant's favour,  or  did  not  decide  the  case  by
    applying the approach  which  it  expressly  stated,  more  than  once.



25. Mr Winter was right to observe that the appeal turns on the strength of
    the FtT's reasoning not the SSHD's; but there was force  in  the  point
    made by Ms Cunha on the case as a whole.   It  turned  on  whether  the
    appellant was at risk from criminals as a "whistle blower", or  whether
    the prosecution and conviction of his former senior  colleagues  was  a
    convenient peg on which to hang a  claim.   The  FtT's  decision  is  a
    thorough explanation to the appellant of why it  has  found  the  first
    alternative not to be even reasonably likely.

26. The grounds set off on a dogged pursuit of the appellant's case, but in
    substance  they are a lengthy disagreement on the facts, rather than  a
    demonstration of error on a point of law.

27.  The decision of the FtT shall stand.

28. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is preserved.

      [pic]

      9 October 2020
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




