
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02559/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2018                           |On 23 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                       Nirmal Mashika Walikandegedara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Shah, of 786 Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of
the First-tier Tribunal Garratt, who in a determination promulgated on 3
April 2018 dismissed his appeal against a refusal of asylum made on 31
January 2018.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 9 June 1987.  He
entered Britain as a student in 2010 with his wife as his dependant, as
indeed she is his dependant in this appeal.  An application for a further
extension of stay as a student was refused in December 2013, with the
refusal being maintained in August 2014.  That refusal was appealed and the
appeal was dismissed in October 2014.  The appellant subsequently claimed
asylum in November 2016.  The basis for the appellant's claim was that he
was Sinhalese and had married a woman of Tamil ethnicity and that had led
to him and his wife receiving death threats made in the main by the
appellant's father.  The appellant claimed that, despite the fact that he
had been out of Sri Lanka for seven years, he would be killed by members of
his family who disagreed with his relationship with his wife.  The
application had been refused by the Secretary of State on the basis that it
was not credible and it was considered that the dependant's evidence was
muddled.  Section 8 was also relied on by the respondent.

3.   At the hearing the appellant gave evidence as did his wife.  The judge
noted the terms of the statements provided, noting that the appellant had
said at first he did not know who was trying to kill him but that he had
later found that it was his father's friends, and he had not been allowed
to go out of the family home when his father was there but he could do so
when he was not.  The appellant's evidence was that even though they were
married he and his wife had lived in separate houses until four months
prior to arriving in Britain.  He asserted that he had been married in
secret although his mother had been invited to the wedding.

4.   The appellant's wife had confirmed that she and the appellant had been
living together with her husband's extended family member, who was a Swiss
national since 2017.  It was noted that the appellant's wife's evidence was
that her father was Tamil but her mother was Sinhalese.  Her father had
left her mother when she was 2 years old but her mother's wider family had
not helped them because she had married to Tamil.  She said that she had
suffered because of her family name but nevertheless had become a national
athletics champion at the age of 11 and that had enabled her to become very
popular at school and within her community although others marked her out
for her Tamil surname.  She had therefore changed her name when the
headmaster started to help with the sports equipment she required.  She
said that only both mothers and cousins had attended their marriage
registration ceremony and said that she had received letters from her
husband's relatives saying they would throw acid in her face.

5.   In paragraphs 22 onwards the judge set out his findings and
conclusions.  He referred to the lower standard of proof before dealing
with issues of credibility.  He noted the terms of the judgment in the
appellant's first appeal and  referred to the Devaseelan guidelines,
stating that he regarded the determination of Devaseelan as stating that
the earlier determination should be a starting point and that if an
appellant relied on facts that were not materially different from those put
to the first judge and proposed to support the claim by what was, in
essence, the same evidence as that available to the appellant at that time,
the second judge should regard the issues as settled by the first judge's
determination and make his findings in line with that determination rather
than allowing the matter to be re-litigated.  He said that he could only
depart from that principle if there was some very good reason why the
appellant's failure to adduce relevant evidence before the first judge
should not be held against him.

6.   He did, however, state in paragraph 28 that:

         "I approach the decision in the first judge's determination with
         some caution bearing in mind that the appeal related to the
         respondent's refusal to extend the appellant's stay as a student
         rather than an international protection claim."

He went on to say:

"However, the human rights claim in that appeal raised Article 3 issues
concerning risk on return based on the appellant's wife's ethnicity and the
appellant's father's opposition to that relationship.  One of the main
credibility issues referred to in the first determination is also present
in this appeal namely whether or not the parties were living together after
their marriage.  The same contradiction in evidence which appears in this
appeal was present in the first as well as consideration of the issue of
serious harm emanating from the appellant's wife's Tamil ethnicity.  The
first judge examined and rejected those claims for the reasons set out in
paragraph 18 of the determination."

7.   In paragraph 30 he emphasised that he had treated the first judge's
findings with some caution.  However, while bearing in mind that the appeal
before him was based on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds in
addition to human rights he could find no reason to depart from those
findings for the reasons which he then gave.  In paragraph 31 onwards he
set out in very considerable detail those reasons, referring again to the
first judge's finding that the appellants were not credible.  He stated
that he could not accept that the appellant's mother would attend the party
after the registration ceremony without learning that it was a party to
celebrate the marriage and that the parties' evidence about keeping the
marriage secret was damaged by contradictory accounts that each had given
about cohabitation after the wedding.  In the statement of 2014 the
appellant had said that he and his wife had lived together before they came
to Britain and yet they had later both denied that that was so.  He stated
that these were important inconsistencies because they did not enable him
to conclude that any opposition to the marriage of the parties was so
serious that it had to be kept secret.  He stated:

"I am certainly unable to conclude that the appellant's father was so
incensed by the relationship and the marriage that he made death threats
against the parties.  In this respect I regard the additional documentary
witness statements which have been submitted as no more than self-serving
rather than an indication of a higher level of opposition to the
relationship by the appellant's father."

8.   He then referred to the Section 8 issue and the delay in claiming
asylum and pointed out that the appellant's wife had changed her surname to
improve her situation and therefore had a Sinhalese name and said that
clearly the appellant's wife was prepared to take steps to avoid
difficulties when she had sporting ambitions whilst still a student.  He
did not accept that the appellant's wife was not resilient or adaptable
enough to overcome any such difficulties in the future.  He therefore
concluded that the opposition to the appellant's relationship was not such
that he should accept that the appellant's father would seek him and his
wife wherever they went in Sri Lanka on their return and subject them to
serious harm.  There was no reason to suggest that they would have any
serious difficulty in relocating.  The judge found that the appellant was
not a refugee and that his wife was also not entitled to international
protection.  He found that there was no reason why the appellant's Article
8 rights would be infringed by their removal.

9.   The grounds of appeal stated that the judge had fettered his
discretion because the first appeal "had nothing whatsoever to do with
asylum or humanitarian protection".  It was stated that the judge had not
taken into account the Amnesty International Reports relating to Sri Lanka
as relevant to the appellant's asylum and humanitarian claim and that he
had adopted a preconceived view of the case.

10.  It was also stated that the judge had based his decision on the
appellant's past and "legally unrelated appeal" and the judge, it was
asserted, had expressed unwillingness to allow the appellant's appeal to be
litigated on the basis that it had been litigated previously.

11.  It was argued that the judge should have found that the appellant's
Article 3 rights would be infringed and that he had not properly considered
the evidence of supporting witnesses that the appellant's father continued
to make threats.

12.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Shah stated that the judge
was wrong to apply the principles in Devaseelan and that he had ignored
evidence in the appellant's bundle which post-dated the previous decision.
He stated that if I accepted that that evidence had not been considered by
the judge then I could consider it myself.

13.  Ms Pal argued that the judge was correct to rely on the first
decision, that credibility issues had been made and there were clear
findings therein that the appellant would not suffer Article 3 ill-
treatment.  There was no error of law in the determination.

Discussion

14.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the determination
of the First-tier Judge.  The central and possibly only point raised before
me was an argument that the judge was wrong to use as a starting point the
decision in the previous determination.  I consider that there is no merit
in that argument.  The reality is that that determination related almost
entirely on the issue of the appellant's rights under the ECHR and his and
his wife's concerns about returning to Sri Lanka because of the threats by
the appellant's father.  The first judge had found, and gave clear reasons
for finding, that the appellant was not credible with regard to that claim.
  I consider that the judge was entirely right to conclude that that
finding - that there was a lack of credibility in the appellant's claim -
was a finding which had not been refuted by the appellant's evidence before
him.  In any event, it is very clear from the determination that the judge
was cautious in his approach to the first determination.  He says so in
terms in paragraphs 28 and 30.  It is clear that he did properly consider
all the relevant facts himself.  He was entitled to find for the reasons he
gave that the appellant was not credible.

15.  Similarly, I consider that the judge, where in paragraph 32 he says
that he has taken into account the additional documentary witness
statements which had been submitted and that they were no more than self-
serving, gave sufficient consideration to those documents.  I have looked
at them myself, as Mr Shah invited me to do.  The reality is that those
statements (at pages 11 onwards of the exhibit bundle) do not advance the
appellant's claim.  I note that the first affidavit from Mr Ajantha De
Silva dated 10 March 2018 does refer to the appellant being threatened by
his father but he states that the appellant's father's threat was either to
commit suicide himself or kill both of the appellant and his wife.  I
consider that the judge was entitled to find that little or no weight
should be placed thereon.

16.  The other statements refer to threats to stop the relationship or to
kill both the appellant and his wife but again, applying the determination
in the case of Tanveer Ahmed, I consider that no weight can be placed on
those.  In any event, the reality is that there is simply no evidence to
indicate that there would not be a sufficiency of protection for the
appellant and his wife on return.  I asked Mr Shah if there is any evidence
in the papers that a father would be able to kill his son with impunity but
he could not point to such evidence.

17.  In all, I consider that the conclusions of the First-tier Judge were
fully open to him and that he did properly consider in detail the evidence
before him and that he was fully entitled to consider the determination in
the first appeal, given that Articles 8 and 3 issues were also referred to
therein.

18.  I therefore find that, there having been no material error of law in
the determination of the First-tier Judge, his determination shall stand.
This appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 30 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
