
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02490/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th March 2019                             |On 1st April 2019              |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                   Mr M T
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by ASK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 5th February 2018 to
refuse his application for protection.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs
dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 4th June 2018.  The
Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by Upper
Tribunal Judge Perkins on 7th February 2019.

The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims that he was born
in a rural area outside Jaffna and that in 1998 his family was displaced to
Vanni, where they lived in a refugee camp until 2002 when they returned to
his home area which was under Tamil control.  He claims that he was trained
by the LTTE in Jaffna for fifteen days in 2005.  He claims that he was
detained on three occasions and accused of being an LTTE member in 2006 and
2007.  He claims that he left Sri Lanka, travelling via India, and arrived
in the UK on 9th April 2008.  He claimed asylum and his application was
refused on 2nd October 2009.  He appealed that decision and his appeal was
dismissed by Immigration Judge Froom in a decision promulgated on 4th
January 2010. The Appellant's appeal rights became exhausted on 5th March
2010.

On 22nd May 2014 the Appellant submitted a fresh application for asylum to
the Home Office, including an updated medical evidence and information
regarding his activities with the Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam
(TGTE) in the UK.  The Respondent accepted that the Appellant had made a
fresh claim but refused the application on 5th February 2018, the decision
the subject of this appeal.

Judge Gibbs took the decision of Immigration Judge Froom as the starting
point in accordance with the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.
The judge took into account two medical reports from Dr Goldwyn, a 2014
report in relation to scarring in 2014 and a 2017 report in relation to the
Appellant's mental health.  The judge decided that the Appellant had not
established that his removal would be in breach of the UK's obligations
under the Refugee Convention or Articles 2, 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

The Grounds of Appeal are set out in the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal
and the renewed grounds to the Upper Tribunal.  Before me, Mr Georget
summarised those grounds with reference to the case as put in the First-
tier Tribunal.  The first aspect to the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal
was the asylum issue in the context of the new evidence.  Mr Georget
maintained that there were errors in the judge's approach to the medical
evidence in the context of her consideration of asylum.  Mr Georget
submitted that the findings made by Judge Froom had to be considered in the
context of the 2017 medical report in relation to the Appellant's mental
health.

I do not accept that this ground has been made out.  First-tier Tribunal
Judge Froom found that the Appellant's account was not credible for a
number of reasons set out in the decision.  I note that there was no
challenge to Judge Froom's decision.  Judge Froom found a number of matters
damaged the Appellant's credibility, including the fact that he denied
having travelled through India and had not explained his behaviour in
continuing to mislead the authorities [30].  He also considered that the
Appellant's evidence of his claimed training with the LTTE was vague and
that the Appellant had not claimed to have any scarring despite having
claimed to have been beaten with gun butts and kicked with boots [31].
Judge Froom also noted that the Appellant had produced no medical evidence
whatsoever to support the claim that he had mental health problems [32].
In my view, Judge Gibbs took the proper approach to this evidence, setting
out Judge Froom's findings of fact before going on to consider how the
medical evidence should be approached in accordance with Devaseelan [20]
where she set out paragraph 40(4) of Devaseelan.  The judge found that the
caution expressed in Devaseelan was particularly relevant in this case when
considering that Dr Goldwyn's reports had been produced five years after
the Appellant's appeal rights were exhausted, at a time when the Appellant
would have been wholly aware of the problems identified in his case.  The
judge considered Dr Goldwyn's 2014 report dealing with scarring and
considered it very significant that the Appellant previously denied either
sustaining injuries as a result of ill-treatment or being scarred because
of this as set out in paragraph 31 of Judge Froom's decision and in his
Asylum Interview [23].

The judge also found it not credible that the Appellant would not have
raised any issue of scarring in his appeal before Judge Froom, considering
particularly that he was represented at that time and that at that time the
relevant country guidance case of LP (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo - risk?)
Sri Lanka CG [2007] UKAIT 00076, in which the presence of scarring was
identified by the Upper Tribunal as a risk factor for Tamils being returned
to Sri Lanka.  The judge took into account that the Appellant was legally
represented at the previous appeal and that had the Appellant had the type
of scarring described by Dr Goldwyn it would have been drawn to Judge
Froom's attention [25].

The judge also considered the fact that in her report Dr Goldwyn had not
addressed the issue of the possibility of the scars having been self-
inflicted by proxy nor had she addressed the fact that the Appellant
previously denied having any scars [26].

Following the hearing in the Upper Tribunal Mr Georget made further
submissions dated 8th March 2019 arising from the decision of the Supreme
Court in KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] UKSC 10. He pointed out that this
case had not been raised at the hearing as the decision was handed down on
the morning of 6th March 2019, whilst the hearing in the Upper Tribunal was
taking place. It is submitted that the decision in KV is plainly relevant
to this appeal and that in the interests of justice that these issues are
dealt with either through consideration of the written submissions or a
reconvened hearing.

I considered that it was appropriate to consider the submissions and
invited the Secretary of State to respond to the submissions, the
substantive submissions and the response are set out below.

Mr Georget submitted that the First-tier Tribunals reasons for rejecting Dr
Goldwyn's 2014 report on scarring is no longer sustainable, in particular
due to her reliance on the potential alternative cause of the scarring as
'self-infliction by proxy' (SIBP). He relied on paragraphs 31-35 of the
decision in KV where Lord Wilson said:

         "31. The third point arises out of the tribunal's final  conclusion
         that there were only two real possibilities,  namely  that  KV  had
         been tortured and that his wounding was SIBP. The point is that the
         likelihood of both possibilities had to be compared with each other
         before either of them could be discounted. And  the  contention  is
         that,  when  it  came  to  compile  the  final   section   of   its
         determination entitled "Assessment of the Appellant's Appeal",  and
         in particular the final subsection, entitled "Conclusion", in which
         it discounted the possibility of  torture,  the  tribunal  made  no
         reference  to  the  likelihood,  or  rather   on   any   view   the
         unlikelihood, that the wounding was SIBP.


         32.  That there was extensive torture by state forces in Sri  Lanka
         in 2009 was well established in the evidence before  the  tribunal.
         For example at para 187 of its determination it quoted an EU report
         dated October 2009 as follows:


             "International reports indicate continual and  well-documented
             allegations of widespread torture and ill-treatment  committed
             by  state  forces  (police  and  military)   particularly   in
             situations of detention. The UN Special Rapporteur on  Torture
             has expressed shock at the severity of the torture employed by
             the army, which includes  burning  with  soldering  irons  and
             suspension of detainees by their thumbs."


         33.  By contrast, evidence of wounding SIBP on the part of  asylum-
         seekers was almost non-existent. The tribunal referred at  para  11
         to just one unreported decision in 2011 in which it  had  concluded
         that the wounding had been SIBP. Dr Zapata-Bravo said that, in  the
         field of immigration, neither he nor any colleague to whom  he  had
         spoken had experience of  wounding  SIBP.  He  contrasted  it  with
         tribal and ritual scarring, administered with social consent, which
         no one had suggested to account for the scars in question. His  and
         the other medical evidence before the tribunal indicated  that  the
         wounding of a body which that person deliberately achieved  by  his
         own hand was slightly less uncommon; but that there were parts of a
         body which that person could not burn without assistance  and  that
         they certainly included the burnt parts of KV's  back.  Dr  Zapata-
         Bravo said that in the literature he had found only  one  statement
         referable to a person's burning of himself by use of a proxy. "Very
         rarely", it had said, "an accomplice might  be  asked  to  cause  a
         wound in a place the person cannot reach".


         34.  There is no doubt that,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the
         serious lack of KV's credibility in  several  other  areas  of  his
         evidence, the tribunal was correct to address  the  possibility  of
         wounding SIBP. But, in assessing the strength of  the  possibility,
         it had to weigh the following:


             (a)  It is an extreme measure for a person to decide to  cause
             himself to suffer deep injury and severe and protracted pain.


             (b)  Moreover KV needed someone to help him to do it.


             (c)  Wounding SIBP is, in the words of Sales LJ at para 93  of
             his judgment, "generally so unlikely".


             (d)  If KV's wounding was SIBP, the wounds on his  back  could
             have been inflicted only under anaesthetic  and  so  he  would
             have needed assistance from a person  with  medical  expertise
             prepared to act contrary to medical ethics.


             (e)  If his wounding was SIBP, an explanation had to be  found
             for the difference in both the location and in particular  the
             presentation of the scarring as between the back and the arm.


             (f)  If his wounding was SIBP, an explanation had to be  found
             for the number of the wounds, namely the three wounds  on  the
             back, albeit now represented by five scars, and the two wounds
             on the arm. As Elias LJ observed  in  para  99,  "one  or  two
             strategically placed scars would equally well have supported a
             claim of torture".


         35.  Elias LJ offered a summary in para 101:


             "In my view very considerable weight should be  given  to  the
             fact that injuries which are SIBP are likely to  be  extremely
             rare. An individual is highly unlikely to want to  suffer  the
             continuing pain and discomfort resulting  from  self-inflicted
             harm, even if he is anaesthetised when the harm is  inflicted.
             Moreover, the possibility that  the  injuries  may  have  been
             sustained in this way is even  less  likely  in  circumstances
             where the applicant would have  needed  to  be  anaesthetised.
             This would in all probability have required the clandestine co-
             operation of a qualified doctor  who  would  have  had  to  be
             willing to act in breach of the most fundamental  and  ethical
             standards,  and  who  had  access  to  the  relevant   medical
             equipment."


         That was his view. It should also, I suggest, be ours."


Mr Georget submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to weigh
the factors referred to in paragraph 34 above in its assessment as to
whether SIBP was a realistic alternative explanation for the scarring
described by Dr Goldwyn. The expert went into detail as to the nature of
the scarring and her opinion of the likely causes and considered and ruled
out self-infliction as acknowledged by the judge a paragraph 26. However it
is submitted, just as in KV, that this effectively left two possibilities:
given the nature of the scarring and the findings of Dr Goldwyn, either the
scars were caused in the way claimed by the Appellant or they were caused
by SIBP. Accordingly, it is submitted that the possibility of SIBP was
clearly in the mind of the judge. It is submitted that the judge erred in
failing to explore the possibility along the lines set out by the Supreme
Court and in the context of the Supreme Court's opinion that the
possibility of SIBP is "generally so unlikely" that it requires the issue
to be explored in detail if it is to be relied upon in a determination of a
claim for international protection. It is submitted that the First-tier
Tribunal Judge's treatment of the medical evidence as to scarring is no
longer sustainable. Mr Georget submitted that the decision should be set
aside in its entirety and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh
hearing for this reason alone. It is accepted that in any de novo hearing
the Appellant would have to deal with the previous negative credibility
findings in the 2009 appeal in the context of Devaseelan and in particular
in circumstances where the Appellant apparently did not draw the attention
of the Tribunal to any injuries at that time. However it is contended that
any future Tribunal would have to treat the issue of SIBP carefully and in
accordance with the guidance in KV.

Mr Avery responded to the submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State
on 12th March 2019. He submitted that it is clear from reading the Supreme
Court's decision in KV that the primary issue with the Upper Tribunal's
decision was the interpretation of the medical evidence but that the
context of this case is fundamentally different in that this Appellant
initially claimed not to have any scars. In his submission, in this
instance the determination of the judge did not stand in isolation but
followed a previous, unchallenged, decision of the Tribunal dismissing the
Appellant's case and finding him not credible. He contended that Judge
Gibbs properly applied the Devaseelan principles when considering the fresh
evidence. He submitted that at paragraph 26 Judge Gibbs gave sound reasons
for expressing doubts about the medical evidence, not least was the
complete failure of the expert to address the Appellant's previous denial
that he had any injuries resulting from his treatment. This, in and of
itself, seriously undermines the reliability of the report. On behalf of
the Secretary of State he invited the Tribunal to uphold the decision of
Judge Gibbs.

I agree with Mr Avery's submissions in relation to this matter. Judge Gibbs
properly took the decision of Judge Froom as her starting point.
Significantly she took into consideration that Dr Goldwyn did not address
the fact that the Appellant had previously denied having any scars [26].
She attached considerable weight to the fact that the Appellant did not
raise the issue of scarring in his appeal before Judge Froom taking into
account the fact that he was represented then [25]. I accept that this in
itself was capable of raising doubts as to the reliability of the medical
evidence as to scarring. The judge highlighted that Dr Goldwyn had not
addressed the issue of self-infliction by proxy. In the case of KV this was
something specifically addressed in the medical evidence. It is clear from
the Supreme Court's decision that the tribunal in that case had significant
evidence as to the nature of the scars and to the possibility of them being
SIBP. No such evidence was before Judge Gibbs. Judge Gibbs drew attention
to the fact that this issue was not dealt with by Dr Goldwyn but did not
reach a conclusion that this is what happened to the Appellant. This is a
significant distinction between this case and the case of KV.

In the particular circumstances of this case and in light of the evidence
before Judge Gibbs and the way she dealt with that evidence I am satisfied
that the decision and guidance in KV does not undermine the conclusions
reached by Judge Gibbs. Accordingly in my view the judge reached
conclusions open to her on the evidence and made no material error in her
approach to the issue of the medial evidence of scarring.

In his submissions, Mr Georget submitted that the second element of the
appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was the Appellant's sur place
activities in light of the updated country guidance.  He highlighted that
in the Appellant's witness statement from paragraph 6 onwards he described
his activities with the TGTE and provided evidence of his attendance at
demonstrations, providing links to websites where his photographs had been
released.  He submitted that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation, that
the Appellant was involved in that organisation and that the judge erred in
her approach to this evidence.

The judge dealt with this at paragraph 32, where she said:

"With regards to the Appellant's sur place activities I accept, as does the
Respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, that he is a member of TGTE
and has attended rallies and demonstrations in the UK.  I am not however
persuaded that his participation goes beyond this.  Although Mr
Yogalingam's letter states that the Appellant takes an active role in
organising events and public demonstrations I am not satisfied that he has
a particular profile, which I would in any event find inconsistent with his
claimed level of mental health problems (which require his brother to take
a day off work to take him to the demonstrations and meetings)."

Mr Georget contended that this was an inadequate consideration of the
Appellant's claimed sur place activities.  In his contention, the judge
failed to explain why she found the Appellant has no particular profile and
should have dealt with this issue in more detail.

However, the judge did take into account the fact that the Appellant is a
member of TGTE and that he has attended rallies and demonstrations in the
UK.  The Appellant submitted a letter from the TGTE, which the judge
referred to in paragraph 32. However that letter was not specific about the
Appellant's claimed roles in relation to organising events and public
demonstrations.  In his witness statement, the Appellant set out a number
of demonstrations he had attended but did not specifically refer to any
active role in organising events or volunteering in organising events as
claimed in the letter from TGTE.  The judge considered the guidance in the
case of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)
at paragraph 33 but did not consider that the Appellant had established a
profile whilst in the UK in accordance with risk category 7(a) of GJ.  In
my view the judge was entitled to reach this conclusion on the basis of the
evidence before her.

The third matter put forward by Mr Georget at the hearing relates to how
the judge dealt with the evidence as to the Appellant's mental health.  The
judge had before her a report from Dr Goldwyn, following a consultation on
27th November 2017.  That report details an examination of the Appellant's
mental state and a report on a PTSD assessment.  Dr Goldwyn concluded that
the Appellant has severe Post Traumatic Stress Disorder and major
depression.  Dr Goldwyn also considered that the Appellant presents a high
risk of committing suicide if he is returned to Sri Lanka (paragraph 43).

Mr Georget submitted that there is a distinction between the diagnosis of
PTSD and the causes of PTSD.  He submitted that the judge took an erroneous
approach to the medical evidence in that at paragraph 15 the judge accepted
that there was prima facie evidence that the Appellant had been identified
as suffering from PTSD, depression and anxiety and treated the Appellant as
a vulnerable witness but at paragraph 29 the judge said that she was not
persuaded in relation to the diagnosis of PTSD.  In his submission, the
judge did not separate the cause of the PTSD from the diagnosis.  In his
submission, the judge had to give compelling reasons for going against the
diagnosis of PTSD but did not do so here.  He submitted that this is
material because the judge went on to question the cause for any diagnosis
for PTSD at paragraph 29.  He submitted that it is clear from paragraphs 31
and 35 that the judge did not accept the doctor's diagnosis of PTSD.

I have considered the judge's treatment of the evidence of the Appellant's
mental health.  In my view, there is no inconsistency between the approach
at paragraph 15 and the approach elsewhere in the decision.  At paragraph
15 the judge was simply saying that she treated the Appellant as a
vulnerable witness on the basis of the prima facie evidence that the
Appellant suffered from PTSD.  This is the correct approach to the conduct
of the hearing and no error is disclosed in relation to the judge's
approach.

In terms of the diagnosis of PTSD, the judge considered at paragraphs 26
and 27 that the concerns she expressed about Dr Goldwyn's assessment as to
scarring in the 2014 report affected the weight that she could attach to Dr
Goldwyn's evidence as a whole.  The judge found at paragraph 27 that if the
Appellant was able to dupe Dr Goldwyn regarding his scars it is a real
possibility that he has done so regarding his mental health problems.  In
this context, the judge noted, and I consider that this is significant,
that she did not have any other medical evidence before her regarding the
Appellant's mental health problems or treatment in the UK.  In my view,
this finding was open to the judge on the evidence before her.  The judge
gave cogent reasons for not accepting Dr Goldwyn's report in relation to
scarring.  These went to the Appellant's previous appeal and the delay in
seeking medical evidence on the issue of scarring.  In circumstances where
the scarring report and mental health report were carried out by the same
doctor three years apart, the judge was entitled to consider how the
conclusions in the first report affected those in the second.

Further, there was limited evidence in relation to the Appellant's mental
health problems or treatment in the UK, accordingly it was open to the
judge to take this into account when assessing the weight to be attached to
Dr Goldwyn's 2017 report [27].  Indeed, there was no evidence that the
Appellant has been receiving any treatment in the UK in relation to any
mental health problems.  This was a relevant consideration for the judge in
this context and indeed, in the context of Article 3 and Article 8.

The judge reached conclusions at paragraph 28 as follows:

"I also find that in Dr Goldwyn's 2017 report she concludes that the
Appellant suffers from severe PTSD, major depression, memory difficulties
and cognitive impairment.  Although she attributes this decline to the
Appellant's ongoing worries regarding his asylum claim I do not see, in the
absence of evidence on this issue, how the Appellant has developed
cognitive impairment (which is not mentioned in the 2014 report) or why Dr
Goldwyn has diagnosed (in 2017) memory problems independent of the PTSD
when previously (in 2014) she recorded these as a symptom."

The judge went on at paragraph 29 to say that, given these concerns, she
did not attach any weight on Dr Goldwyn's conclusions regarding the
Appellant's memory problems or cognitive impairment in her assessment of
the evidence.  The judge said that equally, she was not persuaded with
regards to the diagnosis of PTSD but, even if she was wrong in this, given
her overall credibility findings, she was not satisfied that the existence
of PTSD is evidence that the Appellant's account of events in Sri Lanka is
true.  The judge did find it credible that the Appellant is depressed and
anxious but found that this is most likely to be because of his immigration
situation and desire to remain in the UK although not for the reasons he
has advanced.

In the medical report Dr Goldwyn referred to the Appellant having very real
worries because he does not know whether his asylum case will be accepted
and expressed anxiety in relation to the prospect of return to Sri Lanka
(paragraph 36) and that the Appellant reported feeling very hopeless about
his situation (paragraph 43).  On the basis of this evidence it was open to
the judge to reach the conclusions reached at paragraph 29. In these
circumstances, in my view, the judge did not err in her approach to the
2017 report.

This feeds into the judge's assessment of Article 3 and Article 8.  There
was no evidence before the judge as to ongoing treatment for the Appellant
in the UK that would be relevant to issues around Article 3 and the judge
attached limited weight to Dr Goldwyn's report in relation to PTSD and
depression.  Accordingly, I conclude that the judge made no error in the
approach to Article 3.  The judge dealt with Article 8 at paragraph 36.  I
find no error in the judge's approach here either.  The judge considered
the evidence about the relationship between the Appellant and his brother
and his family.  There is no evidence about ongoing medical treatment in
the UK in relation to the Appellant's depression.  The conclusions in
relation to Article 8 were open to the judge on the evidence.

For the reasons set out above the Grounds of Appeal have not been made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not  contain  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 28th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed.  Therefore, there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

