
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/02120/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Decision and reason promulgated on   |
|from George House                    |                                     |
|on 11 August 2021                    |08 September 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    O T O
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Farrell, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 18 November  1992.   FtT
    Judge McLaren dismissed her appeal on protection and  on  human  rights
    grounds by a decision promulgated on 3 December 2020.

 2. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to appeal to the UT, on
    the  human  aspect  only.   The  grounds  went  to  findings   on   the
    relationship between the appellant's infant son and the child's father.
     Judge Adio refused permission on 19 January 2021,  on  the  view  that
    given the limited part the father plays in the child's life, there  was
    no arguable error of law in the outcome.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to the  UT.   The  thrust  of  the
    grounds is that physical proximity is of the essence of family life; it
    is difficult to imagine what kind of sustained zoom or  skype  call  an
    adult might have with a 7 month old child; the FtT did not address  the
    principle that for a father and son relationship to have any chance  of
    functioning properly, an element of close proximity  is  required;  and
    even if the father's role was limited,  the  FtT  had  not  taken  into
    account that it was  still  in  the  child's  best  interests  to  have
    contact, so as to develop a proper relationship.

 4. Ut Judge Rimington granted permission on 23 February 2021, on the  view
    that there was arguably an obvious error, although  not  identified  in
    the grounds, in that the child had not been born at  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision, and this  was  a  "new  matter",  not  open  for
    decision unless with the respondent's consent; subject to which, it was
    arguable that the best interests  of  the  child  were  not  adequately
    considered.

 5. Parties agreed that the new matter  was  raised  with  consent  of  the
    respondent, as recorded in the decision at [6], setting out the  issues
    drafted by the respondent and approved by the  appellant,  ending  with
    (vi), "If Article 8 is engaged, would the appellant's removal result in
    unduly harsh consequences for the appellant or her son?"

 6. Mr Farrell submitted further to the grounds, relying  on  textbook  and
    case law authority that remote communications are not an adequate  mode
    of family life, and that physical proximity is of the essence. Although
    the adverse credibility findings  had  to  be  accepted,  the  FtT  had
    concentrated on the father, not on the child.   Even  if  the  father's
    role was limited, it was in  the  child's  best  interests  for  it  to
    continue and to develop, which in the  case  of  an  infant  could  not
    happen without physical proximity.  The decision should be reversed.

 7. Ms Cunha accepted that the judge had looked at  the  situation  of  the
    child in terms of "unduly harsh consequences" when the test should have
    been "best interests", but she said that  was  immaterial.   The  judge
    looked  at  all  relevant  circumstances  and  came  to   the   correct
    conclusion.  The child is a baby, his mother  is  plainly  his  primary
    carer, his father plays  a  very  limited  role,  it  is  in  his  best
    interests to remain with her, and there is no question  of  them  being
    separated.  His father's other children  live  far  away  in  different
    family units with  their  mothers.   There  was  nothing  to  show  any
    significantly adverse impact  on  his  interests  through  leaving  for
    Nigeria with his mother.  Although the decision did  not  rehearse  the
    best interests issue, the  grounds  took  nothing  away  from  thorough
    findings of fact from which the outcome was clear. The decision  should
    stand.

 8. Mr Farrell had nothing to add in reply.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The terms in which the judge analysed the case arose from  the  way  it
    was put by representatives.  The position of the child  was  not  dealt
    with in the respondent's decision, because the child had not then  been
    born.   It was agreed in the FtT  that  the  issue  arose  whether  the
    appellant's removal would "result in unduly harsh consequences" for her
    "or her son".  Her representative submitted accordingly; see paragraphs
    6 (vi), 44, and 45 of the decision.

11. I note that the phrase "best interests" occurs at  44  (a),  where  the
    judge says that  the  "statement  [by  the  child's  father]  that  his
    presence alone  would  be  sufficient  to  support  the  child  is  not
    consistent with the view of a parent  committed  to  his  child's  best
    interests"; but that is a passing comment, not the final resolution  of
    the case.

12. The duty to treat the best interests of the child as a primary (but not
    paramount) consideration is an obvious point.  The  judge's  conclusion
    should have been considered and formulated in those terms.

13. Apart from the legal test, the appellant's grounds do not disclose  any
    error.   It  is  well  established  that  remote  communication  is  no
    substitute for family life, most obviously so for an  infant;  but  the
    judge did even hint that it might  be.   She  doubted  if  the  child's
    father video-called the baby as often as claimed, but found  that  even
    if he did, that could continue from Nigeria to  Glasgow  as  easily  as
    from London to Glasgow.   There  is  no  error  in  that  part  of  the
    analysis.

14. Physical proximity is obviously at its  highest  importance  in  family
    life with an infant.  There is a need to consider family life not  only
    as matters stand but as they might develop.  There is  no  relationship
    here between the parents, but even without such a  family  unit,  there
    are cases where  a  mother  cannot  lawfully  be  removed  due  to  the
    significance of a father's role in  advancing  the  best  interests  of
    their  child.  There is a presumption that it is in the best  interests
    of a child to have contact with both parents.

15. In this instance, the judge found at 44 that (a) the  father  played  a
    limited part in the child's life; (b) he was  not  committed;  (c)  his
    evidence of visiting twice a month for a full weekend  was  fabricated;
    (d) his evidence of poor internet in Nigeria was  fabricated;  and  (e)
    the child's parents were not spending the periods of time together with
    the child which they claimed.  No error has been suggested  in  any  of
    those findings, based on  which,  even  if  the  judge  had  drawn  her
    conclusions in terms of the best interests of the  child,  the  outcome
    would  have  been  that  removal  of  the  appellant   would   not   be
    significantly adverse to those interests.  The error is not such as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

16. Alternatively, if the decision had been set aside, I would have  remade
    it,  treating  the  best  interests  of  the   child   as   a   primary
    consideration, to the same  effect,  based  on  the  FtT's  undisturbed
    primary findings, for the reasons above.

17. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

18. An anonymity direction is in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      13 August 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

