
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/02992/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2019                 |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                     N H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
                    LLP (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon
('the Judge') issued on 10 July 2019 by which the appellant's appeal
against the decision of respondent to refuse to grant him international
protection was dismissed.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Simpson granted permission on all grounds.


Anonymity

I am mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No 1 concerned with anonymity orders and
I observe that the starting point for consideration of anonymity orders in
this Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and Tribunals, is open
justice. However, I note paragraph 13 of the Guidance Note, where it is
confirmed that it is the present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal
and this Tribunal that an anonymity order is made in all appeals raising
asylum or other international protection claims.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant. This direction
applies to, amongst others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure
to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm arising
to the appellant from the contents of the protection claim being made
public.


Background

The appellant is a national of Iraq and is presently aged 18. He arrived in
this country in July 2016 and claimed asylum a month later. He detailed
that he was an ethnic Kurd hailing from Kirkuk and that his father, a
member of the Peshmerga had disappeared. By the date of his asylum
interview on 18 August 2016 his father had returned to the family home and
explained that he had been involved in a fight with another family and had
killed two people. He stated that a blood feud had arisen and that members
of that family had threatened to kill him. Subsequent to the interview, the
applicant's father was killed on 7 February 2017.

The respondent took some two-and-half years to refuse the application for
international protection consequent to the appellant's interview, issuing
her decision on 15 March 2019, some four months before the appellant turned
eighteen.


Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

The appeal came before the Judge at Birmingham on 2 July 2019. I note at
paragraph 29 of the decision the Judge observed before detailing her
reasons, "when making my findings, I keep in mind at all times the
appellant's age and that when he was interviewed and gave his statement was
(on his own evidence) aged 13 years old". She therefore recognised that the
appellant provided information as to his claim for international
protections whilst a minor.

The Judge accepted that the appellant's father was one of three people
found murdered on 7 February 2017, but she did not accept that it was the
consequence of a blood feud and having made a number of adverse credibility
findings she refused the appellant's appeal.


Ground of Appeal

The grounds of appeal were drafted by Miss Warren, Counsel, who represented
the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. Three grounds were
identified, namely:

          0. the Judge erred in requiring corroborative evidence;

          0. the Judge erred in assessing the risk arising from the blood
             feud as at the time the appellant left Iraq, thereby not
             placing into the assessment the subsequent murder of the
             appellant's father, and

          0. the Judge erred in law by concluding that the appellant could
             safely obtain a CSID in Kirkuk and then travel on to
             Sulaymaniyah.


When granting permission to appeal, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Simpson observed that the assessment of risk appeared to be internally
inconsistent and erroneous in law by fixing in time the appellant's account
of risk with reference to the appellant's disclosure when he claimed asylum
and not as the date of hearing.

No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.


The Hearing

Both representatives at the hearing before me confirmed that they
considered the Judge's decision to be flawed by legal error such that it
should be set aside. Mr Singh, representing the respondent, confirmed that
paragraph 34, by which the Judge addressed the crux of the appellant's
evidence, was confused as to the relevant time for the assessment of the
appellant's purported fear of persecution.


Decision on Error of Law

The Judge commenced her assessment of the appellant's evidence at paragraph
31 of her Decision and Reasons:

"31.     However, I have not been provided with anything other than the
appellant's assertion that his father was killed as a result of a blood
feud and I therefore turn to an assessment of his credibility, keeping in
mind his age. I start by looking at the independent evidence provided and
find nothing to take this element of the claim any further. I have seen
confirmation that his father was a peshmerga and died of gun shots. It is
of course plausible that he could have been killed on duty. I have seen
from the newspaper article that his father's body was found with 2 others
and that other men were seen fleeing the scene. It is unknown from this
article whether the other dead men were known to the appellant's father,
whether they were on the same side of any arguments and who was responsible
for their deaths. There are many possible explanations for the deaths of
these 3 men and accordingly the mere fact of their deaths does not assist
me in determining whether they are as a result of a blood feud."

The Judge proceeded to reason at paragraphs 34 and 35:

"34.     I do find significant however the discrepancies between the
answers he gives for the reasons for coming to the UK. I note in his in-
take interview that he stated that this was due to the hardships in Iraq
and the difficulties in getting a job. He goes on to state that he had been
told that his father was captured by ISIS and so he was afraid as the
oldest male of the family. He makes no mention of any feud at this stage.
It appears that he was not told of any feud until after his father was
killed and he spoke to his uncle. It appears therefore that until his
father was killed, the appellant was not at risk first, as he was a child
and therefore unlikely to be the target of any feud and secondly as the
other family had no need for revenge. I find therefore that the appellant
has not shown that he came to the UK as he was at risk. Indeed, it appears
likely that his first response as to why he came here - for a better life
and to study - is the truth. He may well have feared ISIS as he stated, but
there was no reason for him to have any specific fear and this was borne
out by the apparent willingness of his family to permit him to go to work
every day at the age of 13, notwithstanding the fact that his father was
missing.

35.      Looking at all of the evidence put before me, I find that the
appellant has failed to show to the low standard required that his father
was killed as a result of a feud. Even if that were the case, most
importantly I find that he has failed to show that he is at real risk as a
potential victim of such a feud. If that feud had been continuing for some
time prior to his departure, he experienced no problems and whilst I take
into account that he was a child and therefore according to Country
Information was unlikely to be a target, it is relevant that no other
family member, such as his father's brother, experienced no problems. I
note from the appellant's statement that his uncle told the other family
not to exact revenge on him, but to seek out the appellant as he was in the
UK and, therefore, they would not find him. I find this to be implausible.
If the other family were seeking revenge, I find it unlikely that they
would simply accept the uncle's word and leave him alone. I have heard no
evidence to suggest that in the past 2 years after his father's death that
efforts were being made to locate him, either through his uncle or even
through his mother in Durkan. I find that the appellant has failed to show
that he is at real risk as a result of the blood feud with his father."

The Judge undertook as her initial assessment the circumstances of the
father's death and considered this as a discrete issue in which she made a
plausibility assessment. It is appropriate to observe the judgment of
Ouseley J, sitting as the President, in MM (DRC - plausibility) Democratic
Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT 00019; [2005] Imm AR 198 where he confirmed
that while it is correct that the assessment of credibility may involve an
assessment of plausibility of what has been said, the assessment is not a
separate stage in the assessment of credibility. A story can be implausible
and yet be taken as credible. He further held that a decision as to whether
an appellant is credible should be founded on the totality of the evidence,
including consistency on essentials or major inconsistencies, omissions and
details, improbabilities or reasonableness.

The Judge was therefore required to move on from her reflection upon
plausibility and assess credibility, having considered the evidence in the
round. Unfortunately, I accept the representatives' observations before me
that in seeking to consider the evidence in the round, the Judge materially
erred at paragraph 34 of her decision by rooting her assessment of risk as
at the time the appellant claimed asylum, following his arrival in this
country, rather than at the date of hearing.  Consequently, as to the death
of the appellant's father, which post-dated the appellant's arrival in this
country, her assessment of credibility remained rooted in her original
plausibility assessment, and this is insufficient for a lawful
consideration as to credibility on this issue, and clearly constitutes a
material error of law.

A further concern in the Decision and Reasons is whilst observing that the
appellant was a minor when he claimed asylum and also when he was
interviewed, there was no true engagement by the Judge with the impact of
his minority upon the evidence presented.  I observe that when considering
evidence presented by minor asylum seekers such assessment is to
incorporate the guidance of the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 [2018] 4
WLR 78 and the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 'Child,
vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance'. The Judge was required
to expressly take into consideration that children often do not provide as
much detail as adults in recalling experiences and may often manifest their
fears differently from adults. The Judge was also required to assess as to
whether when arriving in this country as a minor the appellant had a full
understanding as to the notion of the feud in which his father had become
involved and was required to weigh into her assessment of credibility the
appellant's subsequent understanding of events that led to the death of his
father.

For those reasons, I am satisfied that the errors identified in the grounds
are made out as those errors go to findings of fact and analysis of
evidence. I set aside the decision and do not preserve any of the findings.


Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors, I accept the
submission made by both Ms Radford and Mr Singh that clear findings have to
be made on the evidence presented.  Both representatives submitted that the
appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I have given careful
consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal
and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.
That reads as follows at 7.2:

         The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to re-
         make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
         Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-

(a)      the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

(b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit this matter
to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters.  The
appellant has enjoyed no adequate consideration of his asylum claim to date
and has not yet had a fair hearing.

I observe that the First-tier Tribunal will expect to be addressed by the
representatives as to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010
'Child, vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance' as well as the
guidance of the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan).


Notice of Decision

The Judge materially erred in law for the reasons identified. I set aside
the Judge's decision promulgated on 10 July 2019 pursuant to section
12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

It is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham for a fresh hearing
before any judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nixon.

No findings of fact are preserved.

An anonymity order is made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 19 September 2019

