
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03054/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2020                       |On 19 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent, in her response to the grounds of appeal made
       pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008, accepts that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
       materially flawed and concedes that the decision should be set aside
       with no findings preserved. In the light of this concession, I will
       give only brief reasons.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who claims, inter alia, to be
       at risk from a gang. She claims that the gang will target her because
       her brother, who is gay, refused to join - and escaped from - them.
       She claims that her brother was granted refugee status in the UK.

    3. Following the respondent's refusal of her protection and human rights
       claim, the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. In a
       decision promulgated on 29 October 2019 Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal Meah ("the judge") dismissed the appeal. The judge did not
       find the appellant or her brother, both of whom gave oral evidence,
       credible.

    4. The Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing did not
       challenge the evidence of the appellant's brother, as set out in his
       witness statement, about the reasons he left Jamaica. In addition,
       the judge did not pose any questions on this issue.

    5. The grounds of appeal argue that it was procedurally unfair for the
       judge to make adverse credibility findings against the appellant's
       brother when his evidence had not been challenged and the judge's
       concerns had not been put to him.

    6. Mr Lindsay accepts in the respondent's rule 24 response that the
       First-tier Tribunal's assessment of the credibility of the account
       given by the appellant and her brother was inadequate. I agree with
       Mr Lindsay. It was procedurally unfair, and erroneous in law, to make
       adverse credibility findings in respect of the appellant's brother
       when his evidence was not challenged and where none of the concerns
       identified by the judge in the decision were put to him.

    7. I also agree with Mr Lindsay that no findings of the First-tier
       Tribunal should be preserved. Having regard to the nature and extent
       of judicial fact finding that will be necessary for the decision to
       be remade, I have decided, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the
       Senior President's Practice Statement, that the appeal will be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

       Decision

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an
       error on a point of law and is set aside. The appeal is remitted to
       the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by a different judge.

       Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    9. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
       is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
       or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
       direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
       proceedings.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Daniel Sheridan                      |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated:  5 June 2020                  |




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
