
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/03003/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2020                  |On 17 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ER
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Ahmad, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal of the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference, where
appropriate I will describe the parties as they were before the First-tier
Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Malley promulgated on 10 September 2019.  Judge O'Malley
allowed an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the Secretary of
State dated 15 March 2019 to refuse her claim for asylum and humanitarian
protection, made on the basis that she was a trafficked woman from Albania
who faced a risk of retrafficking.

Factual background

The appellant was born in Albania in 1991.  She entered the United Kingdom
clandestinely in October 2015 with a man, M, who was later accepted by the
Competent Authority to have trafficked her here.  The appellant had been
trafficked through a number of locations in Central and Southern Albania
and later throughout Europe with M.

The appellant met M after she separated from her partner.  The relationship
broke down upon her becoming pregnant.  M promised the appellant love and
support but would later abuse, exploit and traffick her.  The appellant was
vulnerable because her pregnancy was out of wedlock.  She had already been
ostracised by her family and ejected from the family home.  The family are
located in Central Albania.

In a decision dated 21 November 2018, the Competent Authority accepted the
appellant's claims to have been trafficked.  That is a feature of this case
which performs an important function in the overall analysis of the judge
below.

The decision below

Turning to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, there were some aspects
of the appellant's subjective fears which the judge did not find to be well-
founded.  The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal had been that
she faced a risk of retrafficking from criminal gangs.  The judge gave
reasons, which have not been challenged by the appellant, for rejecting her
claimed fear of criminal gangs, concluding at [44] that she had not been
trafficked by a gang.  Essentially, the judge found that there was no link
between M and the wider criminal fraternity such that the appellant's fear
was of the latter, and not just the former.  Crucially, and correctly under
the circumstances, the judge did not purport to go behind the decision of
the Competent Authority, and based her analysis of the appellant's asylum
claim on the basis that she was a victim of trafficking at the hands of M.
The judge then considered whether it would be possible for the appellant to
be returned to Albania without facing a risk of retrafficking.

At [48] the judge outlined some of the factors which militated in favour of
the appellant being returned to Albania.  The judge noted that the
appellant was an intelligent and able woman who had initially embarked upon
degree level study, but which had to be stopped due to financial
difficulties.  She had been able to obtain interpreter qualifications
despite suffering from some mental health problems and despite caring for
her young son, born as a result the pregnancy outlined above.  However, the
judge noted in the same paragraph that the appellant's family would no
longer be supportive of her and that there would be "some risk from them if
she were to relocate close to" them.

The judge at [50] considered that the appellant would be able to rely on
some mental health provision upon her return to Albania, if that would be
necessary.  However, at [51] the judge said that:

"I am not satisfied that the police would be a source of support for gangs
seeking to re-traffick the appellant, both because my finding is that she
was not initially trafficked by a gang and because I find that the evidence
in the COI [presumably this is a reference to the Home Office Country
Policy and Information Report] and the country guidance is that there are
areas of positive support from the police to tackle the problems of
trafficking in Albania."

Having set out those factors militating in favour of a finding that the
appellant would enjoy sufficiency of protection from the authorities, the
judge then noted at [52] that her "current position overall" was that her
illegitimate child, the lack of support from her family and the
impossibility of finding refuge support "in the North of Albania, the only
part of the country where she would feel sufficiently safe to return" meant
that it would not be possible for the appellant to be returned to Albania
without facing a significant or a real risk of future persecution or
trafficking.

Permission to appeal

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey on the
basis that it was arguable that the judge had failed properly to understand
the position of the Secretary of State in relation to the location in
Albania to which the appellant would be returned.  The grounds contend that
the judge approached the issue of return to Albania on the basis that the
only possible location of return would be Northern Albania and approached
the issue of risk on return on that basis.  That was an error, the grounds
contend.  Paragraph [48] of the refusal letter dated 15 March 2019 stated
that the appellant could relocate to other parts of Albania "including
Northern Albania" and therefore the return of the appellant potentially
included, but was not limited to, Northern Albania.  The judge had
erroneously approached the issue of the appellant's return on the basis
that only Northern Albania was a prospective location of return, the
grounds contend.  The grounds also contend that the judge's findings
concerning the overall assessment must be conducted pursuant to TD and AD
(Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) did not permit the finding
that the judge was eventually to reach that the appellant would not be able
to relocate without facing a real risk of being trafficked.

Discussion

Ms Isherwood helpfully crystallised the Secretary of State's position to
the following proposition.  While maintaining her position that the judge
had erroneously approach the issue of the appellant's return as though it
were only to Northern Albania at various points throughout the decision,
she accepted that at [52] the judge had said that Northern Albania was the
only location in Albania that the appellant would feel comfortable
returning to.  Ms Isherwood submitted, there was no evidence before the
judge which permitted her to reach the finding that the Northern Albania
was the only part of the country that the appellant would feel sufficiently
safe to return to, and highlights that there is no discussion in the
judge's decision of any evidence which highlighted Northern Albania as the
only area in Albania where the appellant would be willing to return to.
She noted that the appellant's witness statement focussed on her claimed
inability to return to the entirety of Albania, without singling out the
North as a potential area of less reluctance on her part.

The significance of the judge's finding that the appellant would only feel
"sufficiently safe" in Northern Albania lies in the fact that there are no
shelters or refuges there for returned victims of trafficking with
illegitimate children, such as those in the position of this appellant.
The judge's findings - consistent with TD and AD - were that such support
would be vital for internal relocation within Albania not to be unduly
harsh.

Viewed in this way, the Secretary of State's primary ground of appeal,
namely that the judge mistakenly analysed the appellant's prospective
return on the basis that only Northern Albania would be a viable internal
relocation destination, falls away.  While at [7] the judge summarised the
Secretary of State's case in that way, her operative reasoning at [52] was
based on the premise that the reason Northern Albania was in scope was
because it was the only part of the country where the appellant would feel
she was safe, not because that was the Secretary of State's sole proposed
point of return, or target relocation area.  The judge's reasoning was not
based on a mistake of fact of the sort falling within R (Iran) v Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [9].

Properly understood, the reformulated challenge of the Secretary of State
is a sufficiency of reasons challenge, rather than one brought on the basis
of a factual mistake made by the judge.  I accept that there is some
superficial force in Ms Isherwood's reformulated submission that the judge
did not set out in terms why the appellant would only be comfortable in
returning to Northern Albania.  However, those submissions, as clearly and
helpfully as they were made before me, were only superficially attractive,
for the following reasons.

Ms Ahmad for the appellant submitted that the appellant's family were
located in Central Albania and that many of the locations with which she
was compelled to accompany M upon during the process of her being
trafficked out of the country were also in Central and Southern Albania.
Looking at the facts of the case as a whole, submits Ms Ahmad, it is clear
that the only part of Albania which did not feature in the accepted
trafficking narrative advanced by the appellant was Northern Albania.
Therefore, submitted Ms Ahmad, it was possible to "infer" that the judge
was referring to the overall circumstances of the appellant's case by
reference to the evidence that she had heard.

It is trite law that a judge does not need to repeat back to the parties in
a case all the evidence that has been given.  It is also trite law that a
judge must give reasons which are sufficient to explain the findings
reached by a court or Tribunal when considered and read by the parties in
the case, who will be familiar with the evidence and the submissions that
were made.  This judge was plainly aware of the contents of the appellant's
asylum interview, which outlined the different areas within Albania where
she outlined her fear of return, for example see question 47.  Accordingly,
the judge had before her evidence which was consistent with the finding
that she outlined in [52] concerning the only area of Albania where the
appellant would be sufficiently out of reach of her former trafficker and
family was the North of Albania.

In English v Emery Reimbold and Strick Ltd (Practice Note) [2002] EWCA Civ
605 Lord Phillips MR, as he then was, discussed at some length the duty to
give reasons.  At [118] he said this:

"It is the duty of the judge to produce a judgment that gives a clear
explanation for his or her order...  An unsuccessful party should not seek
to upset a judgment on the ground of inadequacy of reasons unless, despite
the advantage of considering the judgment with the knowledge of the
evidence given and submissions made at the trial, that party is unable to
understand why it is that the judge has reached an adverse decision."

I consider that the judge in the present matter was in the same territory.
The judge had before her an account from the appellant which described
parts of Albania within which she had experienced trafficking and in
relation to which she claimed to experience or be at risk of future
retrafficking, or at risk from her family.  In light of those factors, and
having considered the individual circumstances of the appellant, the judge
was entitled to highlight that Northern Albania was a part of the country
in relation to which the appellant would be less afraid to return to.

There had been no challenge on the part of the Secretary of State to the
judge's application of the background materials concerning the absence of
women's refuges in the North of Albania.

The Secretary of State did, however, seek to challenge the individual
assessments that the judge performed of the appellant's overall case.
Pursuant to TD and AD it is necessary for a judge to consider the risk of
retrafficking pursuant to certain criteria.  At [(g)] of the headnote, this
Tribunal stated as follows:

"Retrafficking is a reality.  Whether that risk exists for an individual
claimant will turn in part on the factors that led to the initial
trafficking, and on her personal circumstances, including her background,
age, and her willingness and ability to seek help from the authorities.
For a proportion of victims of trafficking, their situations may mean that
they are especially vulnerable to retrafficking, or being forced into other
exploitative situations."

Ms Isherwood contends that the judge's application of those criteria was
flawed.  She accepts that the judge considered that the mental health
conditions experienced by the appellant, her illegitimate child and the
lack of support for her family were all legitimate factors for the judge to
take into account.  However, she contends that there were additional
factors which militated in favour of the appeal being dismissed which the
judge failed to take into account.  Those were the fact that the appellant
is familiar with the language, culture and customs of Albania and spent the
majority of her life there.  Those considerations, submits Ms Isherwood,
combine to lead to the inescapable conclusion that the appellant's overall
circumstances were such that there would be no risk on her return.

I disagree.  The judge was entitled to set out the factors that she did at
[52] and [53].  The factors militating in favour of the appellant's
removal, namely the familiarity that she can be expected to have with the
language, culture and customs of Albania, are factors which do not lead to
the only conclusion that was properly available to the judge being one of
dismissing the appeal.  In fact, those are relatively minor considerations
which can be expected to be present in almost every case of an Albanian
victim of trafficking facing a prospective return to Albania.  Taken at its
highest, that submission on the part of the Secretary of State is no more
than a disagreement of fact with a legitimate and well-reasoned conclusion
set out by the judge.

In conclusion, therefore, I accept that the judge did appear to err in
summarising the respondent's position at several points in the decision as
being that the appellant would be returned only to Northern Albania.
However, that was not an error which was in any way material to the overall
conclusion which the judge reached.  That was a conclusion reached by the
judge in light of the appellant's evidence and a careful examination of the
nature of her protection claim by reference to the geographical pattern of
the previous abuse that she had experienced and suffered and the likely
future risk of persecution were she to be returned in light of those
considerations.  For these reasons I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge O'Malley did not involve the making  of  an  error  of
law.

This appeal is dismissed.

I maintain Judge O'Malley's order for anonymity.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 25 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

