
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04272/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 3, 2019                               |On May 17, 2019               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel, instructed by Knightbridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant entered the United Kingdom on March 14, 2017 and claimed
asylum on March 17, 2017.  The respondent refused his application under
paragraphs 336 and 339M/339F HC 395 on March 12, 2018.

The appellant appealed this decision on March 28, 2018 under Section 82(1)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, arguing he would be
persecuted based on his imputed political opinion and ethnicity.

The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Devlin
on May 10, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on June 19, 2018 the Judge
dismissed the appellant's appeal both on protection and human rights
grounds.

Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal Shaerf on a limited basis on the ground that the Judge had relied
on the Court of Appeal decision in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944,
which had been superseded by the Upper Tribunal decision in AAH (Iraqi
Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq (CG) [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC).

    Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

submissions

MS PATEL ACKNOWLEDGED THAT PERMISSION TO APPEAL HAD BEEN ON A LIMITED BASIS
AND ARGUED THAT THE JUDGE HAD ERRED BY FAILING TO CONSIDER THE MORE RECENT
COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISION DESPITE THE FACT IT HAD BEEN HANDED DOWN
SUBSEQUENT TO THE PROMULGATION OF THE JUDGE'S DECISION.  SHE RELIED ON THE
UPPER TRIBUNAL DECISION OF ADAM (RULE 45: AUTHORITATIVE DECISIONS) [2017]
UKUT 00370 (IAC) AS EVIDENCE THAT THE TRIBUNAL SHOULD TAKE ACCOUNT OF
COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS AND SHE INVITED THE TRIBUNAL TO IGNORE THE COURT
OF APPEAL DECISION IN NA (LIBYA) V SSHD [2017] EWCA CIV 143.

Mr Tan opposed the application and submitted that the Court of Appeal had
made clear in NA (Libya) that country guidance decisions were not to be
used to set aside previous Tribunal decisions and he referred me to
paragraph 27 of that decision.  In SA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
683 the Court of Appeal held there was no error of law by the Upper
Tribunal in deciding an asylum claim on the basis of a country guidance
then in force and that the correct remedy where the country guidance had
changed was for an applicant to make further submissions under paragraph
353 HC 395 based on new guidance.

finding on Error in Law

PERMISSION TO APPEAL HAD BEEN GRANTED ON A VERY NARROW BASIS AND THE SOLE
ISSUE TO CONSIDER WAS WHETHER THIS TRIBUNAL HAD THE POWER TO REVISIT THE
JUDGE'S DECISION IN CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE A COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISION HAD
BEEN ISSUED AFTER THE PROMULGATION OF THE DECISION.

Both representatives presented contrary arguments, and both relied on
different decisions in support of their arguments.

Ms Patel referred me to the decision of Adam and in particular paragraph 8,
in which the Upper Tribunal stated:

"We emphasise, however, the restrictions which specifically appear within
Rule 45.  What this decision does is to open the possibility of review to
cases where the decision of the Upper Tribunal which is under challenge by
an application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is one which
might have been affected by an authoritative decision within the terms of
paragraph 12 of the Practice Direction.  The power to review still only
arises where the authority in question could have a material effect on the
decision.  In terms of Rule 45(1)(a) it may be that a complete failure to
notice the existence of a relevant country guidance decision might
constitute overlooking it but nevertheless a question on review would have
to be whether the country guidance decision in question could have had a
material effect on the decision of the Upper Tribunal and similar
considerations related to paragraph (b).  Therefore this decision opens a
door to review: it does not mean that every case where there is a country
guidance decision in existence or in issue the power to review would be
exercised."

It is important to note that this decision is not an authority to review
all decisions and, in particular, the decision refers to a review of a
decision of the Upper Tribunal rather than a decision of the First-tier
Tribunal. Rule 45 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
specifically refers to "Upper Tribunal's consideration of an application
for permission to appeal".

Mr Tan argued that the Court of Appeal had emphasised, in NA (Libya), that
the issuing of a country guidance decision after the promulgation of a
decision does not mean the original decision was wrong.  Reliance was
placed on SA (Libya) and the fact that the appellant would have the option
to revisit the issue by way of fresh grounds of appeal.

Having considered the submissions, I find this case could be covered by
Rule 45 of the 2008 Rules because it is an application for permission to
appeal.  The guidance issued by the Upper Tribunal in Adam makes it clear
that not every case is affected by the subsequent issuing of a country
guidance decision.

Iraq is an unusual country in that the situation on the ground is "fluid"
but significant factors in this appeal is that AAH was promulgated seven
days after the First-tier Judge issued his decision and AAH is therefore
based on factors in existence at the time the Judge heard the evidence.

The Judge decided the case on evidence before him and made clear findings,
but he did not have the benefit of hearing from experts who gave evidence
to the Upper Tribunal in AAH. The country evidence in AAH must have
relevance and I therefore find, through no fault of the Judge, there is an
error because the country information in AAH does impact on how the Judge
should approach the case.

Having found an error in law, I invited both Ms Patel and Mr Tan to make
oral submissions on the remaking of the decision.

Mr Tan submitted there was no dispute that the appellant was from the IKR
and the First-tier Judge made findings on the appellant's case which
included:-

the appellant's passport was with the German authorities;

the appellant's documents had not been destroyed as claimed and

he had contact to his family, who continued to live within the IKR.

He submitted that, given those circumstances, it would be possible for the
appellant to obtain the necessary documents he would need (either a
passport or a CSID) to enable him to return to Baghdad.  The appellant's
mother was a lawyer working within the IKR and his father owned a car
dealership and the appellant remained in contact with them.  His family
would be able to assist him obtain his documentation.  There were also
direct and viable flights now running between London and the IKR but only
if an appellant was willing to fly back voluntarily.

Ultimately, that was a matter for the appellant but that was also an option
and it was also possible for him to fly to Baghdad and then obtain a
certification letter in line with the Home Office Policy Guidance and
Information document dated February, 2019.

Ms Patel submitted that the key issue in this case was whether he could
obtain a CSID or passport either in the United Kingdom or within a
reasonable period of time.  She relied on the guidance issued in AAH and
submitted that it would not be possible for the appellant to obtain either.
 His passport remained with the German authorities and whilst he was in
contact with his family there was no evidence he would be able to obtain
his documents to make the application in the United Kingdom or to obtain
travel documents once he arrived in Baghdad, bearing in mind he was a
Kurdish Sunni Muslim.

findings on return to the ikr

HAVING MADE A FINDING THAT THERE WAS AN ERROR IN LAW, IT IS NECESSARY TO
REFER TO THE GUIDANCE THAT HAD BEEN ISSUED IN AAH.

The Upper Tribunal stressed that whilst it remained possible for an Iraqi
national to obtain a new CSID, the crux of the issue was whether he would
be able to do so within a reasonable timeframe and the Tribunal found that
would depend on individual circumstances.

In this case, we know that the appellant had a CSID as he stated as much in
his evidence and we also know he had been issued with a passport, which, he
stated, was with the German authorities.  The appellant is therefore in a
better situation to that facing other Iraqi nationals.  The appellant is in
contact with his family in the IKR, which, again, can be contrasted with
many appeals coming before this Tribunal where appellants state they have
no family to whom they can turn to.

The headnote in AAH sets out the difficulties that could be envisaged in a
case such as this.  The decision stresses that without a valid CSID or
Iraqi passport a journey from Baghdad to the IKR is neither practical nor
affordable but where a person has such documentation then the journey can
be made without a real risk of persecution or serious harm or a breach of
Article 15(c).

Mr Tan provided evidence of direct flights from the United Kingdom to the
IKR and although I accept these are on a voluntary basis the fact remains
there are flights available.  He is a person who has family and the
obtaining of his documents should not present the same problems as
encountered by many other Iraqi nationals.  He can contact the German
authorities to obtain his passport or, alternatively, he can approach the
Iraqi Embassy in London to try and obtain his documentation.  To do so and
to obtain a CSID he has to complete an application form which has to be
signed by his family which should be stamped by an embassy or consulate, he
must produce his Iraqi passport, the name of a representative in Iraq and
an additional form completed by his family verifying the contents of his
application form are true.  All of this could be done by the appellant
although, clearly, he may be extremely reluctant to cooperate.  There was
no suggestion that there were any difficulties in obtaining records
relating to his wife and child.

Alternatively, there is the option for his family to sort out his paperwork
in Iraq.  At paragraph 27 of AAH the expert witness recorded the fact that
he was able to obtain a CSID from the office in Sulaymaniyah in one day,
albeit where such an application is being made from the UK the process is
not as straightforward.  The point is that this appellant does have family
to whom he can turn to.  There is nothing to prevent the appellant's family
meeting him in Baghdad, if he chooses to fly to Baghdad, to arrange his
paperwork.  His family are persons of means because one is a lawyer and one
runs their own business.

I therefore find he would have the assistance of family in the IKR and
accommodation in the IKR would therefore not be an issue.  Any time spent
in Baghdad would be limited for the reasons set out above.

The February 2019 guidance addresses the issues of returns from paragraph
2.7.8 onwards.  The appellant has either a current or expired Iraqi
passport with the German authorities and no reasonable explanation has been
put forward as to why this could not be recovered by him.

Taking into account all of the findings made by the First-tier Judge in
this matter, there appears to be no good reason why this appellant would be
unable to be returned to Iraq with his family. In the circumstances, I find
returning the appellant would not breach either his refugee claim or his
humanitarian protection claim or Article 3 ECHR.

Decision

There was an error of law.  I set aside the original decision and I remake
the decision by refusing the appeal on protection and human rights grounds.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date         16 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
