
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04187/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th March 2020                    |On 28th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     IAM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar of Counsel, instructed by Terence Ray
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt promulgated on 10 December 2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  her  protection
    and human rights claim dated 3 April 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 1 July 1996, who claims
    to have arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum  on  16  April
    2017.  Her claim was refused  on  25  September  2017  and  her  appeal
    against that refusal dismissed in a decision promulgated on 23  October
    2017; following which she became appeal rights  exhausted  on  6  April
    2018.  The Applicant made further submissions that she would be at risk
    on return to Somalia as a lone woman, as a member of  a  minority  clan
    and because of the general security situation  in  Somalia.   She  also
    relied on family life  established  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her
    father.

 3. The Respondent refused the  application,  first  by  referring  to  the
    significant  adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the   First-tier
    Tribunal in 2017 and the finding  that  the  Appellant  had  family  in
    Mogadishu at that time whom she was in contact  with.   The  Respondent
    considered that there was no further evidence  beyond  the  Appellant's
    own written statement that she would be at  risk  on  return  from  Al-
    Shabaab and she would not be at risk as a member of  a  minority  clan.
    The Respondent referred to the CPIN about women dated April 2018  which
    found that a lone woman without  family  connections  or  resources  is
    likely to be at risk on return but there was  nothing  to  disturb  the
    previous findings that the Appellant was  in  contact  with  family  in
    Mogadishu.  The fact that the Appellant's  father  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom did not affect that.  Overall, there was no risk on return,  no
    need for humanitarian protection and no breach of Articles 2  and/or  3
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.  In relation to  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  the  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Appellant had established family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom for these purposes,  nor  did  she  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  There were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain.

 4. Judge Moffatt dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  10
    December 2019  on  all  grounds.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  took  the
    previous appeal decision from 2017 as the starting point in  accordance
    with the principles in Devaseelan and noted that the Appellant had  not
    previously claimed to be at risk on the basis of her  clan  membership.
    The First-tier Tribunal referred to the  previous  adverse  credibility
    findings and found no reason to depart from the findings therein.   The
    Appellant would return to Somalia with  family  and  clan  support  and
    would not be at risk on return.   Finally,  there  was  no  established
    family life between the Appellant and her father for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 and  no  disproportionate  interference  with  her  right  to
    respect for private life, in particular taking into account the factors
    in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's  approach  to  the  evidence  was  erroneous,  in
    particular that the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  father's  grant  of
    refugee status was not before the Tribunal in  2017  and  supports  the
    Appellant's claim to have suffered the  same  persecution  in  Somalia.
    Further, that it was unfair for the First-tier Tribunal  to  find  that
    the Appellant's father had not tried to locate family  through  members
    of the  community  in  circumstances  where  the  Red  Cross  had  been
    contacted and there was no basis for the  finding  that  the  Appellant
    still had family in Somalia.  Secondly, the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in its findings on Article 8, applying the wrong standard of proof  for
    the finding that the Appellant had family in Somalia  and  that  family
    life had not been established between  the  Appellant  and  her  father
    given her care for him.  Finally,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to consider up to date country information which  supported  the
    Appellant's claim to be at risk on return on  the  basis  of  her  clan
    membership and as a lone woman.

 6. At the oral hearing, Mr Jafar relied on the written grounds  of  appeal
    and made further extensive oral submissions  which  went  significantly
    beyond the matters set out in writing.  In relation to the  persecution
    claim, Counsel submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    make any findings about the credibility  of  the  Appellant's  father's
    evidence and the  decision  contained  a  factual  error  in  that  the
    Appellant had relied on being at risk from her clan membership  in  her
    written statement in 2017.

 7. Counsel's submissions on the protection findings focussed significantly
    on the background objective evidence as to the  situation  in  Somalia,
    however he confirmed that it was not and had not been the case that the
    Appellant was seeking any departure from the country guidance in MOJ  &
    Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).   In  the
    alternative, Counsel relied on this evidence to show that  it  was  not
    inherently improbable that the Appellant's family in Somalia  had  fled
    given the worsening security situation there  and  provides  sufficient
    reasons as to why they may have done so.   Counsel  was  invited  on  a
    number of occasions to clarify the Appellant's case before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  and  to  confirm  whether  the  objective  evidence  was
    specifically relied upon for this reason, to support the claim that the
    Appellant has no family remaining in Somalia, rather than in support of
    her claim to be at risk on return as a minority  clan  member  and  her
    claim  for  humanitarian  protection  based  on  the  general  security
    situation.  At best, Counsel's instructions were that that this was the
    basis upon which background country evidence was submitted  and  relied
    upon but there was nothing to suggest or support this.  In  particular,
    there was no skeleton argument and there  is  no  record  of  any  such
    submission in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 8. In relation  to  Article  8,  Counsel  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to apply the correct test as  to  whether  family  life
    existed between the Appellant and her father, that there only needed to
    be something more than normal emotional  ties,  not  more  than  normal
    dependency.  Counsel submitted that this family life had to  be  viewed
    in the context of  separation  in  1999  caused  by  conflict  and  re-
    establishing a relationship in the United  Kingdom  since  2017,  which
    alone  constituted  exceptional  circumstances  sufficient  to   engage
    Article 8.  In this case, there was in addition sufficient evidence  of
    real,  committed  and  effective  support  between  family  members  to
    establish family life.  The same factors as to forced  separation  were
    relied upon to show that the error would be  material  as  interference
    with family life would be disproportionate for this reason.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Fijiwala submitted that  there  was  no
    evidence before the Upper Tribunal or from the notes she had  available
    from the Home Office Presenting Officer who appeared before the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  had  relied  on  the
    background country evidence in the way suggested by Mr  Jafar,  to  the
    contrary, this was relied upon in the context of Articles 2  and  3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights only.

10. As to the findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  case  and
    evidence before it, it was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    started from the correct point of the previous  Tribunal's  significant
    adverse  credibility  findings   and   also   made   findings   as   to
    inconsistencies between  the  Appellant's  evidence  and  that  of  her
    father, as well as the lack of detail in their evidence.

11. Ms Fijiwala accepted that the Appellant had previously referred to  her
    membership of a minority clan, the Tribunal's decision in 2017 recorded
    that she had not made any claim of past persecution  or  harassment  on
    this basis; such that there was no factual inaccuracy about the  First-
    tier Tribunal's reference to this.

12. Overall, it was submitted that the further evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was very limited and did not  provide  any  basis  for  a
    departure from the previous Tribunal findings in 2017.  The decision on
    the protection aspects of the Appellant's claim were open to the First-
    tier Tribunal and were in accordance with the country guidance.

13. In relation to Article 8, it was submitted that there was  no  material
    error by the First-tier Tribunal on whether family life was established
    for these purposes  nor  the  overall  conclusion  that  there  was  no
    disproportionate  interference  taking  into  account  the  factors  in
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  very  brief  as  to  the
    claimed family life and at best,  showed  only  normal  emotional  ties
    between the Appellant and her father.  In any  event,  even  if  family
    life had been established, it would not have made any difference to the
    outcome of the appeal in all of the circumstances.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to risk on return, the First-tier Tribunal's findings began
    with the correct starting point of the previous  Tribunal  findings  in
    2017, at which time the Appellant did not claim to  have  suffered  any
    past persecution on the basis of her clan membership  and  overall  was
    found to have fabricated her  claim  in  its  entirety.   There  was  a
    specific finding that the Appellant's family remained in Mogadishu  and
    there was nothing to support her contention that they  were  no  longer
    there.  At the time of that appeal hearing, the  Appellant  was  living
    with her father in the United  Kingdom  but  he  did  not  provide  any
    written or oral evidence in support of the initial appeal.

 2. The  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that  the  Appellant's  father's
    evidence  lacked  detail  and  did  not  corroborate  her  claim.   The
    Appellant was not found to be credible  and  there  was  no  reason  to
    depart from the previous Tribunal findings in 2017, that the  Appellant
    had family in Mogadishu and would be returning  with  family  and  clan
    support such that she would not be at risk on return.

 3. To assess the lawfulness of those findings, it is necessary to consider
    in more detail the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal and
    how that evidence was relied upon by the Appellant in  support  of  her
    various claims (which included a risk of persecution on  the  basis  of
    clan membership, as a lone woman and for humanitarian protection on the
    basis of the general security  situation).   The  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal in 2017 from the Appellant was that she last had contact  with
    her mother in Somalia and had lost contact with all family there  after
    she had left.  There was no evidence from her father about  this  issue
    at the hearing in November 2017, nor about his  own  status  (beyond  a
    copy of his British passport) or nature of his own asylum claim.

 4. In her written evidence, the Appellant stated that she  has  no  family
    left in Somalia, having  been  informed  by  a  member  of  the  Somali
    community that they had fled to Ethiopia but neither she nor her father
    had been able to locate them in Ethiopia.

 5. The Appellant's oral evidence is recorded in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision in paragraphs 18 to 24.  With regard to her family in Somalia,
    the Appellant stated that she did  not  know  where  they  were,  maybe
    Ethiopia or Kenya and that her father had tried to find them;  she  had
    not and she had not contacted the  Red  Cross.   The  family  had  fled
    Somalia in mid-2018.

 6. As part of her further submissions to  the  Respondent,  the  Appellant
    included a written statement from her father  dated  28  January  2019,
    which was materially identical to his written evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal, that he fled  Somalia  in  1998  due  to  the  escalated
    conflict and because of his  minority  clan  membership,  entering  the
    United Kingdom in 1999 and being granted refugee status  in  2004.   He
    stated that after his arrival, he learned that his family was in  Kenya
    and following a visit to them in 2010, he sponsored their  entrance  to
    the United Kingdom for family reunion.  At that time, the Appellant was
    not with the family in Kenya and her father did not know where she was,
    the family having lost contact with  her  whilst  they  were  still  in
    Somalia.  The Appellant's father contacted the Red Cross  to  find  the
    Appellant but received no information.  They  resumed  contact  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant's father stated that the  Appellant  has
    no family left in Somalia.

 7. The Appellant's father's oral evidence is recorded  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in paragraphs 25 to 27.   He  stated  that  he  had
    heard that his family members (the Appellant's mother and siblings) had
    left Somalia  and  travelled  to  either  Kenya  or  Ethiopia  and  had
    attempted  to  contact  them  through  the   Somali   community.    The
    Appellant's father stated that he did not know exactly when the  family
    left, but thought it was the end of 2017 and had known that  they  were
    planning to leave.  He did not  know  whether  the  Appellant's  uncles
    remained in Somalia and had no way of contacting them.  The Appellant's
    father's contact with the Red Cross was in 2010 and they had  not  been
    in touch with any news.

 8. As above, there is nothing  to  suggest  that  any  of  the  background
    country evidence in the Appellant's bundle was relied upon  in  support
    of the claim that the Appellant no longer had any family in Somalia and
    in any event, this adds little weight to  the  claim,  particularly  in
    circumstances where no reason has been given as to why the family  fled
    and where the evidence about them and efforts to contact  them  was  so
    thin.  I find it was entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal  to  find
    that the Appellant had not provided any credible evidence  to  reach  a
    different conclusion to the Tribunal  in  2017  as  to  her  family  in
    Somalia.  Her own evidence on this point amounted to little more than a
    bare assertion and without personally making any efforts to contact her
    family.  The Appellant's father's evidence was that he had attempted to
    find family members through others in  the  Somali  community,  without
    giving any detail as to who these people were, where these people  were
    (for example, if they were in the United  Kingdom,  Somalia,  Kenya  or
    Ethiopia) or when they were contacted.  The contact with the Red  Cross
    was in 2010, unevidenced and provided no support  for  the  claim  now.
    The Appellant's evidence was inconsistent with that from her father  as
    to when her family fled and neither offered any information at  all  as
    to the  whereabouts  of  the  Appellant's  uncles  who  had  previously
    supported her.

 9. In these circumstances, there was no error of law on the  first  ground
    of appeal.  There was, as the First-tier Tribunal  found,  no  credible
    evidence before it to depart from the previous findings of the Tribunal
    in 2017 that the Appellant had family in  Somalia.   The  evidence  was
    lacking in detail and not credible.  The findings in paragraphs 36  and
    38 were entirely open to the First-tier Tribunal and  did  not  involve
    any error of law either on the first ground of appeal as originally put
    in writing, nor in failing  to  consider  the  background  evidence  as
    support for the contention about family (as submitted orally) on  which
    there is nothing to suggest it was relied upon for  that  purpose;  nor
    that it in any event supported the claim  that  these  specific  family
    members had fled.

10. Consequently, there is also no error of law  on  the  third  ground  of
    appeal as the Appellant would not be returning as  a  lone  woman  (and
    therefore not at risk on return as such) and there is  nothing  in  the
    country guidance nor background country evidence relied upon (which was
    not in any event relied upon to depart from the  country  guidance)  to
    support the claim that the Appellant would be at risk on  return  as  a
    minority clan member either.  The Appellant's father failed to  provide
    any evidence in support of the basis upon which his  asylum  claim  was
    ultimately allowed, but in any  event,  the  position  in  relation  to
    minority clans was materially different in 2004 to now.  The fact  that
    there was evidence from the Appellant's father that he had been granted
    status in 2004 did not support the Appellant's claim now,  nor  did  it
    form the basis of any departure from the Tribunal's findings  in  2017,
    particularly when such evidence existed and could have  been  submitted
    at the earlier appeal.

11. The second ground of appeal concerns the First-tier Tribunal's findings
    on Article 8, which were as follows:

         "42. The appellant has been in the UK  since  April  2017  and  has
         lived with her father and  step-family  since  that  date  and  has
         established a limited private life since that date.  To remove  the
         appellant would interfere with that private life.  Questions 3  and
         4  in  the  Razgar  test  must  undoubtedly  be  answered  in   the
         Respondent's favour.

         43.   The  issue  is   whether   the   respondent's   decision   is
         proportionate.  I note that there is a strong  public  interest  in
         the  maintenance   of   effective   immigration   controls.    When
         considering section 117B of the Immigration Act 2014, I  note  that
         the appellant does not speak English as evidenced by her use of  an
         interpreter today.  The appellant is being supported financially by
         her extended family and, as such, is not a financial burden on tax-
         payers.  I note that section 117B(5) requires me to  attach  little
         weight  to  private  life  established   whilst   the   appellant's
         immigration status is precarious.  The respondent has not  produced
         any evidence to suggest the appellant should be  refused  leave  on
         the basis of her suitability.

         44.  I find that the appellant's care towards her father is nothing
         more than that which would be provided by  a  child  towards  their
         parent.  The level of care is not  substantial  enough  to  suggest
         that there is a level of dependence on  the  appellant.   The  care
         provided could be carried out  by  anyone.   Before  the  appellant
         arrived in the UK, these tasks were carried out by the  appellant's
         step-mother.  No additional evidence  has  been  submitted  by  the
         appellant in respect of the appellant's private life."

12. Again, when considering those findings it is necessary to consider  the
    evidence of  claimed  family  life  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Appellant's evidence as to  her  relationship  with  her
    father was that this was re-established following her  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom and that she lives with him and his family (who are  all
    British citizens) here.  The Appellant stated that  she  took  part  in
    family responsibilities such as helping her  father  who  is  disabled,
    assisting in house duties, with the children  and  their  daily  needs.
    Her father supports her.  The Appellant's  father's  evidence  went  no
    further than saying that the Appellant lives with him and contained  no
    detail at all as to the nature of their relationship beyond that.

13. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  to  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and her father was incredibly thin and lacked any
    of the detail that would be required to establish family life  for  the
    purposes of engaging Article 8(1) of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  The fact that they were separated by conflict between 1999 and
    2017 does not provide any basis, alone, or together with  the  evidence
    of the relationship now, for finding that family life is  engaged.   It
    was open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  there  was  no
    dependence established between the Appellant and her father beyond that
    of what would normally be expected between an adult child  and  parent,
    such that Article 8(1) was not engaged.  The  Appellant's  relationship
    with her father, step-mother and  step-siblings  was  referred  to  and
    taken into account as part of her private life, with no  other  details
    of any significant private life being relied upon.

14. In any event, even if the First-tier Tribunal found  that  family  life
    was established for the purposes of Article 8(1), that would  not  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    The First-tier Tribunal referred to the factors in section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2004 which were adverse (or at best
    neutral) to the Appellant which would in any event tip the balance such
    that removal would not be disproportionate even  if  the  relationships
    were taken into account as family life rather than private life.  I  do
    not find any error of law on the second ground of  appeal  and  in  any
    event, even if there was, it would not  be  a  material  error  of  law
    requiring that part of the decision to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                      Date:     12th April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

