
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04512/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|And via Skype for Business           |On 11 August 2021                    |
|on 12th May 2021                     |                                     |
|and in person on 21st July 2021      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'GC'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
By virtue of this appeal including consideration of  the  appellant's  minor
children, unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, instructed by Corbin & Hassan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's refusal of his human rights claim.  A First-tier Tribunal
(Judge Cockrill) had previously refused his protection appeal and that part
of the decision remains undisturbed, as confirmed in our error of law
decision dated 16th December 2019, and annexed to these reasons.

Background

The appellant, a citizen of China, sought leave to remain in the UK based
on the right to respect for his family and private life.  As recorded in
our error of law decision, the respondent refused that application in a
decision dated 21st March 2018.  The appellant had entered the UK under an
assumed identity on 24th August 1996 and applied for asylum; his asylum
appeal was refused and his statutory appeal against that decision was
treated as abandoned.  He remained in the UK unlawfully, and was convicted
on 19th June 2006 of the indecent assault of a vulnerable woman, for which
he was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment.  The sentencing Judge also
recommended his deportation and placed him on the sexual offences register
for 10 years.  The respondent then served a deportation notice, in response
to which the appellant appealed and his appeal was refused by a First-tier
Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 3rd January 2007.  He was eventually
deported on 7th March 2008.

The appellant claims to have clandestinely re-entered the UK on 25th
February 2012 in breach of the deportation order (he was only encountered
on an enforcement visit to a restaurant in the UK in 2015).  During the
period when he had been returned to China, his wife and children visited
him twice.  Following his encounter by the UK authorities, he submitted
several further representations, including a claim to have been the victim
of trafficking.  A referral under the National Referral Mechanism was made
and his claim was rejected, as were his later protection and human rights
claims in the 2018 decision.  In that decision, the respondent considered
the facts that the appellant's wife was naturalised as a British citizen in
2011 and he had two British citizen children: a daughter born on 5th
November 2004 (so now aged 16), whom we refer to as "child A;" and a son
born on 6th December 2005 (so now aged 15), "child B".  The genuineness of
their relationships was accepted but the respondent did not accept that its
refusal of the appellant's human rights claim was in breach of his human
rights, as a foreign criminal who had re-entered the UK in breach of a
deportation order.  The family could return as one unit to China, or
alternatively, the effect of the appellant's deportation would not be
unduly harsh on his wife and children.

In a decision promulgated on 30th July 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge
Cockrill (the 'FtT') dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal
of the appellant's protection claim (there is no appeal against that
decision) but allowed his human rights appeal.  The respondent appealed
against that decision, on the basis (1) of apparently contradictory
conclusions in the FtT's analysis, as briefly summarised in our error of
law decision; (2) and a failure to explain why the separation of the family
would be unduly harsh, which had occurred previously in the period 2008 to
2012.

 1. This Tribunal set aside the FtT's decision  in  respect  of  the  human
    rights claim, allowing the respondent's appeal.  This Tribunal regarded
    it as appropriate to remake the decision, noting the narrowness of  the
    issues between the parties and potential availability  of  evidence  (a
    social worker report in respect of the children).

The issues in this appeal

While the respondent's decision and the FtT's appeal had referred to
paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules, the issues in remaking the FtT's
decision, considering the recent authority of Binaku (s.11 TCEA; s.117C
NIAA; para. 399D) [2021] UKUT 00034 (IAC), are whether the appellant, as a
foreign criminal (as defined by section 117D(2) of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002), sentenced to less than four years'
imprisonment, meets the requirements of 'Exception 2' as set out in section
117C (5) of the 2002 Act; and whether there are very compelling
circumstances for the purposes of section 117C(6).

The appellant does not rely on 'Exception 1,' as he has not been lawfully
resident in the UK for most of his life (he has never been lawfully
resident).

The respondent accepts that the effect of the appellant's children having
to follow their father and mother to China, when they have lived in the UK
all their lives, are British national children and are at a critical stage
in their education, would be unduly harsh.  The core issue is whether the
effect of the separation of the appellant, were he removed to China, from
his children in the UK, would be unduly harsh and whether there are very
compelling circumstances over and above 'Exception 2'.  We had discussed
and agreed these issues at the earlier adjourned hearing on 12th May 2021.


Documents and evidence

The respondent provided a bundle containing extensive documentation,
including the appellant's immigration history and witness statements.  The
appellant provided a combined bundle, including updated witness statements
and an expert report dated 30th January 2020, of an independent social
worker, Ms Elizabeth Wanjiru, whose expertise was unchallenged.  We also
had the benefit of written skeleton arguments of Mr Sowerby, Counsel,
initially instructed on behalf of the appellant; and on behalf of the
respondent, separate skeleton arguments of Ms Fijiwala and Ms Pettersen,
Senior Presenting Officers.

We had witness statements and heard evidence from the appellant; his wife;
and both of their children.  We were conscious that the children were
minors and we monitored and checked their understanding of proceedings.
The children's spoken English was excellent, and they gave evidence without
the need for an interpreter.  In contrast, the appellant and his wife
required an interpreter in Mandarin to give evidence.

We do not recite the evidence in full, much of which was undisputed.
Instead, we refer to it where necessary in our findings.

The Law

We are reminded by the recent authority of HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ
1176, that what is "unduly harsh" must be considered in the context that
the starting point is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
criminals.  The underlying question is whether the harshness which the
deportation will cause for the children is of a sufficiently elevated
degree to outweigh that public interest.  There is no requirement of
exceptionality in the test of 'unduly harsh', and such an assessment,
bearing in mind the best interests of the children for the purposes of
section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, is
intensely fact specific.  In that regard, our assessment needs to be
focussed on the loss to child A and to child B in the event of their
father's deportation, and their distinct point of views, rather than
consideration of a 'norm' in the case of any separation.

In relation to the wider issue of very compelling circumstances, we may
consider the appellant's offending, including the nature and date of the
offence, any subsequent reoffending and the extent of the appellant's
rehabilitation.  We also consider the fact of the deportation order, which,
while never revoked, would mandate refusal of entry for a 10-year period,
ended in 2017 (the deportation order was made on 20th February 2017).  We
also consider that the appellant re-entered the UK in breach of the
deportation order, which must be a weighty consideration against him
(although there is not a higher standard in such cases, as Binaku
confirms).

Findings of fact

We considered all the evidence presented to us, whether we refer to it
specifically in these findings or not.

Child A

Child A is 16 years old and has recently sat her GCSE exams.  She has yet
to receive the results but is predicted to obtain scores at level "six",
equivalent to old grades at the level "B".  She is moving this summer from
her current school in London, the name of which it is unnecessary to name,
to a sixth form college elsewhere in London where she plans to study
vocational qualifications in travel and tourism, with an additional
vocational emphasis on aeroplane cabin crew experience.  Her expressed aim
is to travel, including taking her parents to travel with her.  She lives
in a close family relationship with her younger brother and her parents.
She is aware that her father, the appellant, does not have permission to
stay in the UK.  She candidly accepts that he is not a very educated person
and is therefore not able to help her in terms of the content of her
studies, but he has always been a supportive parent.  She describes that
during the COVID pandemic, when her mother caught COVID symptoms, the
appellant ensured that the house was running as normally as it possibly
could.  When the children's school began to go "online," he made sure that
everything was comfortable for the children to continue with their
education.  Without her father, the family would not be complete and child
A thought that her mother would be very depressed.  Child A also feared
about the mental impact on herself.  Correspondence from Child A's school
of 8th July 2021 (page [48] of the appellant's bundle ("AB")) states as
follows:

"Although this year has been filled with uncertainty, [child A] has managed
to hold herself together and remained radiant and bright.  As a student she
is desperate to excel, she displays all the qualities of a learner that is
serious about her academic [sic].  Unfortunately, however, this has not
been the case in the last few weeks.  [Child A] battled through her GCSE
examinations and is expected to receive very good GCSE grades.  All of the
[sic] was possible because of the support and the encouragement she
receives from her father.  [Child A] is a bright and intelligent girl this
family deserves to stay together.  [Child A's] father is committed to
support his daughter and members of staff in order to foster a positive
working ethos from child A.  This commitment is exactly what we encourage
from our parents and [the appellant] is the epitome of this.  [The
appellant's] current plight is causing [child A] added stress and it is
impacting on her learning and psychological wellbeing.  [Child A] needs her
father as they a close family unit [sic] and they all depend on each other.
 [The appellant] has a desire to support his family financially, physically
and emotionally.  [The appellant] is the cornerstone of his family and they
rely upon his guidance and protection.

I hope you are able to see my concern about the situation [Child A] finds
herself in and will understanding [sic] to her needs as a young girl trying
to make sense of everything that is going on around her."

The correspondence was addressed "to whom it may concern" and was from the
head of year at child A's school.

The correspondence is consistent with the independent social worker report
at pages [50] to [67] AB, produced by Ms Wanjiru, to which we now turn.
Her report focusses on the impact of the appellant's removal upon both
children.  At �21, Ms Wanjiru refers to having liaised with the
safeguarding lead of the children's school, who emphasised that both
children were doing extremely well academically and are star pupils in the
school, with no concerns around their behaviour; always being well-
presented; and adhering to school rules and boundaries.  The appellant was
described as the main point of contact and the contribution in his
children's life as "tremendous".  The school referred to "good bonding"
between the children and their father, and he was a role model to his
children.  Child A was described as at a crucial point in her education
(the report was prepared in January 2020, was when she was in the first
year of her GCSEs).  The children attended Mandarin classes in London every
Sunday as well as being involved in their local church group.  At �22, Ms
Wanjiru describes an interview with child A, when she asked her about the
period when the appellant was not in the UK.  Ms Wanjiru described child A
recalling this period "with a lot of pain".  Child A was worried about who
would be there to offer her mother support and the thought of the appellant
being away from the family caused her to have "suicidal thoughts".  Ms
Wanjiru was concerned about child A's presentation when interviewed.  Ms
Wanjiru referred to general academic work on the traumatic effect for
adolescents of the loss of a parent, akin to post-traumatic stress.  In Ms
Wanjiru's view, child A has already suffered emotional harm because of
ongoing exposure to the challenges of the appellant's appeal.

At �25, Ms Wanjiru describes her discussions with the appellant's wife, who
had also feared for the children experiencing significant disruption, in
the event of the appellant's removal, as they are very well integrated into
their school, with settled after-school routines and a "local" way of life.
 Ms Wanjiru describes at �27 the positive roles models that the children
exemplified, in the context of gang violence linked to young children
"these days." She contrasted with the effect of the appellant's removal and
her opinion was that it would be "shameful" if their lives were
interrupted.

Ms Wanjiru then describes at �28, the appellant's wife owing a significant
amount of money to friends, totalling some �100,000, used to buy the family
home; and needing to maintain her employment to pay this back.  Ms Wanjiru
then discusses the appellant's claimed ill-health, which could be related
to stress and could deteriorate, if he were removed.

Whilst noting that Ms Wanjiru's qualifications and expertise have not been
challenged, in some respects her comments stray beyond an assessment of the
effects of deportation to personal opinions (for example, her reference to
the "shameful" disruption of the family's life in the event of the
appellant's removal).  Moreover, it is also clear that in at least one
respect, Ms Wanjiru did not have the full picture of the family's
circumstances, where she describes the appellant's wife as owing �100,000
to friends, where we now have fuller evidence because of the oral evidence
of the appellant and his wife, which we come on to discuss later in these
reasons.

There is no medical evidence of any diagnosis of any illness that child A
suffers from, or any medical treatment received, or any treatment.  While
Ms Wanjiru referred in her report of January 2020 to concerns about A
suffering mental ill-health, there have been no follow-up referrals, for
example to children's mental health services.  Whilst child A has battled
through her GCSEs, she has been able to cope.  The worrying predictions
outlined by Ms Wanjiru as to possible symptoms consistent with post-
traumatic stress disorder do not appear to be borne out by any subsequent
assessment or treatment to which we have been referred.  We are not
satisfied that there has been any impact on child A's educational
attainment from the ongoing stress of the resolution of her father's
immigration status.

We have no doubt that the appellant takes an active role in child A's
parenting, for example, in being the prime point of contact with the
children's school.  We regard elements of his role as on occasion
overstated (he claims to have accompanied both children to their school
every day, something which child A directly contradicted in her oral
evidence) but nevertheless our key finding is that the appellant plays a
close and central role, by way of practical and emotional support to both
his children, as part of a close-knit family.

Child B

Child B is 15 years old and is sitting his GCSE exams next year.  He
reiterated the closeness of the family unit and that they attended church
every Sunday.  He describes the appellant as encouraging him and his sister
to work hard and achieve good results in their GCSE exams because their
lives would only change for the better in the future.  The appellant has
stressed to his children the importance of education.  Child B confirmed
that his mother had been working hard to provide for the family and she
comes home from work exhausted and he worries about how she will cope in
the appellant's absence.  He did not know how the family would cope if the
appellant were not present, especially if his mother were seriously ill. He
gave examples of her suffering from migraines and an aching body.  He was
worried that his mother could not continue her work and then look after the
family at home as well.

The school correspondence in relation to child B, at page 49 [AB],
describes an exemplary student with exceptionally high marks in all his
mock exams.  The same correspondence reiterates the central role played by
the appellant in his progress and moulding him to become the "extraordinary
man" that child B is.  The appellant is described as a very supportive
parent over the last four years and having played a vital role in
supporting child B in accessing remote learning and being an integral part
in child B's mental health.  The head of year 10 was very worried about
child B's progress being negatively affected, should the status of the
appellant and his ability to remain in the UK change.  The teacher implored
any decision-maker to consider all options to avoid the impact being
detrimental on child B's future.

As with child A, Ms Wanjiru also expressed a view in her independent social
worker report and whilst this is also a view expressed in January 2020, she
also discussed concerns around child B when interviewed, at �23, describing
him as a "boy of very few words", struggling to show emotions. The
potential of him losing his father weighed heavily upon him, as his father
was the only source of adult motivation he had.  He wished to make his
father proud, and Ms Wanjiru records him saying this as he was choking with
tears.  He mentioned that his father, the appellant, had taught him to
manage dark days but he needed a strong role model.

Once again, we note Ms Wanjiru's concerns, but also the fact that during
the period since the report, child B appears to be prospering,
notwithstanding the uncertainty about the appellant's immigration status.

It is also important to note in respect of both children that the family,
whilst a close-knit one, is not isolated from a wider support network.  We
consider this in the context of the scenario where the appellant is
required to return to China.  We find that this is not a case in which, in
the event of the appellant's removal, the appellant's wife will be left to
cope alone.  From a purely financially perspective, Ms Wanjiru's report
omits an important part of the family's collective resources.  At �10, she
refers to the appellant's wife having borrowed �100,000 from a mortgage
company and having borrowed �100,000 from friends, to pay for the property
valued at over �400,000.  The purchase price paid by the appellant's wife
on 25th October 2017, recorded on the land registry deed at page [94] AB,
was in fact �425,000.  At �16, Ms Wanjiru refers to the appellant's family
in China with their income reported to be very minimal and only making
enough to survive.  At �18 there is a description of the appellant's wife's
family in China but there is no reference to their resources.

In fact, as it transpired during oral evidence, when we discussed with the
appellant's wife how she was able to afford a purchase price of �425,000
when she had received the loan from friends of �100,000 and a mortgage of
�125,000, how the remainder was therefore paid for.   She explained that
her family in China had given her (not loaned) the sum of �200,000 in 2017,
which she had also used to purchase the property.  They are clearly a
family of significant financial resources.  There was no reference to this
gift of �200,000 in Ms Wanjiru's report or the appellant's wife's witness
statements.

In terms of the loan from friends of around �100,000 in the UK, this was
not a single loan or from a small number of friends, but from between 20
and 30 people, some loaning her more than others, but with no minimum
agreed repayment terms nor any requirement to pay interest.  It is
important to note, in that wider context, that the appellant and his wife
appear to have extensive family in China.  Whilst his family may be of
limited financial means, he confirmed that he remained in contact with his
siblings, albeit in a different area from where the family originated, and
his wife has family in China with sufficient resources to make such a
significant financial contribution to support the appellant and his family,
as well as a wide network of support in the UK.

We regard the part of Ms Wanjiru's report, where she refers to the couple's
limited resources in China (�13), which are discussed in the context of the
inability of the appellant to return because he still owes money to
criminal gangs, to be unreliable.  It appears that through no fault of her
own, Ms Wanjiru has not been provided with the full details of the family's
financial circumstances.  We make no criticism of her in this regard but it
is clear that at least part of her assessment is based on incomplete
information.

The support for the appellant and his family goes beyond extensive
financial support.  Ms Wanjiru herself describes the strong support network
for the family in the UK (�14) and at �10, a large progressive Chinese
community where the family resides.  The children receive tutoring in
Mandarin in London and regularly attend church, with the report discussing
their involvement in church youth activities and Bible study.

In terms of the children's circumstances vis-�-vis their parents, there is
no suggestion that they play any caring role for either of their parents.
Whilst the appellant's wife has been described as ill and the appellant's
wife asserted that she thought she was suffering from the effect of long
COVID, she has not been diagnosed by any doctor to this effect and indeed,
she continues to work Monday to Friday, 9am until 6pm, making clothing.
Whilst there was correspondence in the appellant's bundle from the
appellant's GP dated 13th May 2019 (page [86]) suggesting he was unable to
work because of severity of migraines and it also discussed his poor sleep,
in oral evidence, the appellant confirmed that were he permitted leave to
remain, he would immediately start work full time in a restaurant.

We do not accept in these circumstances that the children have any caring
responsibilities for their parents or would end up on such a role if the
appellant is removed to China. Considering the carer role from the other
perspective, namely the appellant's wife looking after the children alone,
as we have already discussed, there was a discrepancy in the evidence of
the extent to which the appellant took his children to school, but we
accept the central role he has played in the family.  Nevertheless, the
appellant does not carry out a caring role in the sense of the children
having any special educational needs or medical conditions.  He is a
continuing presence in their lives, but he admits, and we have noted, were
he granted leave to remain, he would immediately start working as a chef in
a restaurant full-time.  Given their ages, the children are growing in
independence and whilst we do not minimise the important stages that they
are at in their lives, it is not the case that by virtue of the appellant's
wife ending up as the sole or primary carer for them in the appellant's
absence, their situation is analogous to that of small children.  They take
themselves to and from school and there is no reason to suppose that they
would not be semi-independent within the home setting, looking after
themselves to an extent for some of their practical needs, but also as part
of a strong unit with their mother.  We emphasise again that the family
unit is not the sole source of support for the children, with strong
support at school but also with the progressive Chinese community, who were
sufficiently supportive to lend the appellant's wife �100,000 towards the
family property; and the church group, from whom there is correspondence
within the appellant's bundle at pages [84] and [85] AB.

Considering the picture as a whole, the family unit has a strong financial
footing.  There appears to be substantial equity in the family home, the
family having been gifted �200,000 by family members in China and loaned an
additional �100,000 by immediate friends within the UK, on terms which are
not commercial; do not require any minimum repayments; nor any interest.
We do not accept that any health conditions mean that the appellant's wife
would feel compelled to give up her work and indeed, she continues to work
full-time.  We are satisfied in terms of any caring arrangements for their
children, given their ages, on a practical level the support that they
would draw from the wider close-knit community and their church would mean
that arrangements for the children could safely continue.  In reaching this
conclusion, we do not underestimate the impact on the children emotionally.
 They will, we have no doubt, be upset and that was an upset reflected in
the period when they were distressed during the uncertainty over the
appellant's immigration status, as reflected in correspondence from the
schools and in the independent social worker report.  It is, however,
testament to both children that they have continued to thrive, albeit with
the appellant's presence.

We find that in the event of the appellant's removal, both children would
be in regular contact via social media with him.  They have close
connections with the Chinese diaspora community, speak Mandarin and they
also have several relatives in China.  We have no doubt that just as the
children had visited their father on two occasions in the period when he
had been removed to China and lived there, that the children would swiftly
visit their father in China and so in addition regular, if not daily,
social media contact with him, they would also physically visit him, and
that the parental relationship would be maintained.

Discussion and conclusions

Based on the above findings, we come on to discuss the question of whether
the effect of the appellant's deportation on his wife and children would be
unduly harsh, although Ms Pinder has accepted that the effect on the
appellant's wife is unlikely to add more to our consideration of the
children.  We remind ourselves that the consequence of the appellant's
offending and his re-entry in breach of the deportation order is not
relevant at this stage of the analysis.  We take as our starting point that
the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.  We also
remind ourselves as per the authority of HA (Iraq) that there is no
"ordinary standard" of harshness and that unduly harsh effects may be
commonplace.

However, we accept Mr Whitwell's submission that even taking the
appellant's case at its highest, the effect of the appellant's deportation
on his wife and children would not be unduly harsh.  We accept that there
will be a substantial degree of upset for both children.  We do not
underestimate the important stages at which both children are in their
lives, even though they are older children.  However, and considering the
evidence holistically, we also reflect that the children derive support
from a financially secure home, within a close-knit UK diaspora community
with whom they are involved; their church community; and substantial
assistance from both schools.  Neither child has any long-lasting medical
issues, nor any special educational needs.  Even during the period of
uncertainty, which has affected child A in particular, both children have
thrived.  While we accept that the appellant's removal will be distressing
in the context of that stable setting, in the children's continuing ability
both to see their father by social media means but also, more importantly,
to see him on a regular basis in person, as they did before, we are
satisfied that the appellant does not meet the test of 'Exception 2'
(section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act), in terms of the "stay" scenario, namely
the appellant is removed to China, but his family remain in the UK.   In
respect of the appellant's wife, the effect on her would not be to require
her to give up work or be financially compromised so as to put the family
home at risk. While the appellant's absence would put additional
responsibilities on her as sole parent in the UK, we find that she would
receive substantial practical support from her church, her children's
school, and the Chinese diaspora community.  Considered as a whole, the
effect on the appellant's wife would not be unduly harsh. We have analysed
the social worker's report above and reference our findings therein.
Although Ms Wanjiru was concerned in relation to the children's mental
health, we find that they have progressed at school and maintained
emotional stability.

In respect of whether there are very compelling circumstances, Ms Pinder
candidly accepted that in respect of right to respect for the private life,
there was little she could usefully add.  No appeal against the asylum
decision had been pursued and she reflected on the evidence we had heard
about the family's financial resources in China.  Whilst there had been
references and assertions to very significant obstacles to the appellant's
integration into China, we note the significant resources of the
appellant's wife's family members in China; his ability to relocate
elsewhere than the region in which he was brought up, as his sisters have
done;  and the continuing strong support from the UK diaspora community,
which, we find, is likely to continue in the event of his removal.  We do
not accept that there is any sense that he would be returning to China as
an "outsider", noting the continuing links with family there as recently as
2017, when his wife was given �200,000 by her family members.

We then come on to consider the question of very compelling circumstances
in the context of family life.  It is at this stage that we are permitted
to consider the nature of the appellant's offending and his re-entry to the
UK in breach of the deportation order.  We accept that, as per the
authority of Binaku, there is no separate, higher standard for those re-
entering in breach of a deportation order.  We consider that the ban on re-
entry of 10 years which would normally be the consequence of a deportation
order has since expired, but we also consider that the appellant was only
ever out of the UK for four years.  Moreover, as the appellant confirmed in
oral evidence to us, the decision to return to the UK in breach was a
decision of the couple jointly.    The weight of the public interest in the
maintenance of immigration control where, as here, somebody has returned in
breach of a deportation order, must be very significant.

In terms of the offence, we consider the nature of the offence; a sexual
assault on a woman using public transport late at night, who was vulnerable
through alcohol impairment, as reflected in the remarks of the sentencing
Judge, His Honour Judge Lawrence, on 19th June 2006, at pages [E1] to [E3]
of the respondent's bundle.  We also note the length of sentence (15
months, so towards the lower end of sentences resulting in automatic
deportation).  We also consider that the appellant has not offended since
his conviction for the sexual assault in June 2006; and the correspondence
from both the children's school about the positive role played by the
appellant; and the church which the family attend, which describes the
appellant as having a spiritual conversion to Christianity, and his being
rehabilitated.

However, in the context where the effect of removal would not be unduly
harsh, bearing in mind all of the circumstances, including whether any
facts relevant to Exceptions 1 and 2 are nevertheless sufficient to
outweigh the public interest in deportation, we attach significant weight
to the appellant's re-entry in breach of the deportation order.  We also
attach particular weight to his ability to see physically his family in the
future, just as they did when he had been deported in the past; his ability
to integrate into China; and the ability of the family in the UK to
prosper, despite his deportation. In our assessment of all of the
circumstances, we conclude that there are not very compelling circumstances
over and above either Exceptions 1 or 2.

As part of the wider Article 8 assessment, by reference to Section 117B,
whilst we accept that the appellant and his wife do not appear to be any
burden on taxpayers and indeed have significant financial resources,
nevertheless, neither appear to be able to speak English.  The appellant
has never had leave to enter or remain in the UK.  Any private life he has
established in the UK was when he was here unlawfully and whilst we accept
that different considerations apply in respect of family life,
nevertheless, that is a fact we bear in mind in terms of the
proportionality assessment.  We conclude that whilst the effects of refusal
of the appellant's human rights claim and refusal of the revocation of the
deportation order will be significant enough to interfere with the
appellant's right to respect for his private and family life under Article
8 ECHR to engage with that right, we are satisfied that that interference
is wholly proportionate.   The interest in immigration control is strong;
the appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules; and the effects on the
family's private and family life of the appellant's deportation are
substantially mitigated by the family's financial resources and extensive
support network, both in the UK and China.

In summary, the appellant's appeal fails and is dismissed.



Decision

The appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.



Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   6th August 2021






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has failed and so there can be no fee award.






Signed:  J Keith


              Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   6th August 2021




ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04512/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th December 2019                |On                                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'GC'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
By virtue of this appeal including consideration of  the  appellant's  minor
children, unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure
to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, instructed by Corbin & Hassan
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The parties are referred to as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the respondent against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Cockrill (the 'FtT'), promulgated  on  30  July  2019,  by
   which he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   refusal of his protection claim, but allowed his human rights appeal,  in
   the context of his seeking revocation of the  deportation  order  against
   him. The respondent reached her decision on 21 March 2018.

3. In  essence,  the  appellant's  claims  involved  the  following  issues:
   whether the  appellant  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  from
   criminal gangs to whom he alleged he owed  money  (so-called  "snakehead"
   gangs) and whom he alleged had forced him to work as a victim  of  modern
   slavery in the UK; and whether he should be returned  to  China,  despite
   having re-entered the UK from China in breach of an existing  deportation
   order, as a result of which he  had  previously  been  deported  back  to
   China; but noting that his wife and  children  were  now  naturalised  as
   British citizens.

4. The core points taken against the appellant by the respondent  were  that
   his protection claim was not genuine,  let  alone  well-founded,  as  his
   family had sufficient funds to buy a house in the  UK,  which  undermined
   his claim to owe a debt of a far smaller sum; and his account,  given  at
   various times, was internally inconsistent in many respects.

5. In relation to his human rights claim, paragraph 399D of the  Immigration
   Rules applied as he had re-entered the UK in breach of a previous  breach
   of a deportation, having originally entered the UK under an assumed  name
   and having previously  been  convicted  of  the  indecent  assault  of  a
   vulnerable  woman.    There  were  not  very  exceptional   circumstances
   justifying why the existing deportation order should not  be  maintained.
   While the appellant had  a  British  wife  and  children,  there  was  no
   expectation for them to have to return to China with  the  appellant  and
   they had already been separated from him between 2008 and 2012, following
   his previous deportation. The family could maintain  contact  via  modern
   social media and the appellant's wife had previously visited him in China
   during the period when he had been deported.  There  would  not  be  very
   significant obstacles to his integration there.

The FtT's decision

6. The  FtT  was  not  impressed  by  various  aspects  of  the  appellant's
   evidence,  dismissing  his  appeal  on  protection  grounds.   The  FtT's
   decision on that issue is not challenged in the Upper Tribunal.  The  FtT
   also found that, applying paragraph 399D of the  Immigration  Rules,   he
   'did not see' that there were  very  exceptional  circumstances  in  this
   appeal and that the appellant's children would  have  to  adjust  to  the
   reality that their father was still the subject of a  deportation  order.
   However, the FtT went on to conclude that for the  appellant's  wife  and
   children to try to maintain a family life in China, they would lose their
   acquired British citizenship, so that this would  swing  the  balance  in
   favour of the appellant, to be able to meet the very tough test  of  very
   exceptional circumstances. He could not enjoy his family  life  with  his
   wife and children, who would only be able to visit him; that  would  cost
   money and it would be 'unduly harsh' on them, noting their existing face-
   to-face contact with their father.

7. Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT concluded  that  while
   the protection claim was  dismissed,  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
   rights grounds succeeded.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

8. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal which are  essentially  that  the
   FTT erred  in  (1)  concluding  that  there  were  not  very  exceptional
   circumstances in the appeal, but then going  on  to  reach  the  contrary
   conclusion; and (2) even if the claimed loss of  British  citizenship  of
   the appellant's spouse and children occurred and was unduly harsh  (which
   was not admitted), the FtT had failed to explain why it would  be  unduly
   harsh for the appellant's family to remain in the UK, just  as  they  had
   done when he was previously deported.

9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal on 1 November 2019, on the basis that it was arguable that
   the FtT had erred in his application of the 'unduly harsh'  criteria  and
   had placed undue  weight  on  family  relationships  developed  when  the
   appellant had returned to the UK  in  breach  of  the  deportation  order
   against him. The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before us

10. Ms Cunha relied on the grounds of  appeal.  Mr  Sowerby  submitted  that
   while the FtT had given a reasoned decision, open to him on the evidence,
   of why it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  appellant's  wife  and
   children to relocate to China, and while he made no concession, he  could
   see the force in the argument that the FtT  had  failed  to  address  the
   issue of why separation of the appellant from his wife and children, such
   as had occurred previously, would be unduly harsh, let  alone  amount  to
   very compelling or very exceptional circumstances.  He did  not  seek  to
   justify the FtT's reasoning that the appellant's wife and children  would
   lose their British  citizenship  if  they  returned  to  China  with  the
   appellant.

The Law

11. Paragraph 399D of the Immigration Rules states:

   "399D. Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the  United
   Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of  the  deportation
   order is in the public interest and will be implemented unless there  are
   very exceptional circumstances."

12. The Court of Appeal in SSHD v SU [2017] EWCA Civ 1069 gave  guidance  on
   the  operation  of  paragraph  399D.   The  Court  confirmed  that  other
   provisions in the Immigration Rules relating to deportation, where  there
   was not re-entry in breach of a deportation order, did  not  apply  where
   paragraph 399D, which related to re-entry  in  breach  of  a  deportation
   order, applied. In particular, paragraphs 390A and 391 did not apply (see
   [22], [41] and [42] of SU). The test of  very  exceptional  circumstances
   was higher than the test of 'very compelling circumstances'  in  399  and
   399A ([44]).  The test of 'very  compelling  circumstances'  in  turn  is
   higher than the test under 'Exception 2' (see  paragraph  398(c)  of  the
   Immigration Rules), that is, whether the relevant circumstances would  be
   'unduly harsh' on the appellant's wife and children.

Discussion and conclusions

13. We conclude that the FtT  has  erred  in  law  in  concluding  that  the
   appellant's circumstances are exceptional because he failed to take  into
   account material considerations.  He failed to  consider,  when  reaching
   this conclusion, why the separation of the appellant from  his  wife  and
   children would amount to very exceptional circumstances,  let  alone  the
   lower tests of very compelling circumstances;  or  whether  it  would  be
   unduly harsh to separate the appellant from his wife  and  children.   By
   focussing on the family's return to China, he failed to consider  whether
   the impact of the separation of the appellant from his family went beyond
   the degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for the partner  or
   child of a foreign criminal who is deported (see:  SSHD  v  PG  (Jamaica)
   [2019] EWCA Civ 1213).  The  gap  in  that  analysis  renders  the  FtT's
   decision unsafe in respect of the human rights decision and we set  aside
   the FtT's findings and conclusion on that issue.

Decision on error of law

14. We conclude that there are material errors of law in the FtT's  decision
   in relation to the human rights appeal, which we set aside.

15. The FtT's findings and conclusion in relation to  the  protection  claim
   were not challenged and shall stand.

Disposal

16. With reference to �7.2 of the Practice Direction, given  the  narrowness
   of the issues, we regarded this as an appropriate case to  be  remade  by
   the Upper Tribunal.

Directions for remaking

17. The following directions shall apply  on  the  future  conduct  of  this
   appeal:

     a) By 4pm on 24  February  2020,  the  appellant  shall  serve  on  the
        respondent any social worker report relied on  in  relation  to  the
        appellant's children, to the extent  that  it  is  relevant  to  the
        appeal.  The appellant shall provide a copy  of  any  social  worker
        report to the Upper Tribunal  with  the  written  skeleton  argument
        referred to in paragraph 17.2 below.

     b) By 4pm on 9 March 2020, the parties shall serve on one another,  and
        the Upper Tribunal written  skeleton  arguments,  to  include  their
        submissions on the relevance  of  the  passage  of  time  since  the
        deportation order was originally made.

     c) The Resumed Hearing shall be listed  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judges
        Rimington and Keith sitting at Field House on the  first  open  date
        after 16 March 2020, time estimate 3  hours,  to  enable  the  Upper
        Tribunal to substitute a decision to either  allow  or  dismiss  the
        appeal.

     d) The anonymity directions shall continue to remain in force.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of  law  in
relation to the human rights appeal and we set it aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the protection  claim
stands.



 Signed J Keith                 Date:  17 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
