
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/04059/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing via Skype  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2021                     |On 15 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Joseph, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

I now remake the decision arising from the appellant's appeal against the
respondent's decision dated 12 April 2019, refusing her asylum and human
rights claims.

In a decision dated 17 November 2020, I found that the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 21 January 2020, in which the appellant's
appeal was dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds, should be set
aside and remade in the Upper Tribunal ('UT').

Background

The appellant, a citizen of Ethiopia, arrived in the United Kingdom ('UK')
on 13 July 2017 and claimed asylum on 9 August 2017.  She came as a member
of a private household and was granted a visa in that respect, but escaped
from that household, claiming that she was a victim of trafficking and
servitude ('VoT').  A conclusive grounds decision dated 2 January 2019
recorded that on 3 October 2017 the relevant competent authority decided
there were reasonable grounds to believe that she was a VoT.  It followed
that at the time of the FTT hearing the judge treated the appellant as a
VoT and this has been accepted by the SSHD.

The appellant relied upon an asylum claim that involved a history of being
a VoT but also upon her father's membership of a political organisation in
Ethiopia. The FTT accepted that the appellant's father may have been a
member of the political organisation (Genbot 7) and that he may have been
arrested as a result of this in 2010.  At that point the appellant was only
17.  Her evidence was that she had not seen him since. I need say no more
about this because it has been accepted on the appellant's behalf that
there is no current well-founded risk to her for reasons relating to her
father's political opinion.   The appellant's own country expert, Dr
Campbell made it clear that he did not consider her to be at risk on
account of her father's political opinion or activities.

Hearing

At the beginning of the hearing before me both representatives accepted the
following matters:

          i) The appellant has been conclusively assessed to be a VoT and
             she was trafficked in the manner that she claimed in her
             statement dated 9 December 2019.  The appellant's original
             traffickers were her mother's aunt and an agent who then took
             control of her in 2011 by sending her to Dubai and then
             returned her to Ethiopia in 2013 before re-trafficking her to
             Kuwait that same year.  She was then returned by the
             trafficker to Ethiopia in 2016 before being re-trafficked to
             Kuwait that same year.  That family brought the appellant to
             the UK.

         ii) The appellant has not had any contact with her aunt since 2011
             and is not at risk from her or her previous traffickers given
             the passage of time.

        iii) The appellant had not had contact with her father, husband or
             sister since 2010 and would be returning to Ethiopia on her
             own with no family or community to turn to for assistance.

         iv) The sole issue in dispute is whether the appellant is at risk
             of being re-trafficked by persons unknown after considering
             all relevant factors including her age, her single status and
             lack of family contacts, the shelter services available in
             Ethiopia, the potential grant that she might be able to access
             from the UK, her past trafficking and re-trafficking.

          v) If at risk of re-trafficking in Ethiopia the appellant faces
             serious harm for a Convention Reason namely women VoT.

         vi) If not at risk of re-trafficking I must still consider whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's
             reintegration to Ethiopia pursuant to 276ADE of the
             Immigration Rules, such that her removal would breach Article
             8, ECHR.

        vii) The only background evidence relevant to the risk of re-
             trafficking in Ethiopia are the reports contained in the
             appellant's bundle.  This includes: a report from a country
             expert, Dr Campbell dated 22 June 2020 (Department of
             Anthropology and Sociology, School of Oriental and African
             Studies, University of London); the Ethiopian Human Rights
             Council, Civil Society Joint Report on Violence Against Women
             in Ethiopia dated 10 April 2019 ('the EHRC report'), and the
             US Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report 2020:
             Ethiopia, dated 25 June 2020 ('the US report').

       viii) In all the circumstances it was not necessary to hear from the
             appellant, as the credibility of her past claim was accepted,
             and the hearing proceeded by way of submissions only.

Mr McVeety relied upon his brief position statement and submitted that the
Appellant would not be at risk of re-trafficking on return to Ethiopia on
the basis that she does not fit the profile of those at risk of re-
trafficking as identified in Dr Campbell's report.  Mr McVeety acknowledged
that Dr Campbell was entitled to be treated as a country expert on the
matters he addressed but the respondent did not accept his ultimate
conclusion in this particular case, albeit Dr Campbell provided a measured
report containing helpful background.  In particular, Mr McVeety argued
that the appellant was trafficked by a family member and not by any
organised trafficking gang to whom she still had an outstanding 'debt', and
could utilise her experiences and a potential grant of up to ï¿½2000 from the
respondent to avoid any risk of being exploited in the future. Mr McVeety
also drew my attention to evidence that supports the proposition that the
financial package potentially available is significantly in excess of the
average yearly GDP for Ethiopia - see the World Bank's Ethiopia Review.
When pressed, Mr McVeety accepted that the appellant would only be entitled
to a financial package if she agreed to voluntarily return to Ethiopia and
the amount available was uncertain.

Mr Joseph relied upon a helpful skeleton argument in support of his
submission that there is a real risk of the appellant being re-trafficked
on her return to Ethiopia.  Mr Joseph took me to the country background
evidence contained in the appellant's bundle as well as the respondent's
most recent CPIN on Ethiopia dated September 2020 ('the CPIN').  He asked
me to note that whilst the CPIN dealt with the high level of violence and
discrimination against women, it was silent on the issue of trafficking.

After hearing submissions from both parties I reserved my decision, which I
now give with reasons.

Assessment of risk of re-trafficking

The prospective risk of the appellant being re-trafficked turns upon a
careful consideration of the country background evidence together with the
appellant's particular characteristics.  In making my assessment of the
risk of serious harm for the purposes of the Refugee Convention, I apply
the lower standard of proof.

I first turn my attention to the available country background evidence.
This was helpfully summarised in the appellant's skeleton argument.  Mr
McVeety did not disagree with the general background within the reports
relied upon by Mr Joseph.  I accept Ethiopia lacks a comprehensive policy
on trafficking in women and children and does not fully meet the minimum
standards for the elimination of trafficking, yet domestic and
international trafficking, especially of young women and children from
rural to urban areas, is a prevalent problem in Ethiopia.  The reports
before me indicate that the implementation of initiatives including a
National Referral Mechanism and a Migration and Human Trafficking Crime
Team have been extremely limited. There is a lack of standard procedures
for frontline responders to proactively identify trafficking victims among
vulnerable migrants.  Rehabilitation and shelter service remains
unpredictable and scant.  Mr McVeety accepted that any referral would have
to be a self-referral as Ethiopia continued to have a significant problem
in identifying victims of trafficking, as contained in the US and HRCO
reports.

I now address how the appellant is likely to fare upon return to Ethiopia
in the light of her particular characteristics.  The appellant is a 27-year-
old VoT without any family or other close contacts in Ethiopia.  Mr McVeety
accepted that the appellant has endured trauma and abuse over the course of
many years and this rendered her vulnerable, albeit there is no medical
evidence that she suffers from any psychological condition as a
consequence.  Given the structural and practical constraints in Ethiopia,
the appellant will not be identified as a victim of trafficking on her
return.

Whilst there is evidence that Ethiopia has investigated and convicted more
transnational traffickers than in previous years, the overarching framework
for the detection of traffickers remains inadequate for all the reasons set
out in the US and HRCO reports.  Mr McVeety did not challenge this evidence
but rather submitted that this appellant would not be at risk of re-
trafficking because her position is now different to the past when she has
been re-trafficked.  He contended that the appellant would have the means,
knowledge and motivation to fend for herself and avoid any risk of re-
trafficking.  By contrast, it was argued on the appellant's behalf that she
would be unable to rely upon her own resources and resilience, such that
she would rapidly fall into destitution upon return, rendering her prone to
re-trafficking.    It is important to carefully consider this appellant's
particular characteristics in the context of the known country background
information on Ethiopia in order to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
these competing submissions.

I note the evidence tends to indicate that younger women living in rural
areas are most at risk of trafficking from relatives and people they know.
This is consistent with the appellant's own history of trafficking.  Upon
return to Addis Ababa, the appellant will be 27 and not squarely within the
range most at risk of trafficking.  Indeed, she will have no relatives to
turn to and is no longer at risk from her previous traffickers given the
passage of time.  The appellant will therefore not be at any obvious
immediate risk from anyone in particular upon return to Ethiopia.  To that
extent, the appellant's circumstances have changed.  However, I am
satisfied that the appellant is likely to face destitution and an inability
to access appropriate employment and accommodation upon return to Ethiopia.
 That in itself places her in an enhanced risk category for re-trafficking.
 The US report states:

             "Scarce economic opportunities and dire poverty, coupled with
             familial encouragement, compel thousands of Ethiopians,
             including a substantial percentage of unmarried individuals
             under age 30, to transit, primarily via Djibouti or Somalia,
             to Yemen and onward to Saudi Arabia and Europe...within the
             country, traffickers predominantly exploit victims in forced
             labour in domestic service and sex trafficking in urban
             centres..."

In addition, Dr Campbell has highlighted that vulnerable adults who do not
have the support of their families are also at enhanced risk of
trafficking, particularly those without savings, support or any income
source.  Although Mr McVeety referred to the assisted voluntary return
scheme as a potential income source, he was unable to take me to any
evidence that it would apply to this appellant.  She has been consistently
clear that she does not wish to return to Ethiopia and would not do so
voluntarily, given her history there.  On the evidence available to me, I
do not accept that the appellant will have access to a financial grant.
Even if I am wrong about this, any such grant will be limited and will run
out.  This is not an appellant with the requisite skills to invest any
limited grant in a sustainable small business venture.  The appellant's
only employment experience has involved domestic servitude and
exploitation.  As Dr Campbell noted, she is uneducated with no relevant
skills or experience to earn a reasonable income to support herself.  She
has no family or contacts to access genuine employment in a country where
such employment for a person with the appellant's background is very
difficult to obtain - see the CPIN at [4.1.5-9] and [19.3.1-3].  Mr McVeety
submitted that the appellant will be returned as a relatively mature and
experienced woman which will equip her with greater resilience to avoid the
deception that often accompanies the methodology used by traffickers.  On
the other hand, Mr McVeety accepted that the appellant was vulnerable by
reason of her extended history of trafficking and labour exploitation.  It
is noteworthy that the appellant was re-trafficked on two occasions and
worked in conditions of modern slavery for an extended period of time, from
2011 until she escaped in 2017.  That history is set out in detail in her
witness statement.  It does not paint a picture of a robust individual but
one who has been abused, undermined and deceived repeatedly.  These
experiences have clearly left the appellant more vulnerable than resilient.
 I do not accept that she is in a position to be able to self-refer for NGO
assistance and shelter in the context of Ethiopia, where such facilities
for women with her background are scant - see the COIS report from [19.7],
which focuses upon those fleeing violence (as opposed to VoT) and notes at
[19.7.4] that shelters remain scare with women often being turned away.

I am therefore satisfied that the appellant will have huge difficulties in
securing an income and will almost certainly be forced to live rough on the
streets where the predominant form of income is casual sex and where one of
the few potential routes out is through trafficking.  This is consistent
with Dr Campbell's conclusions at [7] to [14], which I accept.  Although Dr
Campbell referred to the plight of children at [16] and [17] of his report,
when the report is read as a whole, it is clear that he has been able to
evidence why this appellant, aged 27, would be at increased risk of re-
trafficking in Ethiopia.

I am satisfied that this particular appellant remains at enhanced risk of
re-trafficking as a result of a combination of factors: she is under 30;
she has no family or anyone else to rely upon; she has already been a
victim of re-trafficking; she does not have the skills, experience,
contacts to obtain appropriate employment such that she is likely to feel
compelled to turn to sexual or labour exploitation for basic survival.  Mr
McVeety did not dispute that the appellant would not be able to seek
sufficient protection from the authorities if I made such a finding, and it
is therefore unnecessary to explore this issue further.

The parties agreed that a finding that the appellant faces a real risk of
re-trafficking in the context of Ethiopia means that she faces serious harm
for a Convention reason.  As such, it is unnecessary for me to determine
whether the appellant faces very significant obstacles to re-integration in
Ethiopia.



Decision

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights
grounds.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer                               Dated: 13 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
