
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number PA/05522/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on dates to 12 May 2021              |On 28 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               MUZAMEL YOUSIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    various Senior Home Office Presenting Officers on
different dates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT  Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 September 2019.

 2. By a decision dated 20 and issued on 25 February 2020, which should  be
    read along with this decision, I declined  to  uphold  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal to the UT, apart from ground 1 (i), which revealed  a
    lacuna in an otherwise comprehensive decision.  The  judge  was  asked,
    whether country guidance was relevant or not, and whether the appellant
    was otherwise credible or not, to allow his appeal because of  risk  to
    any returning  Nubian.   That  required  an  assessment  based  on  the
    evidence cited by the expert witness, Mr Verney, (regardless  of  other
    well-founded criticisms of his reports) and on the rest of the evidence
    presented by both  sides.   The  appellant  submitted  that  the  FtT's
    decision did not resolve that final issue.  The respondent  was  unable
    to show that it did.

 3. The decision of the FtT was therefore set  aside  only  to  the  extent
    required for resolution of the issue of risk to any returning Nubian.

 4. The case was retained in the UT for that purpose.

 5. Mr Verney subsequently gave evidence further to  his  several  reports,
    and  was  cross-examined  and  re-examined.   A  further  hearing   for
    submissions was  not  concluded,  due  to  faulty  remote  connections.
    Parties have summarised  their  final  positions  in  written  skeleton
    arguments.  On 12 May 2021 the hearing of the  case  was  completed  by
    brief oral submissions.

 6. I am obliged to Mr Winter, and to the several representatives  for  the
    Home Office, for their assistance.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. The starting points are country guidance and the findings  of  fact  of
    the FtT.

 9. IM & AI Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188, published on 14 April 2016, remains
    on the UT's list of country guidance cases.  Its headnote states:

      1) In order for a person to be at risk on return to Sudan  there  must
         be evidence known to the Sudanese authorities which implicates  the
         claimant in activity  which  they  are  likely  to  perceive  as  a
         potential threat to the regime to the extent  that,  on  return  to
         Khartoum there is a risk to the claimant that he will  be  targeted
         by the authorities.  The task of the decision maker is to  identify
         such a person and this requires as comprehensive an  assessment  as
         possible about the individual concerned.

      2) The evidence draws  a  clear  distinction  between  those  who  are
         arrested,  detained  for  a  short  period,  questioned,   probably
         intimidated, possibly rough handled  without  having  suffered  (or
         being at risk of suffering) serious harm and  those  who  face  the
         much graver risk of serious harm.  The distinction does not  depend
         upon the individual being classified, for example, as a teacher  or
         a journalist (relevant as these matters are) but is the result of a
         finely  balanced  fact-finding  exercise   encompassing   all   the
         information that can be gleaned about him.  The decision  maker  is
         required to place the individual in the airport on return  or  back
         home in his community and assess how the authorities are likely  to
         re-act on the strength of the information known to them about him.

      3) Distinctions must be drawn with those whose political  activity  is
         not particularly great or who do not have great influence.   Whilst
         it does not take much for the NISS to open a file,  the  very  fact
         that  so  many  are  identified  as  potential  targets  inevitably
         requires NISS to distinguish between those whom they view as a real
         threat and those whom they do not.

      4) It will not be enough to make out  a  risk  that  the  authorities'
         interest will be limited to  the  extremely  common  phenomenon  of
         arrest and detention which though intimidating (and designed to  be
         intimidating) does not cross the threshold into persecution.

      5) The purpose of the targeting is likely to be obtaining  information
         about the claimant's  own  activities  or  the  activities  of  his
         friends and associates.

      6) The evidence establishes the targeting is not random but the result
         of suspicion based upon information in the authorities' possession,
         although it may be limited.

      7) Caution should be exercised when the claim is  based  on  a  single
         incident.   Statistically,  a  single  incident  must  reduce   the
         likelihood of the Sudanese authorities  becoming  aware  of  it  or
         treating the claimant as of significant interest.

      8) Where the claim is based on events in Sudan in which  the  claimant
         has come to the attention of the authorities,  the  nature  of  the
         claimant's involvement, the likelihood of this being  perceived  as
         in opposition to the government, his treatment  in  detention,  the
         length of detention and any relevant surrounding circumstances  and
         the likelihood of the event or the detention being made the subject
         of a record are all likely to be material factors.

      9) Where the claim is based on events outside Sudan, the  evidence  of
         the claimant having come to the attention of Sudanese  intelligence
         is bound to be more difficult to establish.  However  it  is  clear
         that the Sudanese  authorities  place  reliance  upon  information-
         gathering about the activities of members  of  the  diaspora  which
         includes  covert  surveillance.   The  nature  and  extent  of  the
         claimant's activities, when and where,  will  inform  the  decision
         maker when he comes to decide whether it is likely those activities
         will attract the attention of the authorities, bearing in mind  the
         likelihood that the authorities will have to distinguish amongst  a
         potentially large group of  individuals  between  those  who  merit
         being targeted and those that do not.

     10) The decision maker must seek to build up as comprehensive a picture
         as possible of  the  claimant  taking  into  account  all  relevant
         material including that which may not have been established even to
         the lower standard of proof.

     11) Once a composite assessment of the evidence has been made, it  will
         be for the decision maker to determine whether there is a real risk
         that the claimant will come to the attention of the authorities  on
         return  in  such  a  way  as  amounts  to  more  than  the  routine
         commonplace detention but meets the threshold of  a  real  risk  of
         serious harm.

     12) Where a claimant has not been  believed  in  all  or  part  of  his
         evidence, the decision maker will have to assess how  this  impacts
         on the requirement to establish that a Convention  claim  has  been
         made out.  He will not have the comprehensive, composite picture he
         would otherwise have had.  There are likely to be shortfalls in the
         evidence that the decision maker is unable to speculate upon.   The
         final analysis will remain the same: has the  claimant  established
         there is a real risk that  he,  the  claimant,  will  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities on return in such a way as amounts  to
         more than the routine commonplace detention and release  but  meets
         the threshold of serious harm.

10. On 1 September 2020, the UT published further guidance in KAM  (Nuba  -
    return) Sudan CG [2020] UKUT 00269 (IAC), headnoted thus:

      a) An individual of Nuba ethnicity is not at real risk of  persecution
         or serious ill-treatment on return to Sudan (whether  in  the  Nuba
         Mountains, Greater  Khartoum  or  Khartoum  International  Airport)
         simply because of their ethnicity.

      b) A returning failed asylum-seeker (including of Nuba  ethnicity)  is
         not at real risk of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment  at  the
         airport simply on account of being a failed asylum-seeker.

      c) Prior to the political developments in 2019, individuals  who  were
         at risk on return (whether at the airport or in  Greater  Khartoum)
         were those who were perceived by the Sudanese authorities to  be  a
         sufficiently serious threat to the Sudanese Government  to  warrant
         targeting.

      d) The assessment of that risk required  an  evaluation  of  what  was
         likely to be known to the authorities and a holistic assessment  of
         the individual's circumstances  including  any  previous  political
         activity in Sudan or abroad and any past history  of  detention  in
         Sudan.  Factors include whether the individual  was  a  student,  a
         political activist or a journalist; their ethnicity; their religion
         (in particular Christianity); and whether they came from  a  former
         conflict area (such as the Nuba Mountains).

      e)  Whilst  the  question  of  perception  of   political   opposition
         underlying (c) above remains the  same  since  the  2019  political
         developments, when assessing any risk to  an  individual  now,  the
         effects of the 2019 political developments  are  relevant  and  are
         likely to affect the Sudanese authorities' view  of,  and  attitude
         towards, those who  might  be  perceived  as  political  opponents.
         Further, the 2019 political developments are likely to have greatly
         reduced the interest  of  the  Sudanese  government  in  supressing
         political opposition by violent or military action.

      f) Internal relocation to  Greater  Khartoum  for  a  person  of  Nuba
         ethnicity must depend upon an assessment of  all  the  individual's
         circumstances including their living conditions, their  ability  to
         access  education,  healthcare   and   employment.    Despite   the
         impoverished conditions  and  discrimination  faced  by  Nuba  when
         living in the so-called 'Black  Belt'  area  of  Greater  Khartoum,
         relocating  there  will  not   generally   be   unduly   harsh   or
         unreasonable.

11. The findings of fact on which the appellant principally relies  are  as
    stated at [4] of his skeleton argument: he is Nuba and has attended two
    demonstrations in London.

12. The appellant's submission at [5] develops his primary position that he
    falls within the guidance in KAM, for these reasons:

      i)  although  the  UT  states  at  paragraph  184  of  KAM  that   any
         oppositional activity against the Bashir regime may have  dwindling
         relevance, the UT also states at paragraph 179 that  the  situation
         has not evolved such that the UT could be confident that  the  risk
         to those who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the  Sudanese
         regime,  which  the  UT  accepted  existed  before  the   political
         developments in 2019 has now completely evaporated with the fall of
         the Bashir  regime.  The  central  question  remained  whether  the
         individual's circumstances  as  known  to  (or  suspected  by)  the
         Sudanese authorities create a perception that the individual  is  a
         sufficiently serious threat to the Sudanese government  to  warrant
         targeting  and  ill-treatment.  A  fact  sensitive  assessment   is
         required taking into account all the circumstances  with  reference
         to factors identified at paragraphs 134-135 of KAM (paragraphs 182-
         183 of KAM).

     ii) although the expert's view  was  that  ethnicity  on  its  own  was
         sufficient, the appellant maintains, even in light of the political
         developments, that his Nuba ethnicity, being returned as  a  failed
         asylum seeker, being from the Nuba  Mountains  which  is  a  former
         conflict area (see appellant's statement in original bundle for FTT
         hearing at paragraph 2), having travelled abroad, possibly being  a
         male of military age and the 2 demonstrations he attended in London
         as being sufficient on a cumulative basis to show  he  is  at  real
         risk of at least being perceived as a threat  (see  headnotes  (a),
         (b), (d), (e), paragraphs 227 and 134-135  of  KAM).  KAM  accepted
         that Nuba are marked by their physical appearance (paragraph  116),
         that they have been regarded with suspicion as  possible  political
         opponents and associated with rebel forces (paragraph 117) and that
         there is higher risk of investigation  of  a  Nuba  person  at  the
         airport (paragraph 227). In light  of  the  approach  of  KAM,  the
         various  factors  relied  upon  and  the  expert's  evidence,   the
         political developments are unlikely to mitigate any  real  risk  to
         the appellant;

    iii) the appellant's position is that, applying  the  low  standard,  he
         will be identified and questioned on return. He is not expected  to
         lie. The expert's evidence was that the factors narrated above  are
         sufficient for the appellant to  be  at  real  risk.  The  expert's
         evidence was that people have  been  confronted  with  evidence  of
         taking part in demonstrations in the UK. The expert's view was that
         there are strong  indications  that  the  Sudanese  government  are
         involved both in human resources and in electronic surveillance  in
         monitoring demonstrations. The expert's view was that the term "low
         level" can be misleading as it is not a predictor as to who will be
         ill-treated. The expert's evidence was that something  quite  small
         is likely to tip the balance against the appellant and  that  there
         are sufficient factors  for  that  to  be  done  (RT  (Zimbabwe)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  1  AC  152  at
         paragraphs 53-54 per Lord Dyson). In light of that  information  it
         is submitted that on the low standard applicable,  and  giving  the
         benefit of the doubt to the appellant, that there is a real risk to
         the appellant (in support of the foregoing see paragraphs 26-28, 61-
         65, 66-70, 73, 116, 134-140, 145-147 of expert report prepared 25th
         Jan 2020 contained in the appellant's first inventory; paragraphs 1-
         13,  63-67  of  the  expert  report  prepared  22nd  December  2020
         contained in the appellant's fourth inventory of productions);

     iv) in terms of headnote (f) of KAM, internal relocation does not arise
         if the appellant is at real risk at the airport.

13. That line of argument does not keep itself strictly within the  country
    guidance.  To an extent,  it  relies  on  unproved  assertions  of  the
    appellant and on contentions of Mr Verney which go beyond the guidance.

14. There is also some difficulty in that Mr Verney's opinion is  based  on
    the account advanced by the appellant and not on the facts as found  by
    the FtT (see e.g. the conclusions in his latest report, December  2020,
    at paragraphs 141 and 142).

15. The FtT at [61] found the appellant's sur place activities minimal  and
    of such low level as not to have drawn attention, even bearing in  mind
    evidence of covert surveillance.

16. I prefer the submission at [2] for the respondent that once guidance is
    applied to the preserved findings of the FtT,  the  appellant  has  not
    made out a need for protection.  He is not at risk at the  airport,  or
    elsewhere; and if he did require to relocate within Sudan, he could  do
    so.


17. The case comes back to the point on which an oversight by the  FtT  was
    identified: whether the appellant is at  risk  because  he  is  Nubian,
    without more.

18. The appellant's submissions at [6] put his case on "very strong grounds
    supported by cogent evidence from the expert on which  to  depart  from
    the country guidance  insofar  as  it  states  that  ethnicity  is  not
    sufficient on its own and/ or places reliance on the fall of the Bashir
    regime".

19. That is the correct approach, for  which  the  appellant  cites  R  (SG
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] 1 WLR 41  at
    [47] per Stanley Burnton LJ.

20. I further note that SG at [67] holds that a country  guidance  decision
    remains authoritative "unless and until it is set aside  on  appeal  or
    replaced" by subsequent guidance.

21. The submission continues:

    The expert focuses on 2 key aspects:

      i) racial profiling is still of the utmost  importance.  The  expert's
         view was that there is the  mentality  of  regarding  non-Arabs  as
         second class citizens. That is also illustrated by the long running
         war in the Nuba Mountains;

     ii) essentially the same people associated with the Bashir  regime  are
         still in charge. The expert spoke of the domination of the security
         and intelligence services and where expenditure has been  increased
         on the military. The expert noted that  there  were  still  ongoing
         attacks against civilians and there was  the  imminent  removal  of
         UNMIT. The expert  recalled  the  1985  uprising  which  caused  an
         expression of optimism. However that optimism was short lived where
         the same Islamist forces rose to  power.  In  effect  the  move  to
         democracy has stalled. The references in the expert  reports  which
         pre-date KAM and post-date KAM do not indicate that  there  is  any
         real change from the Bashir regime and as such the country guidance
         should be departed from;

    iii) for the 2 preceding paragraphs reference is made to  paragraphs  8-
         15, 26-28, 73-95, 96-133, 137-140 of expert report prepared on 25th
         Jan 2020 contained in the appellant's first  inventory;  pages  35,
         37, 58-60, 63-69 of the appellant's first inventory; paragraphs  1-
         13, 19-60 and 63-67 of the expert  report  prepared  22nd  December
         2020 contained in the appellant's fourth inventory; pages 9-24, 36-
         44, 46-51, 55-56 of the appellant's fourth inventory; paragraphs 3-
         15 of the expert report of 31st December 2020  in  the  appellant's
         sixth inventory; pages 4-20,  22-24,  26-27,  31-32  of  the  sixth
         inventory; see seventh inventory and article therein; MD (Guinea) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department 2011 SC 237 at paragraph
         6 per Lord Clarke.

22. The respondent says that the evidence of Mr Verney  "merely  replicates
    submissions considered and rejected in KAM".

23. There is force in that counter-submission.  The case for the  appellant
    does not depend on evidence post-dating KAM, or which  was  not  before
    the UT in that case.  No attempt has been made at such  a  distinction.
    Rather, Mr Verney is strongly of the view that KAM was wrongly decided,
    on the evidence which was before the  UT.   (Mr  Verney  did  not  give
    evidence in KAM, but he takes a similarly critical view of IM  and  AI,
    in which he was one of the expert witnesses.)

24. The respondent says that KAM is not under further  appeal.   Mr  Winter
    did not suggest that it is.  However, it is in principle open to the UT
    to find that a guidance case has been wrongly decided, if the challenge
    is strong enough.

25. The respondent referred to these passages in  her  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note Sudan: Nuba - Version 1.0 December 2020:

      3. The evidence submitted in KAM covered the  period  up  to  December
         2019. The UT observed  that  -  considering  events  in  the  round
         including  the  overthrow  of  former  President  al  Bashir,   the
         establishment of a transitional government including  civilians,  a
         new Constitution, and the prospect  of  peace  with  ongoing  talks
         between the government and rebels (see paragraphs 170 to 174) -  up
         to that point 'The direction of travel remains firmly  pointing  in
         the way of democratic change and the powers of law and order and  a
         move to stability and  resolving  difficulties  politically  rather
         than through force or violence' (paragraph 175).

      4. The situation during 2020 has broadly maintained this 'direction of
         travel' towards democracy and the rule of  law.  For  example:  the
         peace agreement with the  rebel  groups,  appointment  of  civilian
         state governments, amendments to the penal code which have improved
         human rights, the removal of Sudan from the US'  State  Sponsor  of
         Terror list which should allow access to international finance  and
         trade.  While  there  continue  to  be  human  rights   violations,
         particularly in South Kordofan, the country evidence since December
         2019 does not indicate that the Nuba have been targeted because  of
         their ethnicity by the state. A person who is a Nuba is unlikely to
         be at risk of persecution simply because of their actual or imputed
         ethnicity.

      5. Each case must be considered on its facts taking into  account  the
         risk factors identified by the UT in KAM.

26. The respondent also referred to the note at 7.1.1, to the  effect  that
    no specific information of the state targeting the Nuba has been  found
    since October 2019, which was the last hearing date of KAM.

27. The note is to be treated as a source of evidence  and  is  not  to  be
    uncritically adopted for anything it says by way of policy.  Mr  Verney
    in cross-examination sharply disagreed with its  terms.   However,  the
    note does take the position a little further up to date than in KAM.

28. Mr Verney is thoroughly steeped in the history and politics  of  Sudan.
    He considers that its  people  have  rejected  and  overthrown  Islamic
    dictatorship in the past, only to find themselves again under the  same
    rule.  Recent changes are only cosmetic.  The semi-hidden hand  of  the
    old regime holds power in the land.  The  apparent  political  progress
    will inevitably be reversed, as has  happened  over  past  decades,  in
    accordance with his predictions. The policy of the "deep state" towards
    the Nubians is ethnocidal.  The authorities are  likely  to  seize  the
    appellant on arrival, with drastic consequences.

29. Mr Verney paints a hideously grim picture.  It  is  impossible  to  say
    that the long run of events may not  prove  him  right.   However,  the
    appellant has not shown that the underlying  evidence,  by  way  of  Mr
    Verney's interpretation,  requires  conclusions  contrary  to  KAM.   I
    decline to depart from that guidance.

30. On the one issue on which the decision of the FtT was  set  aside,  the
    appellant has failed to show that any  Nubian  returning  to  Sudan  is
    currently at risk of persecution.  His appeal is dismissed.

31. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

     [pic]

     17 May 2021
     UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.
