

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05571/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 September 2020                        |On 01 October 2020             |
|                                            |                               |
|                                            |                               |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     H H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 29 May 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Green, promulgated  on  16  August  2019,
         dismissing his appeal.

     iv) The appellant's grounds of appeal, stated in the application to the
         UT dated 7 October 2019,  incorporating  an  application  to  admit
         further evidence.

      v) The  grant  of  permission  by  the  UT,  dated  10  October  2019,
         incorporating directions.

     vi) The appellant's response, dated 31 October 2019.

    vii)  The UT's further directions, issued on 6 April 2020, with  a  view
         to deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law  and
         (b) if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

   viii) The SSHD's response, headed "skeleton  argument",  dated  23  April
         2020.

     ix) The appellant's application, dated 1 May  2020,  for  extension  of
         time.

      x) The UT's directions, dated and issued  on  7  May  2020,  extending
         time.

     xi) The appellant's written submissions, dated  and  filed  on  14  May
         2020.

 2. The case is suitable for decision without a hearing.

 3. The further materials on which the appellant seeks to rely are accepted
    for consideration.

 4. These materials confirm that the "Taliban" often refers  to  itself  as
    the "Islamic Emirates";  two names for the same group.

 5. The materials also show that the appellant in evidence used  the  terms
    "Taliban" and "Islamic Emirates", but not  the  term  "Islamic  State".
    However, his evidence was at  some  points  rendered  into  English  as
    "Islamic State".

 6. With  the  benefit  of  scrupulous  hindsight,  it  can  be  seen  that
    misunderstanding  has  arisen.   It  would  be  a  futile  exercise  to
    apportion responsibility among interpreters,  the  presenting  officer,
    the appellant's representatives, and the judge.

 7. The upshot was that the judge perceived a "three-way  discrepancy"  (as
    the appellant now puts it) which did not objectively exist.

 8. The incorrectly perceived discrepancy  was  not  the  only  reason  for
    holding against the appellant; but it cannot safely be  said  that  but
    for this error, or unfairness, the outcome must  have  been  the  same.



 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.   The  case  is
    remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing, not before Judge Green.

10. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is preserved.



Hugh Macleman
UT Judge Macleman
28 September 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS
1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





