
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06880/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2019                    |On 31 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   Mr MKA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

The appellant, who was born on [~] 1983 and is a citizen of Bangladesh,
appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the respondent
dated 11 July 2017 refusing the appellant's claim for international
protection.  In a decision promulgated on 11 June 2018, Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal Frankish dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

It is the appellant's case that he is a secularist "blogger" and writer.
The appellant studied in the UK between 2007 and 2012.  It is the
appellant's case in summary that whilst in Bangladesh from 2012 he wrote
openly and critically about fundamentalist Islam and the culture of
religious extremism and that he was, amongst other things, a deputy
publisher and on the editorial board as an adviser of the Weekly
Ropalidhara.  It is the appellant's case that as a result of his published
writings he received death threats and that on 16 May 2016 he was attacked
by four or five men who beat him and cut him with a knife.  The appellant
wishes to continue his writing and public expression of his secularist,
antifundamentalist beliefs and the appellant refers to evidence that other
bloggers/writers have been killed in Bangladesh by Islamic extremists.  The
respondent rejected the appellant's claims to have produced secular
writings and his claim to have been threatened and attacked by extremists.
In the alternative, the respondent was satisfied that there was sufficiency
of protection from the Bangladeshi authorities from Islamic extremists.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish rejected the appellant's claimed
attack as not credible and specifically rejected the supporting documents
(paragraph [28]). The judge made a series of adverse credibility findings
against the appellant and did not find that the appellant had suffered an
attack as a result of his blogging activities.  Although the appellant has
a scar the judge considered that the causation could have been from many
sources other than aggrieved opponents.  The judge went on to make further
adverse credibility findings in relation to the appellant's claim to have
been threatened by phone.  Although the judge accepted that the appellant
had been active in blogging and commenting the judge considered that:

"An examination of his work leads me to conclude that it excludes him from
all three categories of the COIS guidance (there is no country case law
guidance) on the subject, as set out at [26] above.  3.1.1 refers to
offending the government, public minority or religious sensibilities.
3.1.2 refers to being seen as un-Islamic or secularist.  The appellant
falls foul of none of these.  As the above analysis shows, the appellant
has adhered scrupulously to his own position and his evidence ([11]) of
being respectful of the religion of others.  He is complimentary to Islam
as being a religion of peace.  He does nothing to indicate apostasy.  He
repeatedly invokes the values of the founders of Bangladesh.  He merely
criticises terrorists, especially Middle Eastern terrorists and the narrow
curriculum of the madrassas.  One blog appears in his bundle, dated 4
October 2016.  In common with all the articles submitted by the appellant,
nothing is contained therein to give offence or to be construed as anti-
Islamic.  Nothing in the expert report is referred to as susceptible to a
contrary interpretation.  Two death threats are recorded as being issued in
response to which the appellant provides mild responses.  Nothing could be
said to encourage a fatal response in respect of the material produced by
the appellant.  The appellant's core value, the separation of religion and
state, which he says is indeed the formal constitution of Bangladesh, is to
be found in his Blog profile ([14] above).  His respect for Islam as a
peaceful religion is legion in his written remarks, as also stated at
interview (question 26).  I have rejected the claimed attack, the appellant
has resiled from this being targeted or the result of being followed.  I
further conclude from the above analysis that the appellant has given no
cause for offence and, accordingly, has given none.  As to 3.1.3 of the
guidance, the appellant is most certainly not at risk from the government.
He has, as above, shown himself to be an emphatic supporter.  As such, the
guidance additionally shows an adequacy of protection if, contrary to my
findings, the appellant has stirred up hostility against himself.

..."

Grounds of Appeal

The appellant appeals with Upper Tribunal permission on the following
grounds:

Ground 1

That the judge materially erred in making an adverse credibility finding in
respect of the attack in that the judge failed to take material matters and
evidence into account; failed to give reasons; unfairly held a supposed
lack of corroborative evidence against the appellant's credibility whilst
taking no account of the corroborative material that the appellant did
produce; and that the judge unfairly misdirected himself as to the standard
of proof in relation to a concession made in submissions;

Ground 2

In finding that there will be no real risk to the appellant on return to
Bangladesh owing to his published writing and the commentaries, it was
argued that the judge erred in failing to consider what the appellant's
actions were and misunderstood the nature of religious politics in
Bangladesh and misunderstood the background evidence and therefore had
failed to take material matters accurately into account;

Ground 3

In his assessment of sufficiency of protection, the judge gave inadequate
and insufficient reasoning and failed to take account of material
background evidence.

Error of Law Discussion

Ground 1

It is the appellant's case that he was violently attacked by probable
Islamist militants on 16 May 2016 following the publication by him of
articles on 1 May and 3 May 2016 (at pages 99 to 101 and 96 to 98 of the
appellant's bundle).  In support of his claim the appellant produced,
amongst other documents, two newspaper articles, one published on 22 May
2016 at pages 74 to 77 of his bundle and one published on 17 May 2016 at
pages 81 to 82 of the bundle, which record that the appellant was attacked
by a person shouting Allahu Akbar and injured.  The article in the Daily
Samakal describes a gathering of bloggers and authors outside of the
hospital where the appellant was taken and the grounds refer to the
hospital discharge certificate at pages 70 to 73.

The grounds for permission to appeal concede that the First-tier Tribunal
knew of the existence of these articles at [16] of the determination.  The
judge provided a comprehensive summary of the evidence before him from [5]
to [25] of the Decision and Reasons.  At [16] the Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal noted that there were two articles referring to the attack on the
appellant and that this attack was condemned.  The appellant produced a 263
page bundle and it is trite law to suggest that the judge need not refer to
each and every document in that bundle.  Nonetheless, the judge
demonstrated an extensive review of the evidence before him and it was
clear he was aware of the nature and import of the different elements of
that evidence.

Although the judge is criticised for not specifically referencing why he
did not accept the articles which purported to corroborate the attack, the
judge, whilst not specifically finding that the appellant was not attacked,
found that this sort of scar could have been from any source other than
from aggrieved opponents and that he had not shown that he had been
targeted as claimed.  Although the judge accepted that the appellant was a
blogger/writer, the judge comprehensively rejected the appellant's claim.

In doing so, the judge took into account the evidence before him including
background country information, the reports relied on by the appellant and
the submissions and case law relied on.  The judge was also reminded and
cited the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439.  At [28] the judge
found as follows:

"There are, additionally, numerous documents of a corroborative nature.  I
conclude that they have the air of a case built up to order on the grounds
that, firstly, they lack direct testimony and rely upon what the appellant
had to say and, secondly, do so very inaccurately with extensive inaccurate
summaries of the appellant's own case."

Although the judge does not specifically cite from the two articles which
reference the alleged attack, in going on to set out at [29], [30], [31],
[32], [33], [34] and [35], the significant difficulties with the
appellant's case, a fair reading of the judge's decision demonstrates that
he considered all the evidence in the round and was satisfied that the
appellant had not been attacked or threatened as he claimed and that it was
a "case built up to order".  There was no specific challenge to that
finding.  Neither was there any challenge to the judge's adverse
credibility findings.  This included, at [29], that the appellant's own
wife, who was supposed to have lived through the difficulties with the
appellant and had to keep moving house with him and would have been a
powerful corroborative witness, was not called, and the judge noted that
both the appellant's wife and the appellant were "in a muddle" as to where
his wife was living.  His statement dated January 2018 referred to his wife
living with her sister in Dhaka whereas the appellant's wife left
Bangladesh with a student visa on 11 September 2017 and was in the UK with
the appellant.

The First-tier Tribunal also found the expert report to be "entirely at
variance" with the core element of the appellant's case including recording
that a secular man is not at risk but that "as an active critic of Islam
and ardent advocate of radical secularism" the appellant faces "intolerable
persecution, possibly death".  The judge found that the appellant claimed
neither to be a critic of Islam or a radical secularist and referred to
what the appellant's articles actually said and also to what the appellant
said in his witness statement, including: "I have nothing against any
particular religion.  I respect every religion equally and compassionately
and I have never sought to offend anyone's religious beliefs."

The judge also considered that the appellant had support from the UK
National Secular Society but found this to be unhelpful and irrelevant, and
again, there was no challenge to either of these findings and the judge
noted that the appellant joined within weeks of returning to the UK in
August 2016.  Although the letter from Mr Sanderson from the society
referred to the appellant receiving threats and menaces and being assaulted
in the street no source for this was referred to whatsoever and the judge
found that this was nothing more than a repetition of what the appellant
said.  The judge noted that corroboration of the appellant's journalistic
and blogger status was provided by Istishonblog and Bangladesh Press.
However, the judge noted that despite the latter being dated 5 November
2016, three months after the appellant purportedly had to flee Bangladesh,
no mention was made of this.  Likewise, in the Weekly Ropalidhara, despite
the fact that it was dated the day before the appellant left the country.

The judge made findings in relation to the appellant's request for a GD
report.  This was dated 16 May 2016 and the judge made findings that it was
not explained how the appellant was able to make such a request on the day
that he claimed to have had a severe beating for which he was admitted for
several days.  The appellant states in the GD report that "by listening
their discussion I could realise they are following me".  However, the
judge noted that this was not what the appellant had said in interview
(question 174/180) or in cross-examination, where he had said that he had
happened by chance to alight from the bus by a roundabout and to go to a
tea stall for refreshment.  It was then that he happened to chance upon his
assailants, who happened to be there.  The judge noted that it was conceded
in submissions that there was no evidence that the appellant was being
followed and that the incident could have amounted to a random attack.  The
judge went on to find that this entirely undermined the appellant's case
that the purported attack was instigated as a result of the articles that
he published on 1 and 3 May.  The judge went on to address that
corroboration was not required but that it was open to him take into
account in the assessment of credibility where such information might
reasonably have been provided.

The judge took into consideration that the respondent had confirmed that
the GD report had been investigated by a representative from the High
Commission attending Badda police station in Dhaka and it was confirmed
that the GD report was not genuine. Although in the skeleton and in oral
submissions Mr Jorro referred to the fact that there did not appear to be
an actual verification report provided by the respondent, there was no
challenge to this finding in the grounds for permission to appeal and the
judge made findings that were open to him in respect of this evidence.
This included that despite the appellant's legal connections from his work
and that he had a lawyer friend and was aware that the respondent did not
accept that the GD report was genuine the appellant's "sole riposte to the
respondent's investigation is that the investigation was wrong".  With the
connections that the appellant claimed to have, it was open to the judge to
find as he did, at [34], that there was no reason why the purported
investigating officer, a Mr S I Karim, could not have been approached
directly to explain.

The judge undertook a comprehensive assessment of the evidence before him
and, considered in the round, I am not satisfied that any error, material
or otherwise is disclosed in his treatment of that evidence as it is clear
that the judge found the claimed attack to have been a case to have been
'built to order' and such must necessarily include the two articles that
reference the attack.  The fact that the judge did not specifically mention
these articles in making the series of adverse findings that he did in
respect of the corroborative evidence produced cannot be a material error.


Mr Jorro submitted that the judge was unfair in his treatment of the
concession made in submissions: the judge recorded that it was conceded
that "there is no evidence the appellant was being followed and the
incident could have amounted to a random attack".  Although it was
suggested in the grounds and in submissions that the judge reversed the
standard of proof in that just because it could have been a random attack
does not mean that it could not have been (Demirkaya v SSHD [1999] Imm AR
498 507, per Stuart-Smith LJ) that is to misconstrue the judge's findings.


The judge, who had correctly directed himself as to the burden and standard
of proof, at [2], took into consideration that it had been conceded that
there was no evidence that the appellant was being followed despite the
fact that the appellant had previously stated "by listening their
discussion I could realise they are following me".  This was completely
inconsistent with his claim that he, by chance, happened to get off a bus
and go to a tea stall and happened, again by chance, upon his assailants,
who happened to be there.  That is not to reverse the burden of proof but
rather the judge took into consideration that the appellant's evidence was
inconsistent.  It was the inconsistency of the appellant's evidence
considered in its entirety, rather than the concession in itself, which led
to the finding that the appellant had not suffered an attack as a result of
his blogging activities.  The judge was pointing out the inconsistency
between the appellant claiming that the attack was being targeted as
against his evidence that he had been set upon after getting off a bus and
coincidentally meeting his attackers.  It was not the case that the
concession in itself led to this finding.  Ground 1 fails to establish any
error of law.

Ground 2

It was the appellant's case that the judge had either failed to properly
and fully read or consider the appellant's articles and the background
material, or had reached an irrational and untenable conclusion at [37] (as
set out above), that the appellant had given no cause for offence and
accordingly has given none.  This finding has to be considered in the
context of all the evidence, including of the inconsistencies and
inaccurate evidence that the judge addressed in some considerable detail.

This included the fact that the judge found, and again, as noted above,
there has been no challenge to that finding, that the expert report was
'entirely at variance' with the core element of the appellant's case.  The
judge set out what was said in the July 2017 COIS Report in relation to
Bangladesh: bloggers and journalists, and went on at [27] to note that
there were a number of reports in the appellant's bundle, including one
relating to the demise of Bangladeshi bloggers; the judge also records in
some detail the background information before him, as well as considering
the documents produced on the appellant's behalf and his expert report.

The judge at [22] to [25] sets out in some detail the flavour of the
appellant's blogs and articles.  This includes that the appellant believes
imams and madrassas should be engaged in improving education, producing
employment and that unemployment was a breeding ground for terrorists
encouraged by Middle East extremists.  The judge also notes that the
appellant's articles refer to Islam being a religion of peace which should
not be linked with extremism and endorses the British anti-radicalisation
policy.  The judge fully refers himself to "other articles in a similar
vein" and that the appellant enquires how militancy has been imported and
further considers other samples of the appellant's work.

This leads the judge to the conclusions he reached, which were available to
him, that the appellant did not fall foul of any of the categories referred
to in the respondent's COIS guidance, which the judge sets out at [26],
that some critics of the government, including journalists, publishers,
social medias and bloggers, have been subjected to surveillance, harassment
and intimidation.  The COIS goes on to set out, in the policy summary,
that:

         "... However not all journalists or internet users expressing views
             critical of the government are subjected to such treatment and
             each case must be considered on its facts with the onus on the
             person to demonstrate that they would be at real risk of
             serious harm or persecution on return.

3.1.2    Online activists, journalists and publishers have also been
targeted by militant Islamist groups for material seen to be secularist,
atheistic or 'un-Islamic'."

21.  The judge at [37] notes that 3.1.1 of the COIS policy summary refers
to offending the government, public morality or religious sensibilities,
and 3.1.2 refers to being seen as un-Islamic or secularist and that the
appellant falls foul of none of these, and in the judge's findings the
appellant's blogs show that he has adhered scrupulously to his own position
of being respectful of the religion of others, including being
complimentary to Islam.

22.  The judge correctly recorded, at [30], that the appellant claims
neither to be a critic of Islam nor a radical secularist.  It is simply not
the case, as suggested in the grounds, that although whilst acknowledging
that the judge considered and set out details of the appellant's writings
the judge had failed to properly and fully read and consider the
appellant's articles and the background material.  The fact that the
appellant disagrees with the conclusions the judge reached does not in
itself make that conclusion irrational and the judge gave adequate reasons
for the findings he reached, including relying on the COIS.  The COIS also

 23. Although the grounds of permission to appeal refer again to the death
of Bangladeshi bloggers and a university professor, the judge took this
evidence into account, having cited these reports, including at [27].
Again, the judge's findings have to be considered as they were made, which
was in the round, including in the context of what he found not to be a
targeted attack.  It was open to the judge in light of all the evidence to
find that, notwithstanding that some other bloggers may have experienced
difficulties, the appellant had given no cause for offence.

24   This also must be considered, as noted above, in light of the judge's
findings that the appellant's evidence in relation to the claimed repeated
threats did not accord with the fact that the police claimed to be unable
to follow up threats from a private number whereas the appellant stated
that in Bangladesh personal details are required in order to obtain such a
phone and that is why the appellant continued to be threatened despite
changing his phone.  The judge also found that, and again there was no
challenge to this finding, that this did not accord with the appellant's
claim that he could be traced via his phone wherever he chooses to
relocate.  The judge gave adequate reasons that were available to him for
not finding the appellant's account, of being threatened and attacked,
credible and ground 2 amounts to no more than a disagreement with that
finding.

Ground 3

Similarly, in relation to ground 3, the judge found in the alternative
that, in the event that he was wrong, the appellant could avail of
sufficient protection in Bangladesh.  Given the judge's comprehensive
consideration of the evidence before him, it was not necessary for the
judge to set out what evidence he rejected or otherwise and there was no
material error in the judge relying on what was said in the respondent's
COIS Report of July 2017, including that if the threat is from non-state
agents relocation to another area of Bangladesh may be viable and, more
specifically, that where someone's fear of persecution or serious harm is
from non-state actors effective protection is likely to be available and
that the security forces have taken effective action against terrorist
groups since 2015.

Although Mr Jorro referred me to section 7.2.5 of the same COIS Report
which mentions several secular activists who had difficulty in accessing
police protection I agree with Mr Melvin that that is to cherry-pick from
the COIS (whereas the First-tier Tribunal judge summarised the overall
conclusions of the report).  Indeed, the third paragraph of 7.2.5 itself,
goes on to indicate that 'some activists did report having a more positive
experience'.  However, ultimately the COIS, having reviewed the evidence,
concluded at 3.1.3 that there was likely to be effective state protection
available, from non-state actors.

Although clearly there is nothing binding about the respondent's COIS,
neither does the judge accord it such a status.  There is nothing
irrational however, particularly given that the 2017 report deals
specifically with the position in relation to journalists, publishers and
internet bloggers and considers information from a series of reports, in
the judge taking into account in the round, the conclusions in that report,
including as to sufficiency of protection.  Although Mr Jorro pointed out
that each case must be considered on its own facts, that is precisely what
the judge has done in this case.

In support of his argument that the judge had failed to consider all the
evidence, including as to sufficiency of protection, Mr Jorro set out a
number of extracts from the background country information.  A number of
reports were highlighted at paragraph 14 of the original grounds, including
at pages 188, 195, 201 to 202, 223 and 227 of the appellant's bundle.  In
reviewing those reports, I note that the Guardian article is dated June
2016, the Amnesty International Report is dated May 2016, the BBC article
May 2016, with further articles dated April 2016, August 2015.  None of the
articles cited appear to postdate the COIS, which itself cites extensively
from Amnesty International, the Guardian, BBC News, the U.S. State
Department, New York Times and other reports, predominantly in 2016 and
2017.

The appellant through his representatives is now seeking to cherry-pick the
evidence to suggest that the judge did not fully consider the relevant
circumstances and background country information, including in relation to
sufficiency of protection.  However this challenge is not sustainable.
Ground 3 is not made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of  law
and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  24 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
